
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 19 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                         MR Jonathan Cornelius Hill
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Counsel Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Atreya of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department and the respondent is a  citizen  of  South  Africa
    born on 13 June 1967.  However, for the sake of  convenience,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary
    of the State as the "respondent", which are the designations  they  had
    in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 3 March 2014 to refuse his application
    for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  10  years  continuous
    lawful residence and pursuant to Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, Chapman allowed his appeal.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Carruthers in a decision dated 11 May 2015  granted
    the respondent permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  being
    found to be arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law
    when finding in the appellant's favour on the question of  family  life
    existing in this country. It was also concluded that there was a flawed
    approach to the appellant having a normal private life  built  up  over
    times when his situation in the United Kingdom was  precarious  and  in
    the  Judge's  application  of  the  "near  miss"  principle  that   was
    disapproved in Miah [2012] EWCA Civ 261.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

    First-tier Tribunal's Findings

 5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal, concluding,  in
    summary, this was an application made by the  appellant  for  leave  to
    remain based on the 10 year residency route set out in the  Immigration
    Rules. The appellant expected that  as  he  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2001, his application would be granted simply because  of
    that long residence. As a result,  his  application  did  not  seek  to
    provide any information about his private or family  life,  as  it  has
    subsequently emerged during the course of this appeal.  The  respondent
    simply dealt with the application on the basis of  long  residence  and
    did not explore the appellant's family life to the extent that a  child
    was involved and no enquiry was made.

 6. The respondent states that  there  were  breaks  in  lawful  continuous
    residence because the appellant had made three applications  for  leave
    to remain out of time. The appellant did not  seek  to  challenge  that
    those applications were made out of time but gave explanations for  why
    they were late. On a balance of  probabilities  his  applications  were
    made out of time and the appellant's lawful leave to remain started  in
    July 2005.  The  appellant  therefore  did  not  satisfy  the  10  year
    residency route, at both the date  of  the  decision  or  the  date  of
    hearing and does not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Rules. As his residence was less than 20 years, the  only  subparagraph
    applicable was 276 ADE (vi), but the respondent did not consider  there
    to be significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  South
    Africa. This was because the appellant's sisters have recently  visited
    the family there. The appellant lived in  South  Africa  for  34  years
    before coming to the  United  Kingdom  and  accepts  that,  if  he  was
    returned he could maintain contact  with  family  and  friends  through
    visits, and there are other modern communication means  of  maintaining
    private life contacts.  Therefore  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE

 7. In respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the
    appellant  has  established  a  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    particularly with regard to  his  sister,  Desiree,  who  is  also  the
    grandmother of Alicia. The evidence as  a  whole  shows  that  Alicia's
    mother had difficulties with her two children Nicola and  Natalie  when
    they were in their teens. When Natalie became pregnant,  the  appellant
    was asked to step in to help. He  supported  Natalie  and  her  partner
    whilst she was pregnant and Alicia as she was growing up. The appellant
    also supported his nephew, Kenan, who lived with him so that  he  could
    continue his schooling when his parents moved  away.  He  is  variously
    described as a parent, uncle,  grandparent  et  cetera.  He  remains  a
    strong father figure to the whole family. In the circumstances of  this
    case, there were elements of dependency  beyond  the  normal  emotional
    ties and family life, such as to engage Article 8, existed.

 8. The issue of the relationship with Alicia  is  much  more  complicated.
    Evidence from the appellant's family, and other witnesses  is  credible
    and significant  in  supporting  the  claims  the  appellant  has  made
    regarding the parental  role  he  has  played  in  Alicia's  life.  The
    evidence is confirmed by the evidence  of  Ms  Brown,  the  independent
    social worker. She is an independent witness with  the  great  deal  of
    experience in such matters, and she was satisfied about the appellant's
    role in Alicia's life. There is nothing in her evidence to suggest that
    the appellant's claim and that of his family is not true.  If  she  had
    any concerns  and  contraindications,  the  social  worker  would  have
    investigated. The difficulty with her  report  is  that  (i)  there  is
    little by way of objective information taken into account  in  reaching
    her conclusions, because almost the entire report is  based  upon  what
    the appellant told her and  (ii)  Miss  Brown  was  not  aware  of  the
    contrary findings of the Children Services assessment which took  place
    in June 2013 which presents a totally  different  picture  of  Alicia's
    life in June 2013 to  the  one  presented  by  the  appellant  and  his
    witnesses. The same problem exists with that report in that  the  views
    of the appellant and of his family has been  sought  but  she  has  not
    sought the views of Alicia's mother regarding the  counter  allegations
    made  by  her.  Setting  aside  Alicia's  mother's   allegations,   the
    assessment, contrary as it is to other  evidence,  still  does  provide
    some confirmation that the appellant  provided  considerable  practical
    support in Alicia's upbringing, such as,  for  example  taking  her  to
    school. When I also take into account the  unchallenged  evidence  from
    Alicia's school of the appellant's involvement there since the date  of
    that assessment, this evidence is preferred and the overall evidence of
    the appellant and all of  his  witnesses  to  the  assessment  made  by
    Children Services over that very short period of time in May 2013.

 9. "Taking the evidence as a whole, I am satisfied that the appellant  has
    played a significant role in Alicia's life since she was born.  I  find
    it likely that there have been periods, such as when Children  Services
    were  involved,  that  Alicia's  mother  has  attempted  to  take  more
    responsibility than at other times, that for the majority of the  time,
    the  appellant  has  been  actively  and  positively  involved  in  her
    upbringing. I considered this to be more than the normal emotional ties
    between granduncle and grandniece and that therefore Article  8  family
    life is engaged in this regard too".

10. As to Alicia's best interest, given the nature of the evidence,  "I  am
    not able to determine exactly what course is in Alicia's best interests
    in the future. That will be for others such  as  Alicia's  mother,  her
    family and possibly Children's Services to determine. The preponderance
    of evidence in this case leads me to the conclusion that it  would  not
    be in Alicia's best interests that the appellant is  removed  from  her
    upbringing altogether, and that he should continue to have some role in
    her life. I do not reach any specific conclusions about what that  role
    should be.  In reaching these  conclusions  regarding  Alicia,  I  have
    considered matters that have caused me  more  than  a  little  concern.
    Firstly, as some of the issues raised about the  appellant's  behaviour
    referred to in the Children  Services  assessment.  Secondly,  is  that
    Alicia's mother has not had  any  input  into  these  proceedings.  The
    weight I have given to these concerns is reduced, however, because I am
    satisfied that several opportunities have been given to the  mother  to
    contribute; the appellant was willing to engage with the authorities to
    resolve the position regarding Alicia; and, most importantly, there  is
    no suggestion that any harm has befallen Alicia.  Indeed,  despite  the
    uncertainties, she appears to be doing well. I am also  satisfied  that
    once the stress and uncertainty that goes with his appeal are  reduced,
    then it is likely that Alicia's future will become  more  settled,  and
    that the appellant's role clarified".

11. The appellant's private life established UK with  limited  leave  as  a
    student, and he did not have a legitimate expectation  of  being  given
    indefinite leave to remain. "However, I also bear in mind that on  each
    occasion he applied for leave even when he did so out of time,  he  was
    granted leave to remain. With hindsight, the 10 year residence was  not
    established because of the out of time applications, but the  appellant
    was not made aware of  this  until  his  most  recent  application  was
    refused. It was  not  made  in  issue  in  previous  applications,  and
    subjectively, he considered it reasonable that his history was not been
    counted against him".

12. Consideration has been given to s117B  (4)  and  (5)  say  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established when a  person  is
    in the UK unlawfully  and  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious. I have taken this into  account  in  weighing  the  factors
    concerning the appellant's private life. This  consideration  does  not
    extend to family life.

13. The final question under Razgar, therefore is whether  the  refusal  to
    give leave is proportionate to the legitimate aims pursued. "On the one
    side of the proportionality evaluation, I must take  into  account  the
    fact  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The rules set  out  what  the  respondent  considers
    other requirements for entry into the UK and leave to remain. They have
    been approved by Parliament and therefore a  factor  to  which  I  must
    attach significant weight".

14. "On the other side of the proportionality evaluation  in  this  matter,
    there are also a number of factors:  the  appellant's  family  life  in
    which I have found that to be more  than  normal  emotional  ties;  his
    substantial private life; the best interests of Alicia,  with  whom  he
    has a very close and supporting relationship; the reasons  why  he  has
    failed to secure the 10 year  residency  route  under  the  rules;  the
    proximity  of  that  10  year  route  been  established  even  on   the
    respondent's calculations of lawful continuously".

15. The cumulative effect of all the factors in  favour  of  the  appellant
    remaining in the UK outweigh the significant weight I have attached  to
    the legitimate aims and the respondent's decision is not  proportionate
    to the legitimate aims pursued. The appeal was allowed on human  rights
    grounds.

    The grounds of appeal

16. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the  following  which  I
    summarise. The first ground of appeal is making  material  misdirection
    of law in concluding that the appellant has developed family life  with
    his wider family members, and there is  the  existence  of  "more  than
    normal emotional ties". This conclusion is based  on  interactions  the
    appellant had with these two sisters, Desiree, her children (Nicola and
    Natalie), his great-niece Alicia, and his nephew  Keenan  although  the
    findings focus on Alicia's interactions with the appellant.  The  Judge
    further concludes that it would not be in the best interests of  Alicia
    to have the appellant removed from her upbringing altogether  and  that
    he should continue to have  some  role  in  her  life  but  reaches  no
    specific conclusions on what that role should  be.  This  is  a  flawed
    approach and fails to lawfully engage with what constitutes family life
    beyond normal emotional ties and whether such ties remain  extant.  The
    evidence appears to hinge on a period of time when the appellant took a
    supportive role, but does not suggest that the role remains ongoing  or
    that others could not assist in a similar capacity. The Judge refers to
    the care of  Alicia  being  something  for  others  including  Alicia's
    mother, her family  and  possibly  Children's  Services  to  determine,
    rather than the appellant having an  enhanced  role  or  view  in  such
    matters.

17. There respondent asserts  that  neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern
    affection that ordinarily go with them are, by themselves or  together,
    are enough to constitute family life within the meaning and purpose  of
    Article 8. The appellant has shown concern and affection for his nieces
    and nephews and great-niece  but  this  does  not  establish  that  his
    interactions are within the meaning and purpose of Article 8. The Judge
    refers to relationships that will beyond normal  emotional  ties,  does
    not resolve the evidence that  suggests  the  appellant's  interactions
    have  been  fractious  at  present,  nor  why  the   appellant's   past
    involvement  now  informs  the  present  relationship  which,  on   the
    evidence, has diminished considerably. This is not  a  case  of  family
    life beyond normal emotional ties.

18. The Judge refers to the appellant substantial  private  life  which  he
    said has been particularised by a considerable amount of  evidence  and
    includes relationships with his wider family,  friends  and  neighbours
    and in the church and the community as a whole. However,  private  life
    should be viewed through the appropriate prism which is forged  at  the
    time and the appellant was precariously present in the  UK,  could  not
    hold a legitimate expectation of its continuation and there is  nothing
    to suggest an inability to form a  comparable  private  life  in  South
    Africa. Although the Judge states that little weight is to be  afforded
    to private life that is acquired during a period of precariousness, but
    fails to then adopt such a position in concluding that the  appellant's
    private life is substantial

19. The Judge erred in relying on the 10 year  residency  route  under  the
    Rules and the proximity of the 10 year route being established even  on
    the respondent's calculation of  lawful  continuously.  This  is  being
    deemed  a  factor  in   the   appellant's   favour   in   the   overall
    proportionality assessment clearly represents a "near miss" argument of
    the kind warned against by Lord Justice  Stanley  Burton  in  Miah  and
    others. The Judge failed to appreciate that the appellant did not  meet
    the Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  cannot  add  substance  to  his
    fundamentally ordinary claim under Article 8.

    The hearing

20. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is  an  error
    of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Clarke  on
    behalf of the respondent argued that in four months the appellant would
    have satisfied the 10 year rule.

    Decision on the error of law

21. Having considered the determination as a  whole,  I  find  the  Judge's
    consideration of the appellant's appeal in  respect  of  Article  8  is
    materially flawed. The Judge accepted that the appellant does not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and then went on to  consider
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis of the appellant's family life,  with  his  sisters
    with his sisters and grandniece Alicia, and his  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

22. It was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that the Article 8
    assessment shall  only  be  carried  out  where  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules. In this case the
    Tribunal has failed to identify why the appellant circumstances are  so
    compelling that they amount to compelling and exceptional circumstances
    to be granted leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

23. The Judge ostensibly based his decision on the best  interests  of  the
    appellant's grandniece, Alicia.  Although  the  Judge  recognised  that
    Alicia has a mother and family who  can  take  care  of  her  including
    Children Social Services still found that the appellant has a  role  in
    her life, without defining what that role is.  Therefore,  the  Judge's
    finding that it is the appellant who will take care of  Alicia  in  the
    future is without any evidential basis whatsoever. It is not clear upon
    which evidence the Judge found that it is  the  responsibility  of  the
    appellant to look after Alicia even when she has  a  mother  and  other
    extended family who can look after her. This  is  especially  so  since
    Alicia's mother had precluded the appellant from  having  contact  with
    Alicia and the negative report by Children's Services on the appellant.
    In light of this evidence,  there  was  no  basis  whatsoever  for  the
    Judge's finding, that the appellant has more than emotional  ties  with
    Alicia or that he would have a role in her life,  in  the  future.  The
    Judge essentially allowed the appellant leave to remain in this country
    on his speculation that the appellant might have continued contact  and
    care of Alicia.  The  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant has no legal parental role in Alicia's life and he is  merely
    the granduncle who may have had some role  in  her  life  in  the  past
    albeit against  Alicia's  mother's  approval.  The  evidence  does  not
    support Judge's finding and the finding is perverse.

24. The Judge also took into account for the purposes of Article 8 that  as
    the appellant had  almost  fulfilled  the  10  year  continuous  lawful
    residence rule. In Patel & others v the Secretary of State for the home
    Department [2013] UK SC 72, it was held that the prospect of a  student
    now succeeding under Article 8 where he  or  she  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules  is  remote.  The  appellant  either  satisfies  the
    Immigration Rules or he does not. In this case the  appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain.

25. The Judge also found that the appellant developed  a  private  life  in
    this  country  while  his  immigration  status   was   precarious   but
    nevertheless found the appellant had a  private  life  which  would  be
    breached and in the circumstances it is not  proportionate  to  exclude
    him. This is a  perverse  finding  which  is  not  sustainable  on  the
    evidence.

26. Having considered the determination as a  whole  I  conclude  that  the
    Judge erred in law in his evaluation of the appellant's appeal pursuant
    to Article 8 and I therefore set  aside  the  decision  in  respect  of
    Article 8.  The  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules in any event.

27. Mr Clarke accepted at  the  hearing  that  in  four  months'  time  the
    appellant will have 10 years continuous lawful residence in the  United
    Kingdom.  The  appellant  therefore  will  be  free  to  make   another
    application but this does not impact my findings that the determination
    is materially flawed in law. It therefore follows that the respondent's
    appeal is allowed.

    DECISION

    The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                The 18th day of October 2015
