
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14794/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

                           Mr Charles Louie Chery
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   In this appeal I will adopt the descriptions  of  the  parties  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).

2.   This is an appeal against the decision of the FtT Judge  Seifert  ("the
    Immigration Judge") promulgated on 30 March 2015.  In her decision  the
    Immigration  Judge  allowed  the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR"), it  appears,  inside  and
    outside the Immigration Rules.

3.   The respondent appealed to the Upper Tribunal against that decision  on
    2 April 2015 because, it was contended in the grounds, the judge had:

    (1)  Failed to properly consider the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
         (iv) in relation to the appellant's son (E Chery).

         That  paragraph  of  the  Immigration  Rules   (found   in   Phelan
         Immigration Law Handbook at page 807) deals with  the  requirements
         to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the  grounds  of
         private life.

         Subparagraph (iv) thereof deals with the requirements to be met  by
         an applicant who is under the age of 18 years but who has lived  in
         the UK continuously for at least seven years and  in  circumstances
         where it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to  leave
         the UK.

    (2)  The finding that he appellant's son, E Chery, met the requirements
         of paragraph 276ADE  (iv)  had  influenced  the  remainder  of  the
         decision so that the remainder of that decision could not be relied
         on.   The  reference  in   paragraph   55   to   "public   interest
         considerations" had  arguably  not  been  properly  applied  having
         regard to the  provisions  of  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    (3)  Whilst it was accepted that there was only one appeal  before  the
         Immigration Judge, it was contended in the grounds that  the  judge
         was wrong to consider Section 117B considerations  in  relation  to
         the appellant but not to all the family members  dependent  on  the
         appeal.

    (4)  The  Immigration  Judge  had  not  carried  out  a  proper  Razgar
         assessment at paragraph 56 of his decision in that the  Immigration
         Judge had failed to carry  out  a  proper  and  adequate  balancing
         exercise in respect of the proportionality assessment.   The  judge
         had failed  to  take  into  account  the  wider  circumstances  and
         countervailing factors having regard to recent case law such as  PG
         (USA) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 118 such as  the  overstaying  of  the
         appellant's wife and the fact that none of the  children  had  ever
         had leave to remain as well as the fact that the appellant  himself
         had overstayed (see Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74).

4.   When she came to consider these  grounds  Judge  Shimmin  thought  they
    were at least arguable.  Specifically, Judge Shimmin noted an  apparent
    error in properly applying paragraph 276ADE  (iv)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the finding that E Chery met the requirements of  that  Rule.
    The judge had  also  arguably  failed  to  apply  the  public  interest
    considerations in Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") fully and the appellant  and  not  his
    dependent family appears to have been subject to a  Razgar  assessment.
    All grounds were stated to be  arguable  by  Judge  Shimmin,  who  gave
    permission.

The Hearing

5.    At  the  hearing  there  was  no   attendance   by   the   appellant's
    representatives, Messrs. Farringdon Solicitors.  I checked the Tribunal
    file and noted that a notice of hearing had been sent out  on  30  June
    2015.  This notified the appellant of the date and enclosed appropriate
    directions.  There  was  no  response  to  those  directions  from  the
    appellant's representatives and no response under  Rule  24  under  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Accordingly, I decided
    to proceed with the hearing in the absence  of  the  appellant  or  his
    representative.

6.   Mr Tufan relied on the grounds.  He  also  indicated  that  the  eldest
    child had been in the UK for nine years but the issue was  whether  the
    child could now return to Gambia with his family.  Mr Tufan referred me
    to two recent cases which I found helpful.  He referred to the case  of
    EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC  74.   He
    specifically referred me to paragraph 58 in the  later  decision  where
    the Court of Appeal said:

         "...The assessment of the best interests of the  children  must  be
         made on the basis that the facts are as they are in the real world.
          If one parent has no right to remain, but the other  parent  does,
         that is the background against which the assessment  is  conducted.
         If neither parent has  the  right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
         background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus  the
         ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child  to
         follow the parent with  no  right  to  remain  to  the  country  of
         origin?"

7.   He also referred me to paragraph 24 in Zoumbas where it states:

         "There is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that they could obtain such benefits as healthcare and education
         which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher  standard
         than would be available in the Congo.  But other  things  were  not
         equal.  They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to
         future education and healthcare in this country.  They were part of
         a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an age
         when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
         immediate family unit.   Such  integration  as  had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of  that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision-maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of their parents without serious detriment to their  well-
         being.  ..."

8.   Mr Tufan submitted that  at  paragraph  52  of  the  determination  the
    Immigration Judge had considered the evidence and  then  asked  himself
    whether it was "reasonable" to expect the appellant's son, E Chery,  to
    leave the UK.  However, he goes on and states that the appellant  would
    not be taught English at school  in  Gambia  whereas  he  "only  speaks
    English".  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  this  was  factually  incorrect.
    English was widely spoken in Gambia.  This  was  one  of  a  number  of
    errors the Immigration Judge made.

9.   Finally, Mr Tufan referred to the requirements of Section 117A  of  the
    2002 Act, which provided for public interest considerations to be taken
    into account in "all cases" where Article 8 was advanced  as  a  reason
    for granting leave to enter or remain in the UK.  Mr Tufan pointed  out
    that one of the public interest considerations to be taken into account
    was  the  lack  of  weight  which  should  attach  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a  time  when  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.  It was submitted that the  Immigration  Judge  had  failed
    adequately to consider this point in his determination.

10.  At the end of the short hearing I decided to reserve my decision as  to
    whether or not there had been a material error of law in this case.

Discussion

11.  The appellant first came to the UK in 2000  but  subsequently  returned
    to Gambia.  It seems that he met and married his wife, Marian, there in
    2004.  They therefore returned to the UK  in  2005  with  knowledge  of
    their lack of  immigration  status  in  the  UK.   Indeed,  they  would
    inevitably  have  to  return  to  Gambia.   Notwithstanding  this,  the
    appellant and his wife embarked on family life in the  UK.   Meanwhile,
    his status as a student no longer  subsisted.   An  application  for  a
    student visa in 2006 was refused and he had no right of appeal  against
    that refusal.  He  was  served  with  a  notice  under  IS.151A  on  13
    September 2007 informing him of  his  immigration  status.   Mrs  Chery
    applied in her own right in June 2004 but her entry clearance was  only
    valid until December 2004.  She applied for a further visa in 2005  and
    entered the UK in May 2005 but her status was that of residency  for  a
    period of about eight years when the application was made,  which  was,
    as the respondent stated in her refusal, substantially  less  than  was
    required  for  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  276ADE.   She   had
    continuing ties with Gambia and although the immediate family had  been
    in the UK.  The family did not attempt to regularise their status until
    2014.

12.  Three children were born in the UK (on 6  July  2005  in  the  case  of
    Ernest, 28 December 2008 in the case of Susan and 26 July 2011  in  the
    case of Marie) at a time when the appellant and his wife did  not  have
    any right to remain in the UK.

13.  This is a factor of considerable weight, as the respondent contends  in
    her grounds of appeal. On the other hand, the children are  not  to  be
    punished  for  the  mistakes  of  their  parents  and  the   respondent
    acknowledges her duty regarding their welfare under section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  However,  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the  interests  of  the  children,  including  E.
    Chery, was only  one  factor  to  consider,  albeit  one  of  paramount
    importance.

14.  Reference is made in the grounds to the changes brought  about  to  the
    2002 Act by the 2014 Immigration  Act.   In  particular,  Section  117B
    imports the requirement that  public  interest  considerations  are  be
    taken into account in any assessment under Article  8.   The  need  for
    effective immigration control (which means respect  for  the  need  for
    foreign nationals to return to their own  countries  when  their  leave
    expires), the need for the United Kingdom to admit only those who  were
    not a burden on taxpayers and able to integrate into society,  and  the
    need to accord little weight to a private life established by a  person
    whose immigration status is precarious, are  all  factors  that  should
    weigh in the balance.

15.  I am not satisfied that the decision of the  Immigration  Judge,  which
    focused on  the  needs  of  the  appellant's  son,  E  Chery,  properly
    considered the requirements of the 2014 Act.   As  the  judge  granting
    permission, Judge Shimmin, stated,  it  appears  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's favourable assessment in relation to E Chery and Section 55  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007  (the  rights  of  the  child)  influenced  the
    remainder of the decision.

16.  When the Immigration Rules are considered in full and the  requirements
    in the 2002 Act (as amended) are placed into the balance  it  is  clear
    that public interest considerations would outweigh the requirements  of
    Article 8 to respect a private or family life.

17.  Furthermore, it is not clear from the  decision  that  the  Immigration
    Judge did not carry out a proper  balancing  exercise  as  required  by
    Razgar and the countervailing factors that operate in this case  having
    regard to the case of Zoumbas.

Conclusions

18.  I have concluded, having carried out a  careful  consideration  of  the
    decision of the FtT that the Immigration Judge did  not  carry  out  an
    assessment  as  required.   Accordingly,  the  appellant's  story,   in
    particular, the interests of his son, were  only  part  of  the  proper
    balancing exercise to be conducted.

19.  When the interference with the appellant's private or family  life  was
    properly put in the balance as set  against  the  wider  considerations
    described above, it is clear that the correct conclusion was  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that he satisfied the requirements of
    the Rules.  The requirements of  the  Rules  were  a  benchmark  to  be
    considered in all cases and not simply cases where the application only
    made under the Rules. There  was  no  justification  for  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on a free-standing basis outside the rules either.

20.  I find that the grounds of appeal are made out  and  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT.  The fact-findings of
    the FtT are not essentially in dispute and  they  will  be  allowed  to
    stand. The appellant and his family as a whole  can  return  to  Gambia
    where they have a number of ties.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT contains a  material  error  of  law.   Accordingly,
that decision is set aside.

I substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal  which  is  to  dismiss  the
appeal against the notice of decision of the respondent  to  refuse  further
leave to remain whether  inside  or  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
removal of the appellant and his family would  not  constitute  breaches  of
the UK's obligations under the ECHR.  Accordingly, the  decision  to  remove
the appellant as an illegal entrant stands.

There was no claim for any anonymity directions.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
