
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14165/2015
     IA/14173/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2017                       |On 22 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          sejal kantibhai chaudhari
                        niravkumar manibhai chaudhari
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Lourdes, Direct Access


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   I shall hereafter refer to Mr and Mrs Chaudhari as  the  appellants  as
    they were before the First-tier Judge and to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent as she was before the First-tier Judge.

2.   The appellants appealed to a First-tier Judge against the  respondent's
    decision of 24 March 2015 refusing to vary leave to enter or remain  in
    the United Kingdom to  the  first  appellant  (the  second  appellant's
    appeal being dependent on hers).
3.   The judge noted the appellant's  immigration  history.   She  had  been
    granted entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student from  21  October
    2009 until 11 March 2012, and on 30 August 2012 she was granted limited
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 26 January 2015 as a Tier 4
    (General) Student.  The judge  noted  that  according  to  her  witness
    statement she made an application on 13 January 2015 for further  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student the refusal of  which  appeared
    to be the subject of this appeal.

4.   The judge dealt with the matter on the papers, by  consent.   He  noted
    that in the letter of the refusal it was said with respect to the first
    appellant and her application as a prospective student that she did not
    have entry clearance as a prospective student and so was  not  eligible
    to be granted leave in that capacity.   It  was  also  noted  that  the
    ability to apply for leave to remain in that capacity was closed to new
    entrants on 1 October 2013.  The judge went on to note that however  in
    the notice of refusal it clearly stated that the  first  appellant  was
    granted limited leave to remain until 26  January  2015  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student which appeared to contradict the letter  of  refusal.
    He considered that it appeared that the reasons given for  the  refusal
    were not within the law and  as  the  original  decision  predated  the
    changes in the law of 6 April 2015 he could remit the case back to  the
    Secretary of State for reconsideration, which he did.

5.   The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  this  decision,
    arguing that it was correct to note as the decision letter did that the
    appellant could not be considered as  a  prospective  student  as  that
    route was not open to her.  She had not  made  a  Tier  4  application,
    contrary to what her witness statement apparently said and there was no
    evidence that the Tier 4 (General) Student route  could  be  met.   The
    refusal letter then undertook  a  comprehensive  Article  8  assessment
    under the Rules and outside.  It was argued that the judge had erred in
    erroneously approaching the appeal as a Tier 4 appeal and  should  have
    determined the Article 8 claim.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  on
    all grounds.

6.    In  his  submissions  Mr  Jarvis  argued  the  judge  had   materially
    misunderstood the appellant's immigration history.  It  was  true  that
    the appeal could be decided as being one where the Secretary of State's
    decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  but  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the nature of the refusal.  The concept of a "prospective
    student" was a term of art in Part 6A of the Immigration Rules and  had
    a particular meaning.

7.   Mr Lourdes helpfully produced the application  made  by  the  appellant
    from which it could be seen that  she  had  applied  as  a  prospective
    student as was set out in the  covering  letter.   The  opportunity  to
    apply as a prospective student had been removed from the Rules in  2013
    as was said in the grounds, and the  appellant  had  not  been  granted
    entry as a prospective student which would have  been  necessary.   She
    had been granted leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  Paragraph  9  of
    the  judge's  decision  was   flawed.    He   had   to   consider   the
    representations in the appeal.

8.   In his submissions Mr Lourdes argued that the Secretary of State  could
    not now criticise  the  decision  as  she  had  not  provided  all  the
    documents sent in as  was  set  out  at  paragraph  6  of  the  judge's
    decision.  The appellant made it clear in her witness  statement  of  3
    July 2015 that she had not completed her course as the college  licence
    had been revoked and she should have been given a 60 day  letter.   She
    had sought a grant of leave to continue her studies which had not  been
    completed.  These matters had  not  been  taken  into  account  by  the
    Secretary of State.  If the Tribunal disagreed, it would be better  for
    there to be a hearing before the First-tier Judge to re-hear the  case.
    In the interim the Secretary of State could look into the  contents  of
    the letter with regard to the revocation of the  licence  and  why  the
    appellant had not been given a 60 day letter.

9.   By way of reply Mr Jarvis argued that none of those issues were  points
    which could have been made  to  the  Judge  who  did  not  engage  with
    fairness, or the 60 day letter.  He had found the  underlying  decision
    unlawful for reasons which were erroneous.  The application  could  not
    succeed under the Rules so if the Tribunal agreed  with  Mr  Jarvis  it
    would be better for it to go back to the First-tier for findings to  be
    made.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  I agree with the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of  State.
     It is clear from the appellant's application that  she  applied  as  a
    prospective student and that avenue was not open to her, in that it was
    not a route that could be gone down since 2013 and in any  event  since
    she had not had leave previously as a prospective student she could not
    have not succeeded in that regard in any event.   The  decision  letter
    therefore was correct as a matter of law and the judge erred in finding
    that the decision letter was legally  flawed.   As  a  consequence  the
    decision to remit the matter to the Secretary of  State  to  reconsider
    that point was not open to him.

12.  Also he did not consider Article 8 which was the essence of  the  claim
    that was being made by the appellant.  Mr Lourdes today  has  mentioned
    such matters as the college licence being revoked and the fact that the
    appellant was not afforded a 60 day letter.   These  matters  were  not
    before the judge and are not before me in any formal sense.  I consider
    that, having concluded that the judge materially erred as a  matter  of
    law, as was agreed between the representatives the  appropriate  course
    of action is for the matter to go  back  to  the  First-tier  Judge  to
    consider the lawfulness of the decision made by the respondent in light
    of the matters raised in the decision letter.  To that extent therefore
    the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

