

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14976/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment delivered orally at |
|On 21 February 2014                           |hearing                      |
|                                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|                                              |On 4 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                           mrs iraniyamma markandu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  19  July  1956.   She
    arrived in the UK as a visitor on 11 September 2012, with  two  of  her
    grandchildren.  Unfortunately, whilst she was here her husband  in  Sri
    Lanka died, in January 2013.  The appellant applied for  further  leave
    to remain but the application was  refused.  Her  appeal  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Judge Rowlands, at Hatton Cross, on  18
    November 2013 whereby he dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  granting
    permission the judge raised certain issues to which I  shall  refer  in
    this judgment.

 2. I deal firstly with the written grounds of appeal.  It is said  in  the
    grounds that the judge erred in law because he failed to consider  that
    the  appellant  has  strong  family  ties  with   her   daughters   and
    granddaughters with whom she is living.

 3. Dealing firstly with the Immigration Rules, it  is  accepted  that  the
    appellant was not able to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules under paragraph 276ADE or under Appendix FM.  That concession was
    specifically made before me by Mr Blundell and is a concession that  is
    rightly made. The First-tier Judge also found that the appellant  could
    not meet the requirements  and  he  was  undoubtedly  correct  in  that
    assessment.

 4. In the grant of permission  the  First-tier  Judge  made  reference  to
    paragraph 317 which was a paragraph of the Immigration Rules which  the
    judge considered.  It was suggested in the  grant  of  permission  that
    that may indicate an arguable material error of law in that  the  judge
    was not concerned to consider paragraph 317, presumably because it  did
    not apply.  Again it is accepted that paragraph 317 had no  application
    to this appeal because at the time of the application and the  decision
    it had been superseded.

 5. As to whether there was any error of law in the First-tier Judge having
    considered paragraph 317, I am not satisfied that there is.   Paragraph
    317 was argued before him and he was expressly asked  to  consider  it.
    Having considered it he decided that the appellant was not able to meet
    its requirements.  If paragraph 317 had applied  he  would  undoubtedly
    have been correct about that but since paragraph 317 has no application
    to this appeal, even if it could be said that  he  was  wrong  to  have
    considered it, it is not an error that is material.

 6. Moving on then to deal with Article 8.  The focus for the  argument  in
    the grounds and developed in submissions before me by Mr  Blundell  was
    the contention that the judge did not have sufficient  regard  for,  or
    did not appropriately focus on, the best interests of the  children  as
    required by Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009.  It is true that the judge did not expressly refer to Section  55
    but it is clear from the determination, for example at [38]  and  [39],
    that he had the interests of the children well in mind.  He referred to
    "welfare issues" and took into account  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the grandchildren. However, the  evidence  was  that  the
    grandchildren live with their mother who it seems has given up her  job
    and now looks after them on a full-time basis.

 7. Judge Rowlands did accept that there was a relationship of family  life
    between the appellant, her daughter, son-in-law and  grandchildren  and
    that removal would have an effect  on  family  life  so  as  to  engage
    Article 8.  That is clear from [36] of the determination.

 8. It is accepted up to a point that the judge was entitled  to  make  the
    findings that he did at [32] of the determination in  relation  to  the
    credibility of the witnesses.  In terms of what  family  the  appellant
    does or does not have in Sri Lanka, the appellant's case was  that  she
    had no relatives there but the judge did not accept that she was  being
    truthful about  that.   Mr  Blundell  submitted  that  in  making  that
    assessment the judge ought to have taken into account evidence that was
    before him in the form of money transfer  receipts  which  showed  that
    before she came to the UK she was in receipt of funds from,  it  seems,
    her son-in-law in the UK.  The judge did not refer in the determination
    to  those  money  transfer  receipts  and  there  is  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle, the pages of which I have been referred  to,  which
    show that money was sent to her. Ms  Isherwood's  submission  was  that
    there is no indication of what those funds were used for and it had  to
    be borne in mind that the funds were sent to her at a time when she was
    looking after her grandchildren.

 9. Whilst I accept that the judge did not refer to  those  money  transfer
    receipts I am not satisfied that that has any material  impact  on  his
    findings.  He was entitled to come to the conclusions that he did about
    the appellant's circumstances on return to Sri Lanka in terms  of  what
    family she had there. At [12], for example, he said that the  appellant
    accepted that there was no  evidence  provided  to  show  that  another
    daughter of hers was no longer in Sri Lanka.

10. The  judge  did  make  findings  about  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her grandchildren.  He did make  an  assessment  of  what
    effect it would have on them for  her  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was a paucity of evidence before him which suggested  that  there
    would be any significant adverse effect on them by her  removal.   That
    is not the way he expressed it but it was  undoubtedly  the  conclusion
    that he came to.  In referring to "welfare issues" it  is  said  by  Mr
    Blundell that that indicates a misunderstanding or misrepresentation of
    the duty to have regard to the best interests  of  the  children  under
    Section 55.  I do not agree with that submission.  It seems to me  that
    the judge did focus on the primary argument in relation  to  Article  8
    which he recognised as being the effect of the appellant's  removal  on
    the relationship with her grandchildren.

11. Having disposed of the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  having
    considered Article 8 in all its aspects the judge dismissed the appeal.
    I am satisfied that his proportionality assessment was  free  from  any
    error of law or any that could have affected the outcome of the appeal.



12. He referred to the fact that the appellant was relatively  young,  only
    57 years of age, was able to work and that she had family back  in  Sri
    Lanka. He came to the conclusion that there was no reason why she could
    not return there and I am satisfied that that was a conclusion that was
    open to him.  He referred also to health conditions that the  appellant
    has, although again there was no indication that she was  not  able  to
    receive treatment for those conditions on her return to Sri Lanka.

13. In conclusion therefore, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8  therefore
    stands.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            27/02/14

