
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14937/2013
                                                               IA/14941/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2014                              |On 16th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                           DELWAR BEGUM CHOWDHURY
                               ISTAK AHMED ANIK
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellants:  Mr McTaggart (of Counsel) instructed  by  Andrew  Russell  and
                  Company Solicitors
 Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are, respectively, mother, aged 31 years and  son,  aged
    12.  Both are nationals of Bangladesh.    Their  cases  stand  or  fall
    together.


 2. These appeals have their origins in decisions made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary
    of State"), dated 12 April 2013, whereby the  Appellants'  applications
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules
    were refused.  Separate removal decisions were also made.  The  refusal
    decisions  consisted  exclusively  of  an  assessment  of  whether  the
    applications satisfied the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   No
    separate  consideration  was  given  to  Article  8  ECHR  outwith  the
    framework of the Rules.

 3. The First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the ensuing appeals.   In
    [8] of the determination, the Judge stated:

         "[Counsel] indicated that  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  second
         Appellant's father being a British national as the  basis  for  the
         claim to be permitted to remain.  In turn, he would need his mother
         to care for him if he was to remain."



    It was common case and, evidently, accepted by the FtT that  there  has
    been a long term estrangement between mother (the first Appellant)  and
    father, Mr Oli Ahmed.  The Judge returned to this theme in [36]:


         "On the balance of probabilities I accept that the first  Appellant
         married Mr Oli Ahmed on 22 September 2000 as evidenced by the Nikah
         Nama.  I have not seen the original of his passport  but  again  on
         the balance of probabilities I would accept  from  [the  photocopy]
         produced that he was born in the United Kingdom and  is  a  British
         national. I also  accept  the  first  Appellant's  account  of  him
         leaving shortly after their marriage, returning after their son was
         born for  a  short  time.   Thereafter  there  is  no  evidence  of
         contact."




    Next, the Judge acknowledged that the originating application  was  for
    leave to remain outside  the  Rules.   Having  done  so,  he  rehearsed
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  (the
    "2009 Act") and the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) -  v
    - Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011] 2 AC 166.   Having
    acknowledged the existence of family life between the  Appellants,  the
    Judge made the following omnibus conclusion, in [43]:


         "It is open to the first Appellant to return to Bangladesh with her
         son and from there [to] make  an  application  on  his  behalf  for
         confirmation of his claim to British citizenship.  She and her  son
         have lived in Bangladesh all their lives.  If any of the visit visa
         application is  to  be  believed,  she  has  profitably  been  self
         employed.  She has siblings who  can  help  her.   She  said  until
         recently  she  had  been  living  with  her  sister.   I  find  the
         Respondent's decision is proportionate."




    I  have  highlighted  the  word  "confirmation"as  it  is  not  readily
    comprehensible, given the clear  British  nationality  finding  of  the
    Judge.


 4. Permission to appeal was granted and the case was argued at the hearing
    on the basis that, having found that the second Appellant is a  British
    citizen, the Judge erred materially in law in failing  to  address  the
    consequences of this.  While the Judge purported to consider  the  best
    interests principle under the 2009 Act, the relevant  passages  of  the
    determination contain no consideration or  assessment  of  the  British
    citizenship issue.  Nor is there  any  consideration  of  the  Zambrano
    principle.  While this was not actively pursued or  argued  before  the
    FtT the latter  was,  nonetheless,  subject  to  the  overarching  duty
    imposed on the Courts of every Member State by Article 6 TEU.


 5. On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  it  was  accepted  that  the
    determination contains an unambiguous finding that the second Appellant
    is a British - and, hence, EU - citizen.   It  was  argued,  consistent
    with the Rule 24 Notice, that the Judge erred in making this finding as
    the supporting evidence was insufficient.  It was  contended  that  the
    Judge should not have relied on a mere photocopy  of  the  passport  in
    question and, further, that this  discrete  finding  is  undermined  by
    conflicting evidence relating to the father.

 6. I draw attention to  two  particular  pieces  of  documentary  evidence
    adduced before the FtT.  The first is a certified copy  of  the  second
    Appellant's  birth  certificate.   The  second  is  the  aforementioned
    photocopied passport.  Juxtaposed, in the absence of  any  evidence  to
    the contrary, I am satisfied that these two  documents  are  consistent
    with each other.  The finding that the gentleman  in  question  is  the
    second Appellant's father was, plainly, open to the Judge on the  basis
    of the evidence available to him.  The  threshold  for  upsetting  this
    finding is, by well established principle, that of irrationality.  This
    elevated  threshold  is,  in  my   view,   manifestly   not   overcome.
    Accordingly, I conclude that there is no merit in what is, effectively,
    a "cross appeal" by the Secretary of State.

 7.  I  conclude  that  the  appeal  succeeds.   The  Judge,  having  found
    unequivocally and in a manner which I consider unassailable,  that  the
    second  Appellant  is  a  British  citizen,  failed  to   address   the
    consequences of such finding.  In particular, there was  a  failure  to
    acknowledge the potency to be attributed to this factor in  considering
    and evaluating the second Appellant's best interests and in  conducting
    the proportionality assessment.  The materiality of this error  of  law
    is beyond plausible argument.  I further  consider  that  there  was  a
    second material error of law, constituted by the failure of the FtT  to
    give any consideration of  the  second  Appellant's  rights  as  an  EU
    citizen and the application of the Zambrano principle to the matrix  in
    question.














DECISION


 8. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the FtT.


 9. It follows from the analysis and conclusions above that the FtT  should
    have allowed the Appellants' appeals on the ground that, based  on  the
    same analysis, the impugned decisions of the Secretary  of  State  were
    not in accordance with the law.  Accordingly, I remake the decision  of
    the FtT by allowing the appeals.

10. It will now be incumbent on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  fresh
    decisions in accordance with this judgment.

11. I would merely add that given the  judicial  finding  that  the  second
    Appellant is a British citizen, he must be considered  not  subject  to
    immigration control, having the right of  abode  conferred  by  section
    2(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   Given  this  factor,  the  fresh
    decision of the Secretary of  State  may,  foreseeably,  grant  to  the
    second Appellant  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    desirable that finality be achieved without avoidable delay.







                                    Signed:
                                                      [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date:   15 April 2014
