
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14194/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2015                |21st December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ABU ZAKI MUHAMMAD MOSHIUR RAHAMAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah of Counsel instructed by VMD Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Farmer  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 23rd April 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh born 17th  February  1978  who
    applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  long  residence
    under the Immigration Rules.

 4. The application was refused on 27th February 2014.   The  Secretary  of
    State did not accept that the Appellant had proved that he had at least
    ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    required by paragraph 276B(i)(a) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was
    contended that the Appellant had no leave to remain between 20th  April
    2010 and 15th December 2010.

 5. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard  by  the  FtT  on  21st
    April 2015.  The FtT found that the Appellant was in the UK  unlawfully
    between 10th May 2010  and  18th  August  2010.   Notwithstanding  this
    finding, the FtT allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  with
    reference to paragraph 276B, finding that the  Respondent  should  have
    exercised discretion to disregard the period in excess of 28 days  when
    the Appellant was in the UK without permission or leave.

 6. As the FtT allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, it  did  not
    go on to consider Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention), although that had been raised as a Ground
    of Appeal.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FtT was wrong in law to
    allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  paragraph  276B(v)
    stated;

         '... the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28  days
         or less will be disregarded, as  will  any  period  of  overstaying
         between periods of entry clearance, leave  to  enter  or  leave  to
         remain of up to 28 days and any period of overstaying  pending  the
         determination of an application made within that 28 day period.'

 8. The Secretary of State contended in the grounds that the Appellant  had
    in fact remained in the United Kingdom without leave between 31st March
    2010 and 15th December 2010 which was a period in excess  of  28  days.
    Therefore the FtT had no power in law to allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pooler of the FtT who stated;

         "It is the Respondent's case that  the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
         without leave between 31st March 2010 and 15th December 2010.   The
         judge has  arguably  misdirected  herself  and/or  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons in her assessment at [10] of the chronology of the
         Appellant's applications for leave to remain, in  which  she  found
         that the Appellant had been in the UK unlawfully in  excess  of  28
         days only between 7th June  2010  and  18th  August  2010;  and  in
         finding  at  [14]  that  the  Respondent  should   have   exercised
         discretion to disregard the period over 28 days".

10. Following the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  the  Tribunal  issued
    directions that there should be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FtT had erred  in  law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Miah confirmed that there had been no written response on behalf  of
    the claimant pursuant to rule  24  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 but that the application was opposed.

12. In making oral submissions Mr Duffy relied upon the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.  I was asked  to  note
    that the FtT had found that the claimant had been  in  the  UK  without
    leave for a period in excess of 28 days, and therefore the  application
    could not  be  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   There  is  no
    discretion contained within paragraph 276B to allow an appeal if  there
    has been a period without leave in excess of 28 days.

13. if the FtT found the Secretary of State had not properly considered her
    own guidance, then the correct course  would  have  been  to  find  the
    decision  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  so  that  it   remained
    outstanding before the Secretary of State for a lawful decision  to  be
    made.  I was asked to set aside the decision of  the  FtT  so  that  it
    could be heard afresh.

14. Mr Miah submitted that the FtT decision disclosed no material error  of
    law.  I was referred to paragraph 6 of the decision in  which  the  FtT
    set out the Respondent's case, which indicated that the discretion  the
    FtT had was limited to periods under 28  days,  or  exceptionally  very
    short periods over this time.  Mr  Miah  submitted  that  the  FtT  was
    entitled to apply discretion if appropriate.  I was asked  to  conclude
    that  the  FtT  had  found  the  circumstances  of  this  case  to   be
    exceptional.

15. By way of response, Mr Duffy  argued  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance  was  not  prescriptive,  and  only  if   the   guidance   was
    prescriptive could the FtT give direct effect to it, as indicated in AG
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKAIT 00082.  Mr Duffy pointed out that in  this  case,
    the Secretary of State's refusal letter at page 4  indicated  that  the
    Secretary of State had in fact  considered  not  only  the  Immigration
    Rules, but considered whether it would  be  appropriate  to  allow  the
    claimant to remain in the  UK  exceptionally  outside  the  rules,  and
    concluded that there were no sufficiently compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances to justify that course of action.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I announced at the hearing that the  FtT  had  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision must be set aside.  This is because the  FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK unlawfully for a period in  excess  of  28
    days.  Therefore the FtT did not have the power to  allow  this  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

17. There is no discretion contained within  paragraph  276B  to  allow  an
    appeal under that paragraph, if there has been a period in excess of 28
    days, during which an individual has been in the UK without leave.

18. The  Secretary  of  State  has  issued  guidance  to  caseworkers  when
    considering applications under  paragraph  276B  but  this  is  not  'a
    discretion conferred by the Immigration Rules'.  It is not possible  to
    allow this appeal on the basis that a discretion conferred by the rules
    ought to have been exercised differently.

19. Guidance given  to  caseworkers  by  the  Secretary  of  State  may  be
    considered as a 'concession',  and  if  that  had  not  been  exercised
    properly or at all, then the only available Ground of  Appeal  is  that
    the decision is not in accordance with the law, and the decision  would
    then remain outstanding before the Secretary  of  State  for  a  lawful
    decision to be made.

20. I am not satisfied that that is the position here.  The FtT  was  under
    the impression that notwithstanding that  continuous  lawful  residence
    had been broken for a period in excess of 28 days, it had the power  to
    allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules, and that is wrong in law.

21. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The FtT did not consider Article
    8 which had been raised as a Ground of Appeal and that is also an error
    of law.

22. Both representatives submitted that it would be  appropriate  to  remit
    this appeal back to the FtT to be heard afresh.  I have considered  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement 7.2 and find  it  appropriate  to
    remit the appeal to the FtT.  This is because judicial fact-finding  is
    required, and  the  Article  8  aspect  of  the  appeal  has  not  been
    considered by the FtT.  No findings are preserved.

23. The appeal before the FtT will take place at the Hatton  Cross  Hearing
    Centre and the parties will be advised in writing  of  the  date.   The
    appeal is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge Farmer.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been  no
request to the Upper Tribunal  for  anonymity  and  therefore  no  anonymity
order is made.


Signed   Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal when the appeal is heard again.


Signed   Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

