
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 September 2015                           |On 30 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                            ANANIAS MAGNO REVILLA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Equalisers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on  24  April  1963.
    He states he arrived on 17 April 2003 with a  five  day  visa.   On  24
    September 2012 he submitted an application for further leave to  remain
    on the basis of his private and family life in the United Kingdom.   On
    11  March  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules and by way of reference to Article 8 of the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. On 26 March 2004 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds refer to the Appellant's marriage to a  British
    citizen but otherwise are in generic and formulaic  terms.  It  appears
    the marriage was on 19 October 2013.

 3. By a decision promulgated on 13 March  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Manyarara  dismissed  the  Appellant's   appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 4. On 11 May 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal because it was  arguable  the  Judge
    had  mis-directed  herself  in  failing  to  consider  the  meaning  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" for the purposes of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and in particular paragraph LTRP.1.1(d)(iii)  and  Section  EX.1(b)  of
    Appendix FM and arguably had not taken into account the significance of
    the British nationality of the  Appellant's  wife  and  had  not  given
    adequate reasons for her decision.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 5. The Appellant with his wife, sister and a friend attended the  hearing.
    He required an interpreter but none had been booked. In the  event  his
    participation was not required.

Submissions for the Appellant

 6. For the Appellant Mr Slatter relied expressly on the two  grounds  upon
    which permission to appeal had been granted, mentioned in  paragraph  4
    above.  He referred to paragraph 23 of the Judge's decision.  The  only
    issue which the Judge had rightly identified was whether there would be
    very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration on return  to
    the Philippines.  However having identified this issue  the  Judge  had
    failed to address Section EX of Appendix FM and  paragraph  25  of  the
    decision could not be read as adequately address the issue.  The  Judge
    had failed to take into account that the Appellant's wife was a British
    citizen and employed although she had mentioned this at paragraph 32.

 7. The Judge had the statements by the Appellant and his  wife  which  had
    been filed but had not taken account of the background  evidence  about
    employment opportunities in the Philippines referred to at  page  6  of
    the Appellant's bundle.  I noted that page 6 appears to  be  the  first
    page    of    a     document     extracted     from     the     website
    "countrystudies.us/philippines/73". The bundle  does  not  contain  any
    subsequent  pages  from  this  web  site  although  it   does   contain
    information about  the  difficulties  and  lack  of  opportunities  for
    employment in the Philippine maritime industry. Further information  on
    this subject was submitted to the Upper Tribunal on 25 August.

 8. Mr Slatter continued that the Judge had erred at paragraphs 27  and  34
    in  attempting  to  consider  the  proportionality  of  expecting   the
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom to apply for entry  clearance  to
    re-join his wife.  Mr Slatter then referred  to  the  decision  in  the
    judgment in R (Thakral) v SSHD IJR [2015]  UKUT  00096  (IAC),  and  in
    particular paragraphs 9 and 11 which state:

         9.   Ms Chikwamba herself had had a baby  after  the  Secretary  of
             State's refusal. However, it has subsequently been established
             that the reasoning in Chikwamba is not restricted to Article 8
             cases involving children. In SSHD v  Hayat  (Pakistan)  [2012]
             EWCA Civ 1054 Elias LJ summarised the principles at [30]:

             a)   Where  an  applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry
                  clearance pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal  of  the
                  claim on the procedural ground that  the  policy  requires
                  that the applicant should have made the  application  from
                  his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute a
                  disruption of family or private life sufficient to  engage
                  Article  8,  particularly  where  children  are  adversely
                  affected.

             b)   Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate
                  interference with family or private life to enforce such a
                  policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan  LJ,  there
                  is a sensible reason for doing so.

             c)   Whether it  is  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  will
                  necessarily  be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified
                  certain potentially relevant factors  in  Chikwamba.  They
                  will  include  the  prospective  length  and   degree   of
                  disruption of family life and whether other members of the
                  family are settled in the UK.

             d)   Where Article 8 is  engaged  and  there  is  no  sensible
                  reason for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should
                  determine the Article 8 claim on its  substantive  merits,
                  having regard to  all  material  factors,  notwithstanding
                  that the applicant has no lawful entry clearance.

             e)   It will be a rare case where it is  appropriate  for  the
                  Court of Appeal, having concluded that  a  lower  tribunal
                  has disproportionately interfered with Article 8 rights in
                  enforcing the policy, to make the  substantive  Article  8
                  decision for itself. Chikwamba  was  such  an  exceptional
                  case. Logically the court would have to be satisfied  that
                  there is only one proper answer to the Article 8  question
                  before  substituting  its  own  finding  on  this  factual
                  question.

             f)   Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter  the  way  the
                  courts should approach substantive  Article  8  issues  as
                  laid down in such well known cases as Razgar and Huang.

             g)   Although the cases do  not  say  this  in  terms,  in  my
                  judgement if the Secretary of State has no sensible reason
                  for requiring the application to be  made  from  the  home
                  state, the fact that he has failed to  do  so  should  not
                  thereafter carry any weight in the substantive  Article  8
                  balancing exercise.

           11.     In  my  judgement,  though,  Ms  Apps  did  identify  the
             fundamental  problem  with  this  first  ground  for   seeking
             judicial review. The Chikwamba principle is only  engaged  if,
             in the terms of paragraph [30] (a)  of  Hayat,  the  SSHD  has
             refused the application in question "on the procedural  ground
             that the policy requires that the applicant should  have  made
             the application  from  his  home  state".  That  is  not  what
             occurred in this case. The Applicant's application  for  leave
             to remain was not refused on  the  basis  that  she  lacked  a
             requisite entry clearance or that she was barred  from  making
             the application  while  she  was  still  in  the  UK.  On  the
             contrary, the SSHD considered the substance of the application
             both under the Immigration Rules and in terms of Article 8.

    Mr Slatter's submission did not take into account that  the  Respondent
    had given  extensive  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and with reference to Article
    8 of the European Convention  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
    reasons letter of 11 March 2014.

 9. He submitted that the Judge had erred in considering the  prospect  and
    proportionality of a temporary separation while the Appellant left  the
    United Kingdom to  seek  entry  clearance  and  that  she  should  have
    assessed the claim under Article 8 of the European  Convention  outside
    the Immigration Rules on the basis that if the Appellant  left  he  and
    his wife would be permanently separated.

10. He concluded the decision contained errors of law  and  should  be  set
    aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

11. Ms Everett relied on the response which the Respondent had  made  under
    Procedure Rule 24.  The Judge had given full consideration  to  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    continuing their married life in the Philippines.  That  the  Appellant
    had long in the past been employed as a seaman  was  irrelevant.   What
    was relevant was that he had more recently been employed as  a  cleaner
    or handyman.  The Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the  claim  under
    Article 8 on the basis  that  the  Appellant  could  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and seek entry clearance.  Both the Appellant and his wife  are
    of Filipino descent and  maintain  connections  with  their  respective
    families in the Philippines who could give some support.

12. The Judge had adequately dealt with the claim under Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  She gave cogent  reasons  at  paragraph  34  in
    support of her finding that it would be proportionate for the Appellant
    to seek entry clearance.  There was nothing in the grounds  for  appeal
    which disclosed a material error of law.



 Further Submissions for the Appellant

13. Mr Slatter submitted that the main argument was that at paragraph 25 of
    her decision the Judge had  made  no  reference  to  what  amounted  to
    "insurmountable  obstacles".   The  Judge  had  erred  in  seeking   to
    determine the proportionality of the decision to remove  the  Appellant
    by way of reference to the circumstances which would obtain if he  were
    removed simply for the purposes of applying for entry clearance.   This
    prospect had not been raised by the Respondent or the Appellant  before
    the Judge.  The decision should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

14. I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.  I refer  to  the
    grounds for permission to appeal and use the same numbering.

15. In relation to para 2.1 of the grounds it was not until  28  July  2014
    that a definition of "insurmountable obstacles" as employed in  Section
    EX was inserted in Appendix FM.  The  Judge  made  findings  about  the
    likely circumstances which would meet the Appellant  or  the  Appellant
    and his wife  if  either  or  both  of  them  were  to  return  to  the
    Philippines in  light  of  the  evidence  which  she  had  recorded  at
    paragraphs  11-15  of  her  decision.   Given   the   nature   of   the
    circumstances, found by the Judge for sustainable reasons, it is  clear
    they are a considerable distance from any sensible meaning which  could
    be given to the expression "insurmountable obstacles".

16. Paragraph 2.2 of the grounds  takes  issue  with  the  absence  of  any
    assessment of the availability of jobs for  the  Appellant  on  return.
    The Appellant had "jumped ship" in 2003.   There  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest he  would  be  looking  for  re-employment  in  the  Philippine
    maritime industry if he were to return to the Philippines.   The  Judge
    noted this at paragraph 11(a) of her decision and that the  Appellant's
    family owned and worked land and at paragraph 12(c) that the  Appellant
    had at one time lived on the land. At paragraph 12(d)  she  noted  that
    employment prospects are generally limited in the  Philippines.   There
    was limited, if any, evidence before  the  Judge  that  on  return  the
    Appellant or his wife or both of them would live in circumstances  that
    which would be unduly harsh or similar.  The point made in relation  to
    ground 2.1 about the  meaning  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  the
    Appellant's circumstances remains also applies here.

17. Ground 2.3 refers to an  inconsistency  and  lack  of  clarity  in  the
    findings on the issue of "insurmountable obstacles".  The  ground  does
    not identify any specific inconsistency and  appears  to  rely  on  the
    ground  based  on  the  lack  of  identification  of  what  amounts  to
    "insurmountable obstacles" referred to in ground 2.1.

18. The finding at paragraph 25 of the decision that the Appellant had been
    absent from the Philippines for twelve  years  referred  to  in  Ground
    2.3.1 is a finding of fact.  It  is  one  which  the  Judge  took  into
    account in considering the issue of  "insurmountable  obstacles".   The
    relevance of it to the Appellant's current ability on return to  obtain
    employment within the maritime industry after some twelve years on land
    is limited.

19. The employment of the Appellant's wife in the United  Kingdom  referred
    to at paragraph 26 of the decision is again a fact which together  with
    her other economic ties, if any, to this  country  are  factors  to  be
    considered as expressly required by Section 117B of the 2002  Act.   In
    the light of the evidence and the finding at the end of paragraph 32 of
    her decision, there was little  weight  which  the  Judge  rightly  and
    properly could give to the wife's employment.

20. Ground 2.4 raises the significance of  the  Appellant's  wife  being  a
    British citizen.  Her nationality was not challenged and was  impliedly
    accepted because it was a condition which needed  to  be  fulfilled  by
    reference to Section EX.1 set out  at  paragraph  21  of  the  decision
    before the Judge could proceed at  paragraph  23  to  consider  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  the
    Philippines.  The Judge  identified  the  legitimate  public  objective
    against which the proportionality of the decision under appeal  was  to
    be assessed at paragraphs 34 and 38 of her decision.

21. Ground 2.4.2 fails to take cognisance of the fact that R  (MM)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 1900 was overturned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  under  the
    citation [2014] EWCA Civ 985 to which the Judge correctly  referred  at
    paragraph 28 of her decision.

22. Ground 3 challenges the Judge's consideration of the possibility of the
    return of the Appellant to the Philippines  to  seek  entry  clearance.
    The ground raises the  issue  of  what  Mr  Slatter  described  as  the
    "Chikwamba procedural point".  The law in this area has  subsequent  to
    the judgment in Thakral upon which Mr Slatter relied  been  extensively
    reviewed in some depth by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in R (Chen) v  SSHD
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2014] UKUT 00189 (IAC).  Of note are the findings at paragraphs 39 and
    40 which I set out below together  with  paragraphs  41  and  42  which
    latter two paragraphs have relevance to the facts  of  the  Appellant's
    case.

         39.  In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual  (the  burden
             being upon him or her) that an application for entry clearance
             from  abroad  would  be  granted  and  that  there  would   be
             significant  interference  with  family  life   by   temporary
             removal, the weight to be accorded to the  formal  requirement
             of obtaining entry clearance is reduced.  In  cases  involving
             children, where  removal  would  interfere  with  the  child's
             enjoyment of family life with one  or  other  of  his  or  her
             parents whilst entry clearance is obtained, it will be  easier
             to show that the balance on proportionality falls in favour of
             the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children  but
             where removal interferes with family life between parties  who
             knowingly entered into the relationship in the knowledge  that
             family life  was  being  established  whilst  the  immigration
             status of one party was "precarious". In other words,  in  the
             former case, it would be easier to show that the  individual's
             circumstances fall within the minority envisaged by the  House
             of Lords in Huang or the exceptions referred to  in  judgments
             of the ECtHR than in the latter case. However, it all  depends
             on the facts.

          40. In Chikwamba, it was accepted that an  application  for  entry
             clearance would  succeed  and  that  went  in  the  claimant's
             favour. It is unresolved whether, conversely, the Secretary of
             State's view that an application for entry clearance would  be
             unlikely to succeed (if she took that view in  any  individual
             case) means that the Chikwamba principle cannot apply.  I  did
             not  hear  argument  on  this  point.  I  therefore  reach  no
             concluded view on it. However, in  my  experience,  applicants
             frequently rely upon the Secretary of State's silence on  this
             point  as  synonymous  with  an  acceptance  by  her  that  an
             application for entry clearance would succeed, in that, it  is
             said that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  said  that  an
             application would not succeed. To state  the  obvious,  if  an
             individual makes an application for leave  to  remain  on  the
             basis of Article 8, the Secretary of State is only obliged  to
             reach a decision on that application. She is  not  obliged  to
             consider further (although she is not prevented from doing  so
             if she wishes to) whether an application for  entry  clearance
             would succeed.

          41. In the instant  claim,  the  applicant  has  relied  upon  the
             Chikwamba to make good her Article 8 claim. She has not placed
             before the respondent any evidence to show  that  her  removal
             (if removal notionally took place consequent upon the  refusal
             of leave to remain on the basis of Article 8) would  interfere
             with any family life being enjoyed. It has  been  accepted  on
             her behalf that  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life being enjoyed between her and Mr Cheung in  China.
             Mr Palmer appeared to retract from  para  7  of  his  skeleton
             argument, which specifically states that it has to be accepted
             that the applicant is  unable  to  argue  that  there  are  no
             insurmountable obstacles to her returning to  China  to  apply
             for entry clearance.  Even if it is the case that this was not
             a concession  as  to  the  facts,  the  reality  is  that  the
             applicant has not placed any  evidence  of  her  circumstances
             and/or those of Mr Cheung. The couple do  not  have  children.
             There was quite simply no evidence before  the  respondent  to
             show that the decision would result in any  interference  with
             family life.

          42. The applicant has relied solely upon the  case-law  concerning
             the Chikwamba principle in an attempt to make good her Article
             8  claim  outside  the  IRs.  Unfortunately,  this   misguided
             approach is not uncommon. Indeed, in  the  instant  claim,  it
             would be correct to say that such evidence as there was before
             the respondent undoubtedly shows that the respondent was fully
             entitled to take the view that it would  be  proportionate  to
             require  the  applicant  to  make  an  application  for  entry
             clearance from China, pursuant to the guidance  in  Chikwamba.
             Her parents and siblings live in China. There was no  evidence
             or explanation why,  even  if  there  were  no  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life being enjoyed on a permanent basis in
             China, temporary separation  for  the  purpose  of  making  an
             application for entry clearance would  interfere  with  family
             life. The applicant simply has not descended into  any  detail
             about her Article 8 claim, choosing instead to rely upon legal
             principles. She made no case as to any form of  hardship  that
             she and/or her husband would suffer if she were to be required
             to make an application for entry clearance."

23. In the light of  these  paragraphs,  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  the
    conclusions she reached because the Appellant had failed  to  discharge
    the burden of proof to show that there were "insurmountable  obstacles"
    to the return of  either  himself  or  himself  and  his  wife  to  the
    Philippines and their pursuit of their private and family  lives  there
    or to the Appellant's return to seek entry clearance.

24. While the Judge's treatment of the issues under  both  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules might  be  considered
    to be brief and compressed, she reached her conclusions for sustainable
    reasons which are adequately but only just, given in her  decision  and
    the appeal amounts to no more than a disagreement with the Judge.

25. The consequence is that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  did  not
    contain a material error of law such that it should  be  set  aside  in
    whole or in part and it shall stand.

Anonymity

26. There was no request for an anonymity order and having heard the appeal
    I do not find such an order is required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law such that it should be set aside.  It shall stand.


Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 30. ix. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



