
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/14175/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2013                             |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                            MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                MRS MATY KANE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Mrs Kane is a Sinhalese national now aged 35 years.   Mrs
    Kane historically had permission to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and
    was lawfully present here at all material times.  That  permission  was
    based on her status as the spouse of a person settled here, namely  her
    husband, who is a British citizen.  The period in question was 10 April
    2011 until  7  March  2013.   At  this  stage  representations  and  an
    application were made on Mrs Kane's behalf by  her  former  solicitors.
    This constituted an application for permission to remain as the  spouse
    of a settled person.  This generated a decision  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State which refused that application and notified Mrs Kane
    of her right of appeal.  That right of appeal was  duly  exercised  and
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal proceeded  in  circumstances
    where neither Mrs Kane nor any representative  on  her  behalf  was  in
    attendance.  This gave rise to an application for permission to  appeal
    to this Tribunal which was duly granted, hence the  hearing  which  has
    taken place today.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal to this Tribunal.  The  first  concerns
    the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal to decline to adjourn  the
    hearing  which  was  scheduled  for  23  July  2013.   On  19  July  an
    application was made to adjourn the hearing and was refused.

 3. The first ground of appeal complains  that  this  was  perverse  and/or
    there was a failure to apply the standard of  proof.   The  essence  of
    this ground is that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have  been
    satisfied by the information available, and in particular  the  medical
    information, that Mrs Kane could not attend the hearing, would  not  be
    represented and had a justifiable reason for all of this.

 4. The first ground of appeal contains a material misstatement.  It  says:
    "she passed her exam and this could have solved the matter".   That  is
    incorrect.  The First-tier  Judge  addressed  the  application  for  an
    adjournment, considered it on the basis of  the  information  available
    and noted in particular that there had been wholesale  default  in  the
    matter  of  processing  and  presenting  the  appeal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was obliged  to  make  that  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    information available to it.  This included medical  information  which
    was rather sparse.  The governing legal principle is that the appellant
    had a right to a fair hearing.   The  complaints  that  the  First-tier
    Judge perversely failed to accede to the application for an adjournment
    must be viewed in the round.  We can find  no  fault  in  the  approach
    adopted and decision made by the First-tier  Judge.   The  question  is
    whether that decision is vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.   The
    error of law advanced to this Tribunal is that of perversity  and/or  a
    failure to apply a standard of proof.   The  second  limb  of  that  is
    unintelligible and it does not begin to establish an error of law.  The
    first erects a hurdle or threshold of  elevated  dimensions  which  has
    plainly not been overcome.

 5. There is however one further ingredient of  fundamental  importance  in
    the equation and  that  is  the  following.   Even  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had acceded to the request for an adjournment this would
    have availed the appellant nothing because the  crucial  proof,  namely
    the ESOL certificate was not available on that date which  drives  this
    Tribunal to conclude inexorably that the outcome could not  conceivably
    have been any different.  Accordingly there  is  no  substance  in  the
    first ground of appeal.

 6. The second ground of appeal recites that there was inadequate reasoning
    and this is followed by the word "credibility".  This places the  focus
    not on the adjournment decision but on the text of the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Given the manifestly narrow issue which the
    judge had to consider we find no inadequacy of reasoning.  There was no
    credibility issue to be addressed and in short  no  error  of  law  was
    committed.

 7. Now this brings us to a further issue  and  that  is  the  question  of
    Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  This issue was identified by the  Tribunal
    as one that would have to be addressed and  it  has  given  rise  to  a
    properly made concession by Mr Saunders on the part of the Secretary of
    State.  He has  conveyed  to  this  Tribunal  that  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State the removal decision is withdrawn and unsurprisingly
    answered affirmatively when asked was that because the legality of that
    decision is unsustainable.  That brings us to how we deal with that  at
    this level on appeal.  We shall treat the grounds of appeal as  amended
    accordingly and - notional amendment is challenging one  clear  failure
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, namely a failure to address
    and determine the Section 47 issue, namely  the  Secretary  of  State's
    failure to comply with the requirements of Section 47.  This gives rise
    to a conclusion on the part of this Tribunal whereby we set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal because it is vitiated by error  of
    law on this ground and we allow the appeal to this limited extent.

 8. We take the opportunity to add the following.

 9. We have been addressed this morning by Mrs Kane's husband and  also  by
    Mrs Kane through her interpreter.  Mr & Mrs Kane  have  addressed  this
    Tribunal on a number of  factual  issues.   Those  issues  may  have  a
    bearing on further and future decision making processes  involving  the
    Secretary of State.  We have found that all that was said  to  us  this
    morning by Mrs Kane and her  husband  to  be  manifestly  credible  and
    persuasive.  We also record that they found themselves in circumstances
    before and at the time of the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing  which
    were rather aggravated and complicated by two factors.

10. The first was the indelible fact  that  Mrs  Kane  did  indeed  have  a
    medical ailment which had plainly been the matter of medical  attention
    in a very short period of days before  the  Tribunal  hearing  and  the
    second  is  that  there  were  obvious  difficulties  involving   legal
    representation and this plainly operate to the detriment of Mrs Kane in
    all matters appertaining to the hearing at first instance including the
    request for the adjournment, the question of  legal  representation  at
    the  hearing  that  there  was  none,  and  the  issue  which  a  legal
    representative would undoubtedly have raised on the hearing day, namely
    the imminence of the ESOL certificate and whether  the  Tribunal  judge
    would have been prepared to grant a very short adjournment  given  that
    factor.  We make that observation bearing in  mind  the  provisions  of
    Section 85, sub-Section 4 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The effect of our decision today is that  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules in unsuccessful thus we have concluded  that  the
    decision purportedly made by the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom was an  unlawful  decision  and  that
    will now fall to be made again.  Mrs Kane and  her  husband  will  find
    themselves making further representations and fresh applications to the
    Secretary of State and they should devote a suitable  time  and  energy
    and investment in that exercise because there is potentially much to be
    said on behalf of Mrs Kane in a  further  and  future  decision  making
    process.  In making that observation we record that  there  was  at  no
    time any issue before either Tribunal concerning Article 8 of the Human
    Rights Convention.





                           Signed:      Mr Justice McCloskey,
                                              Sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the
     Upper Tribunal

                                    Dated:

