
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14949/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2015                              |On  1 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mrs nkechi Edith ovuike
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell
For the Respondent:    Mr Jibowu


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although in the proceedings before me the Appellant is the Secretary of
    State, for convenience I keep the designations as they were before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Thus Mrs Ovuike is the Appellant.

 2. She is a citizen of Nigeria born  in  1976.   She  appealed  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 11 March 2014 to refuse  her
    application for a residence card as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 3. The application was refused, the Secretary of State not being satisfied
    that the Appellant's claimed customary marriage by proxy to  a  citizen
    of the Czech Republic was a marital relationship for  the  purposes  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The  Secretary  of  State  was
    also not satisfied that the couple were in a 'durable relationship' for
    the purposes of Regulation 8(5).

 4. She appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 14 November 2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid allowed the appeal.

 6. In a brief determination the judge noted (at [7]) a  statement  by  Mrs
    Ovuike  dated  24  October  2014  lodged  for  the  hearing.   In   his
    'Dispositive Reasons and Deliberations' he considered that the contents
    of the statement amounted to an asylum claim.

 7. He stated (at [13]) 'The Asylum claim makes this Appellant fear for her
    life.  However, looking at her EEA claim one is not sure she will  win.
    The EEA husband is in a conflict with her and one has  to  think  about
    her going back to Nigeria to those  people  who  have  already  brought
    about the death of her sister'.

 8. He continued (at [14]) 'It is incumbent upon me to advert  to  the  new
    Rules giving respect to the animus legis dictated by the Constitutional
    Supremacy of Parliament.  The rule of law demands that this Appellant's
    Asylum claim should be looked at with  full  humanity  and  compassion.
    For anxious scrutiny of her Asylum claim,  I  remit  this  case  to  be
    looked at afresh and if necessary there should be  an  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal'.

 9. He ended  by  stating  (at  [15])  that  he  was  'persuaded  that  the
    Appellant's Asylum claim deserves a compassionate consideration by  the
    Respondent.  I am expressing my decision as "Appeal Allowed" because  I
    do not want to see this Appellant suffer when she is  waiting  for  the
    result of her case afresh'.

10. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 7 January 2015.

11.  At  the  error  of  law  hearing  Mr  Whitwell  submitted   that   the
    determination was fatally flawed.  The judge had made  no  findings  in
    relation to the application for the EEA residence card  which  was  the
    reason for the appeal.  There had been no s.120  notice.   The  judge's
    reference to asylum was a matter which was not properly before him.

12. Mr Jibowu did not challenge that submission.

13. I agreed.

14. The judge erred in not making any findings whatsoever  in  relation  to
    the application for the residence card which was  the  reason  for  the
    appeal.  Further, he had no legal basis for remitting the  matter  back
    to the Respondent to consider a statement made by the Appellant  on  24
    October 2014, which may amount to an asylum claim.  It appears  that  a
    possible asylum issue was raised for the first time in  that  statement
    prepared for the hearing.  There was no mention of it in the Grounds of
    Appeal.   Nor  was  there  a  s.120  notice  under   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

15.  '... an Appellant on whom no Section 120 notice has  been  served  may
    not raise before the Tribunal any ground of leave to  remain  different
    from that which was the subject of the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State appealed against - the Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  consider
    or rule on "any matter ... which constitutes a Ground of Appeal  listed
    in Section 84(1) against the decision appealed against"  if  there  has
    been no Section 120  notice  and  therefore  no  statement  under  that
    Section.' (Stanley Burnton LJ) (Lamichhane v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  260
    (headnote)).

16. The judge then compounded the error by  allowing  the  appeal  with  no
    identifiable reasons.  In failing to engage  with  the  relevant  legal
    issues before him the judge materially erred.

17. By consent I set aside the determination and proceeded to remake it.

18. Mr Jibowu said he did not seek to pursue the  appeal  against  the  EEA
    application and asked me to dismiss it. An asylum application would  be
    made to the Respondent.

19.  There being no evidence presented in support of the EEA appeal  it  is
    dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a  point  of
law.  It is set aside and remade as follows: the appeal is  dismissed  under
the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 31 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


