
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14487/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd June 2015                     |On 12th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                MR PRIOM ROY
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. We have considered whether any parties require the protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was  made  previously  in
       respect of this Appellant. Having considered  all  the  circumstances
       and evidence we do not consider it necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
       direction.

    2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Russell ("the judge") promulgated on 13 November 2014,
       dismissing the appellant's appeal.

Background

    3. The appellant was  born  on  27  June  1987  and  is  a  national  of
       Bangladesh. The appellant came to the UK to study on 24  March  2011.
       He made an application on 20 June 2013 to vary his leave as a Tier  4
       (General) student to study at Bell's College. The last date to  enrol
       on the course was 25 June 2013 (five days after the application). His
       application was granted on 17 December 2013 with an expiry date of 25
       September 2014. On 23 January 2014 the Home Office were informed that
       the appellant had not commenced studies  at  Bell's  college.  On  12
       March 2014 the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  made  a
       decision to curtail the appellant's leave  to  remain  as  a  tier  4
       (General) student under paragraph 323A(a)(ii)(1) of  the  Immigration
       Rules HC395 (as amended). The reason set out in the  decision  letter
       is that the appellant failed to commence studying  with  the  Tier  4
       sponsor.

The Fist tier Tribunal Judge's Decision

    4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision  to  curtail
       his leave to the First-tier  Tribunal.  Following  a  hearing  on  29
       October 2014 the judge dismissed the appeal against the  respondent's
       decision. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal were that the decision was unfair and breached Article 8  of
       the 1950 Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR'). The  judge  found  that
       the Home Secretary's decision was in accordance with the law and  the
       immigration rules.

    5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  decision
       of the judge on essentially two main grounds of appeal; firstly, that
       the judge had failed to consider  and  assess  properly  whether  the
       respondent had acted fairly and secondly, that the  judge  failed  to
       consider, when determining the appeal, the ground of appeal  advanced
       that curtailment of the appellant's leave infringed rights  protected
       by Article 8 of the ECHR.

    6. The application for permission to appeal against  that  decision  was
       refused by the First Tier Tribunal and a renewed application was made
       to the Upper Tribunal. Permission was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal
       on a limited basis. Permission has been granted only  in  respect  of
       the second ground of appeal; namely that the judge failed to consider
       the claim that the appellant's rights protected by Article 8  of  the
       ECHR would be infringed by curtailment of his leave.

Submissions

    7. A skeleton argument was submitted by Mr Hussain on  the  day  of  the
       hearing. Most of the skeleton argument covered the  first  ground  of
       appeal. We indicated to Mr Hussain that we were only prepared to hear
       submissions and take into account arguments raised with regard to the
       second ground of appeal, the Article 8 claim, as permission had  been
       specifically limited to that ground of appeal.  We  referred  to  the
       very limited particulars in the papers before us with regard  to  the
       Article 8 private life claim. Mr Hussain was invited to  expand  upon
       the  submissions  set  out  in  his  skeleton  argument  and  on  the
       particulars of private life relied on.

    8. Mr Hussain, on behalf of the appellant, submitted that the judge  had
       erred in law primarily because the judge had failed to  consider  the
       Article 8 claim as required. The judge did not determine this  ground
       of appeal. Mr Hussain submitted that the judge should have considered
       the  arguments  on  the  unfairness  issue  in  the  round  with   an
       examination and cross examination of the witness at the hearing  with
       regards to the Article 8 claim. It was an error of  law  to  fail  to
       consider the ground (s86 (2)).

    9. On behalf of the respondent Mr Nath submitted  that  nothing  further
       had been submitted to show why the appellant meets the threshold  for
       an Article 8 claim. He submitted that in light of the cases of  Nasim
       and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)  ('Nasim')  and  Patel
       and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC
       72 ('Patel') the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  for  an
       Article 8 claim. Mr Nath also relied on the Rule 24 response.

   10. In reply Mr Hussain submitted that the success or  otherwise  of  the
       Article 8 claim would depend on the findings of the judge in relation
       to the fairness issue.  He submitted that there was a clear error  of
       law.

Error of Law

   11. Having heard the submissions and after  considering  the  grounds  of
       appeal and skeleton argument  we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
       Tribunal has made an error of law. The judge has simply  not  engaged
       with, or considered, the claim under Article 8. Section 86(2) of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  requires  a  judge  to
       determine any matter raised as a ground of  appeal.   Therefore,  the
       failure of the judge to address and determine  the  Article  8  claim
       constitutes an error of law.  However, we consider that the error  of
       law was not material as the  appellant  was  bound  to  fail  on  the
       Article 8 claim.

   12. The appellant submitted (in his grounds  for  permission  to  appeal)
       that he had built up a private life in the UK (although  the  grounds
       of appeal mention family  life  no  submissions  were  made  in  that
       regard). In particular the appellant considered that he has  invested
       a large sum of money,  time  and  effort  to  complete  his  studies.
       Curtailment of his leave would disrupt his studies  and  would  be  a
       disproportionate interference in his private life. No further details
       were provided at the hearing.

   13. The submissions in the grounds seeking  leave  to  appeal  are  of  a
       generic nature (we noted that paragraph 19 appears relates to another
       case) and Mr Hussain was not able  to  articulate  how  the  decision
       breaches the appellant's private life. He seemed to accept  that  the
       issue depended on fairness and the judge  found  that  there  was  no
       unfairness and permission has not been granted  on  this  issue.  The
       evidence before the  judge  to  support  the  article  8  ground  was
       skeletal,  essentially  one  paragraph  in  the  appellant's  witness
       statement. It clearly was not advanced in any meaningful way  at  the
       hearing.  It is for the appellant to put forward his case and not for
       the judge. He had made a witness statement and he gave  evidence  and
       it was for him to establish the  significance  of  any  private  life
       here.

   14. We have considered the grounds of appeal in  relation  to  Article  8
       that were before the First Tier  Tribunal.  The  appellant  in  those
       grounds relied upon the obiter remarks of the Upper Tribunal in CDS
       (PBS "available" Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC) ('CDS'). The
       Upper Tribunal in that case, having found for the  Appellant  on  the
       Immigration Rules, went on to consider the Article 8 claim. The Upper
       Tribunal commented:

           "17. It is apparent from these principles that  Article  8  does
           not provide a general discretion in  the  IJ  to  dispense  with
           requirements of the Immigration Rules  merely  because  the  way
           that they impact in an individual case may appear to  be  unduly
           harsh. The present context is not respect for family  life  that
           can in certain circumstances require admission to  or  extension
           of stay within the United Kingdom of those  who  do  not  comply
           with the general Immigration Rules. It is difficult  to  imagine
           how the private life of someone  with  no  prior  nexus  to  the
           United Kingdom would require admission outside the rules for the
           purpose of study. There is no human right to come to the  United
           Kingdom for education  or  other  purposes  of  truly  voluntary
           migration.

           18. However, the appellant has been admitted to the UK  for  the
           purpose of higher  education  and  has  made  progress  enabling
           extension of stay in that capacity since her admission in  2007.
           We acknowledge that  that  gives  no  right  or  expectation  of
           extension  of  stay  irrespective  of  the  provisions  of   the
           Immigration Rules at  the  time  of  the  relevant  decision  on
           extension.

           19. Nevertheless people who have been admitted on  a  course  of
           study at a recognised UK institution for higher  education,  are
           likely to build up a relevant connection with  the  course,  the
           institution,  an   educational   sequence   for   the   ultimate
           professional qualification sought, as well as social ties during
           the period of study. Cumulatively this  may  amount  to  private
           life that deserves respect because the person has been  admitted
           for  this   purpose,   the   purpose   remains   unfilled,   and
           discretionary factors such  as  mis-representation  or  criminal
           conduct have not provided grounds for refusal  of  extension  or
           curtailment of stay.

           20. In the present case a change in the sponsorship rules during
           the course of a period of study has had a serious effect on  the
           ability of the appellant to conclude her course of  study.  Some
           requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  applicable  public
           policy scheme may be of such importance that a miss is  as  good
           as a mile, but this is not always the case."

   15.  It is clear from these passages that the Upper Tribunal acknowledged
       that it is possible for a private life, built up as  a  result  of  a
       combination of factors in connection  with  a  course  of  study,  to
       engage Article 8. However, this case must be considered in  light  of
       subsequent case law. That is not to say that  it  can  no  longer  be
       considered good law as found by the Upper Tribunal in Nasim (para 41)

           "...Mr Jarvis urged us to find that the obiter remarks in  CDS
           regarding Article 8 were no longer good law,  in  the  light  of
           Patel and Others. 'We find that would go too  far...  It  would,
           however, be wrong to say that the point has been  reached  where
           an adverse immigration decision in the case of a person  who  is
           here for study or other temporary purposes can never be found to
           be disproportionate...' "

   16. The Supreme Court in Patel clearly set out that  the  opportunity  to
       complete a course of education is not in  itself  a  right  protected
       under Article 8 - in the judgment of Lord Carnwath at para 57

           "57.  It is important to  remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a
           general dispensing power. It is to  be  distinguished  from  the
           Secretary of State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside
           the rules, which may be unrelated to any protected human  right.
           The merits of a decision not to depart from the  rules  are  not
           reviewable on appeal: section 86(6).  One  may  sympathise  with
           Sedley  LJ's  call  in  Pankina  for  "common  sense"   in   the
           application of the rules to graduates who have been studying  in
           the UK for  some  years  (see  para  47  above).  However,  such
           considerations do not by themselves provide  grounds  of  appeal
           under article 8, which is concerned with private or family life,
           not education as such. The opportunity for a  promising  student
           to complete his course in this  country,  however  desirable  in
           general terms, is not in itself a right protected under  article
           8."

   17. In Nasim the Upper Tribunal recognised that  Article  8  has  limited
       utility  in  private  life  cases  that  are  far  removed  from   an
       individual's moral and physical integrity. At paragraph 20 the  Upper
       Tribunal considered that

           "... Patel and Others is  a  significant  exhortation  from  the
           Supreme Court to re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of
           Article 8 and, in particular, to recognise its  limited  utility
           to an individual where one has moved along the  continuum,  from
           that Article's core area of  operation  towards  what  might  be
           described as its fuzzy penumbra.  The  limitation  arises,  both
           from what will at that point normally be the  tangential  effect
           on the individual of the proposed interference and from the fact
           that, unless there are particular reasons to reduce  the  public
           interest of enforcing immigration controls, that  interest  will
           consequently prevail in  striking  the  proportionality  balance
           (even assuming that stage is reached)' and as summarised in  the
           headnote - 'The judgments of the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel  and
           Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC
           72 serve to re-focus attention on  the  nature  and  purpose  of
           Article 8 of the ECHR and,  in  particular,  to  recognise  that
           Article's limited utility in private life  cases  that  are  far
           removed  from  the  protection  of  an  individual's  moral  and
           physical integrity"

   18. The appellant's reliance on CDS is misplaced.  The  circumstances  of
       the appellant are not analogous to those of  the  appellant  in  CDS.
       There has been no change in the sponsorship rules and  the  appellant
       in this case had not enrolled on the relevant course. The appellant's
       claim is, in essence, that the ability to complete his studies  is  a
       right protected by Article 8. As held in Patel this is not in  itself
       a protected right. In the light  of  the  above  mentioned  cases  as
       applied to the facts of this case it is clear  that  the  appellant's
       Article 8 claim was bound to fail  and  as  such  the  error  in  the
       judge's determination cannot  be  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
       appeal.

Summary of decision

   19. Although the judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of  law
       this was not a material error. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



Signed      P M Ramshaw      Date 10 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
