
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14725/2015
     IA/14727/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd June 2016                         |On 5th July 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     l b
                                     a d
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Astor Visas
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellants, both citizens of the People's Republic of China, appeal
    with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refusing their appeal against the respondent's refusal  to  grant  them
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2  Migrant  and
    partner, the applications having been made on 28th January  2015.   The
    applicants are civil partners having entered into a  civil  partnership
    or marriage on 17th April 2014 in the  United  Kingdom.  They  have  no
    other citizenship and are both still citizens of China.

 2. These are applications saved by the provisions of the  Immigration  Act
    2014 (Commencement) Order 2014.  The parties  originally  came  to  the
    United Kingdom as Tier 4 Migrants and therefore there was a valid right
    of appeal.

 3. The respondent's refusal was based on  the  failure  of  the  principal
    appellant's employer to provide any documentary evidence that  the  job
    had been advertised through Jobcentre Plus or its successor,  Universal
    Job Match. The respondent contacted the employer, but did not receive a
    satisfactory response from him.  She did not contact the appellants  or
    their representatives for correct documents.

 4. The respondent's discretion under paragraph 245AA of the  Rules  allows
    her to "contact the applicant or  his  representative  in  writing  and
    request the correct documents". Ms Holmes accepts  that  the  documents
    were never requested from the applicants  or  their  representative  in
    writing or otherwise and an attempt to  obtain  the  relevant  evidence
    from the employer is not a proper  exercise  of  the  discretion  under
    paragraph 245AA(b).

 5. Accordingly, the respondent's decision is not in  accordance  with  the
    law and I allow the appeals  to  the  extent  that  these  applications
    remain  before  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a  lawful  decision  in
    accordance with the Rules.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.  I  re-make
the decision in these appeals by allowing them as set  out  in  paragraph  5
above.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:     4 July 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
