

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
IA/14472/2015

                                                 ia/14478/2015

                                                 ia/14484/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 September 2017                     | On 21 September 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mrs preeti vimalkumar vyas
                      mr vimalkumar ganpatiprasad vyas
                         miss vidhi vimalkumar VYAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Abu Sufian of Counsel


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   In this appeal, the appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department to whom I shall refer as, "the claimant".  The  first  named
    and principal respondent ("principal respondent") is a citizen of India
    born on 23rd August 1985.

2.   On 14th March 2013, the principal  respondent  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a Tier  2  Migrant.   The  second  and  third  named
    respondents claimed as her dependants.  A  letter  from  the  principal
    respondent's sponsor submitted with the  application  was  subsequently
    discovered  by  the  claimant  to  be  false.   Before  the   principal
    respondent's application  of  14th  March,  2013  was  considered,  she
    submitted a further application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.  This  variation  was  submitted  under  the
    Rules.  The variation application was made on 17th October 2013, and it
    is clear from documents  supplied  by  the  principal  respondent  that
    representatives on  her  behalf  wrote  on  several  occasions  to  the
    claimant seeking a decision on both applications.

3.   In  a  decision  dated  27th  March  2015,  the  claimant  refused  the
    application  because  with  her  Tier  2  application   the   principal
    respondent  submitted  a  false  document.   The  claimant,  therefore,
    refused the application  under  paragraph  245ZX(c).   The  respondents
    appealed and their appeals were heard  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lagunju.

4.   The First Tier Tribunal Judge noted that the principal  respondent  had
    gone to great lengths to seek  redress  from  the  police  and  various
    agencies, claiming that she was a victim of fraud.  It was suggested on
    her behalf by Counsel that she notify the Home Office that she had been
    a  victim  of  fraud,  but  Mr  Mills  pointed  out   that   the   only
    correspondence the Home Office had  received  in  connection  with  the
    respondents' original application was  from  representatives  who  were
    seeking a response in connection with the variation application.  Those
    representatives did not indicate that the principal respondent had been
    the victim of fraud.

5.   The judge found  that  the  application  was  correctly  refused  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC  395,
    as amended.

6.   The judge noted that the respondents relied on family and private  life
    in the United Kingdom and could not meet the requirements of FM of  the
    Rules.  The judge  was  satisfied  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) would not be breached either, and went  on  to  consider  the
    application under Article 8.

7.   In the determination, paragraphs 27 to 34, the judge said this:-

         "27. When considering Art 8 of the ECHR I keep authorities such  as
             Razgar and Huang in mind.  Although family life could continue
             unhindered, as they would return as a family  unit,  I  accept
             however in the time the [respondents] have been in the UK they
             have established a degree of private life.


         28.  I find the decision is in  accordance  with  the  law  and  in
             keeping with the legitimate aim pursued.


         29.  When considering proportionality I  have  in  mind  the  minor
             [respondent] who has lived in the UK for 7 years now.  I  note
             however that at the  time  of  the  application  she  had  not
             attained 7 years in the UK thus she does not meet  the  rules.
             I consider her as a primary consideration and  have  her  best
             interests  in  mind  in  line  with  s.55  of   the   Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration act 2009.  I find  her  length  of
             residence relevant and significant.


         30.  She has established a life in the UK, formed relationships and
             ties to her peers and friends and according  to  the  evidence
             from her school contained in the bundle,  she  has  integrated
             well in the UK.  I do not find  it  would  be  in  the  public
             interest to remove her from the UK  after  attaining  what  is
             recognised as a significant length of time in a child's life.


         31.  I note in line with Azimi-Moayed, she entered the UK when  she
             was 4 years old, thus is now at an age in which she has  begun
             to establish her own independence and  form  her  own  private
             life.  In line with the [claimant's] own policy I do not  find
             strong  reasons  have  been  shown  to  justify  removal.    I
             therefore conclude it would not be proportionate or reasonable
             for the child to leave the UK.


         32.  In this respect I also consider  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration
             Act 2014) in relation to the adult  [respondents].   I  reduce
             the weight I attach to the [respondents'] private  life  given
             that their leave has always been precarious.  I note also that
             the [respondents] are likely to have  benefited  from  the  UK
             financially as their child has been receiving an education.


         33.   I  balance  these  factors  against  the  considerations   in
             s.117B(6), the public interest does not require the removal of
             the parents of a qualifying child.  I find  the  [respondents]
             have  shown  that  they  have   a   genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with their child who has now lived in the UK  for
             7 years and for the reasons I  give  above  it  would  not  be
             reasonable for her to leave the UK at this stage in her life.


         34.   On  balance,  I  find  the  decision   does   amount   to   a
             disproportionate interference in  the  Art  8  rights  of  the
             [respondents]."

8.   The claimant sought and obtained leave to appeal, suggesting  that  the
    judge had erred  in  law  by  treating  the  relationship  between  the
    principal respondent and her child and any associated best interests as
    a "trump card" and in doing so it is asserted that the judge has placed
    the consideration of the child's "best interests" above that  required,
    namely a primary consideration  making  it  the  primary  consideration
    above that  of  the  public  interest.   In  doing  so,  his  balancing
    exercise, it was suggested, is flawed and therefore unreliable.  It was
    suggested that the consideration of the child's best  interest  was  an
    exercise to be conducted  separately  but  within  the  proportionality
    analysis of the assessment of what is  in  the  public  interest.   The
    judge erred in his approach to the child's best interests. This  family
    entered the United Kingdom on a temporary basis and at all times  their
    position has been precarious, and on the  understanding  that  at  some
    point they would be returning to  India.   This  factor  has  not  been
    applied to the balancing exercise.  Further, the judge  has  failed  to
    identify  what  is  exceptional  on  the  facts,  such  as  to  warrant
    consideration outside the Immigration Rules which the judge  had  found
    were not met.

9.   In addressing me Mr Mills reminded me that the  principal  respondent's
    child was 14 at the time of arrival in the United Kingdom and 11 at the
    time of the hearing.  The judge has simply not considered the interests
    of the  child  and  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control.  The best interests of the child must be to  remain  with  her
    parents, but the best interests of the child are not the  only  primary
    consideration and they do not of themselves  have  the  status  of  the
    paramount consideration.  The issue for the judge was to decide whether
    or not it would be reasonable to expect the child the leave the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge should have identified the public interest engaged,
    measured its strength and determined whether  the  private  and  family
    life factors advanced on behalf of the respondent outweighed the public
    interest to the extent that the decision was disproportionate.  In this
    case the application could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  but
    the judge does not identify what facts warrant the  granting  of  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules.

10.   On  behalf  of  the  respondents,  Mr  Sufian  reminded  me  that  the
    application took an extremely long time for the claimant  to  consider.
    It was during this period that the principal respondent told  the  Home
    Office that her application contained a full sponsorship letter.

11.  Mr Mills pointed out that in fact no communication  was  ever  received
    from the principal respondent pointing out that the document  on  which
    she relied for her original application  was  false.   Several  letters
    were received from her representatives but they were  all  chasing  the
    Home Office for a decision.

12.  Mr Sufian suggested that the judge had applied MA (Pakistan)  &  Others
    v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.
    Counsel suggested that the judge had clearly applied Nagre [2013]  EWHC
    720, MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1129 and AE (Algeria) [2014] EWCA Civ
    653.  The judge considered proportionality and concluded that it was in
    the best interests of the child to remain in the United  Kingdom.   The
    judge applied  Azimi-Moayed  &  Other  (decisions  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 and concluded that it  would  not  be
    proportionate or reasonable for the child to leave the UK.   The  judge
    went on to consider Section 117B(6).

13.  I asked Counsel if he could  respond  specifically  to  the  challenges
    raised by Mr Mills and suggested that I would  adjourn  the  matter  in
    order that he could consider those specific challenges if he would like
    me to.  He indicated that he would welcome an adjournment and I  agreed
    to adjourn until the end of my list.

14.  At 11:45, when I had completed the remaining  matters  in  my  list,  I
    asked Counsel whether he was in a position to proceed  and  whether  he
    had had sufficient time.  He told me that he would  appreciate  further
    time and asked for a further hour.  I suggested that I would allow  him
    until 2 o'clock.

15.  On resuming the hearing at 2 o'clock  I  asked  Mr  Sufian  if  he  had
    sufficient time and whether he was now in a position to address me.  He
    told me he was.

16.  Counsel told me that the  judge  had  properly  considered  the  matter
    under Article 8, having found that the  respondent  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  do  that
    following the decision in Nagre.  He  submitted  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had properly considered the best interests  of  the  respondent's
    child and it was clear from paragraph 27 that she considered Huang.  In
    paragraph 29 of the determination, the judge  bore  in  mind  that  the
    minor respondent had lived in the United Kingdom for  seven  years  and
    had started to acquire her own family and private life.   In  paragraph
    30  of  the  determination,  the  judge  noted   that   the   principal
    respondent's daughter had formed relationships and ties  to  peers  and
    friends at school and concluded that it would  not  be  in  the  public
    interest to remove her from the United Kingdom.  At  paragraph  31  the
    judge noted that in line with Azimi-Moayed the child  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom when she was 4 years old and had now began to  form  her
    own independence and private life and  there  were  no  strong  reasons
    shown to justify her removal.

17.  Mr Mills responded by pointing out that the judge had erred by  finding
    that the  best  interests  of  the  child  were  determinative  of  her
    proportionality exercise.

18.  I reserved my determination.

19.  In Article 8 appeals the best interests of the child assessment  should
    normally be carried out at the beginning of the balancing exercise.  It
    is clear that this judge has found the best interests of the  principal
    respondent's daughter are determinative of  proportionality.   It  must
    clearly be in the best interests  of  the  child  to  remain  with  her
    parents, but as the Supreme Court said in Zoumbas v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are a primary consideration, but  may  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in the public interest.

20.  It seemed to me that the judge had clearly erred  in  paragraph  31  by
    looking for what she described as being, "strong  reasons"  to  justify
    the  claimant's  decision  to  remove.   The  judge  appears  to   have
    overlooked that a child's best interests are a  primary  consideration,
    but they are not paramount.   The  judge  should  have  identified  the
    public interest engaged, measured its strength and  determined  whether
    the  private  and  family  life  factors  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent outweighed the  public  interest  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision was disproportionate.  What was required was for the judge  to
    consider all issues in the round and conclude whether  removal  of  the
    respondents was a  proportionate  response  by  the  claimant.   It  is
    relevant that the claimant's immigration appeal was  correctly  refused
    under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  It was also relevant
    that the principal respondent was initially granted leave to enter as a
    Tier 4 Student in 2009 on a temporary basis.  It was necessary for  the
    judge to consider whether, considering all the evidence in  the  round,
    it would be unreasonable to expect the principal respondent's child  to
    leave  the  United  Kingdom   with   her   parents.    In   considering
    proportionality  the  judge  appears  to  ignore  the  fact  that   the
    respondents cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

21.  I have concluded that the determination is flawed and cannot  stand.  I
    set it aside.

22.  I have given  consideration  to  retaining  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and hearing it myself but, given the lengthy delays  that  can
    result, I have concluded that it is in the interests  of  justice  that
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    hearing afresh before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lagunju.  Two hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                                      Date:  20
September 2017


