
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/14901/2014
                                                               IA/14902/2014
                                                               ia/14903/2014
                                                               ia/14904/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 May 2015                                |On 20 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 MANGLA RAM
                                  BULA DEVI
                                 GOVIND RAM
                                   DEEPAK
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Reynolds, instructed by MT UK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, nationals of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decisions of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  the  first
    appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain as a work permit
    holder and the second, third and fourth appellants (his  wife  and  two
    children) as his dependants. First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard dismissed
    the appeals and the appellants  now  appeal  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. The respondent refused the applications on the  basis  that  the  first
    appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  134  of  the
    Immigration Rules as he had not demonstrated that he passed the Life in
    the  UK  test  because  the  certificate  was  confirmed  as  false  by
    learndirect limited. The applications were also refused under paragraph
    322(1A) of the Rules because a false document was submitted in relation
    to his application.

 3. The Notices accompanying the reasons for refusal  letters  advised  the
    appellants that they had a right of appeal only after leaving  the  UK.
    However the appellants lodged notices of appeal. I note that on 4 April
    2014, following submission of the notices  of  appeal,  the  appellants
    were directed by the duty judge to submit evidence to the Tribunal that
    a human rights claim or other relevant claim  was  made  prior  to  the
    decisions in line with the case of Nirula and Alighanbari,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWHC 1818 (Admin). There is a reply to that direction  dated  11  April
    2014 from the appellants' current solicitors which  maintains that  the
    appellants made an online application before the expiry of their  leave
    to remain and that, as the applications were made in  time,  there  was
    therefore an in-country right of appeal and that the decision in Nirula
    does not therefore apply. There is a note on the file to indicate  that
    the issue as to whether there is an in-country right of appeal  was  to
    be determined by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as a preliminary  issue.



 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did consider the issue of jurisdiction in
    relation to the decisions to refuse  to  grant  leave  to  remain.  The
    appellants asserted that they made  their  applications  for  leave  to
    remain before the expiry of their leave to remain on 26  February  2014
    by lodging applications online on that date. The respondent said in the
    reasons for refusal letter that the appellants' applications were  made
    on 6 March 2014. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found as  a  preliminary
    issue  that,  as  the  appellants  had  not  submitted  evidence   that
    electronic  applications  had  been  made  for  example  by   producing
    electronic records, they had not established  that  their  applications
    were made before the expiry  of  their  last  leave  to  remain  on  26
    February 2014, and had not  therefore  established  they  have  an  in-
    country right of appeal against the decisions  not  to  vary  leave  to
    remain.

 5. However the Judge did decide that the appellants had a right of  appeal
    against the removal directions and went on to consider the appeal under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  He decided that,
    although the appellants had an established family life there  would  be
    no interference with that family life as  they  would  all  be  removed
    together. In terms  of  their  private  life,  he  accepted  that  they
    probably had established a private life but in the absence of  evidence
    as to the quality of such private life  it  was  not  established  that
    there would be consequences of such gravity as  potentially  to  engage
    Article 8.

 6. The appellants appealed against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  failing  to
    engage with the allegation of deception. It was secondly contended that
    the Judge erred in failing to consider  the  appellants'  private  life
    under Article 8 within the Immigration Rules in  particular  the  'very
    significant obstacles' test. It was further contended that the  failing
    to adequately consider the evidence as to the  nature  of  the  private
    life established by the appellants in the UK.

Jurisdiction

 7. At the outset of the hearing before me Ms Savage raised  a  preliminary
    issue as to whether the First-tier Tribunal had  jurisdiction  to  hear
    the appeal at all.  She  submitted  that  the  Notices  of  Immigration
    Decision issued to each of the  appellants  under  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 advised that the right  of  appeal  was
    exercisable after the appellants had left the UK.  She  relied  on  the
    decision of the Administrative Court in Nirula  v  First-tier  Tribunal
    [2011]  EWHC  336  (Admin)  and  on  section  82  (2)  and  92  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. She  submitted  that  the
    appellants had made applications out  of  time  and  therefore  had  no
    appeals against the decisions to refuse to grant leave to  remain.  She
    submitted that they therefore had no in country right of appeal against
    the decision to remove them.

 8. Mr Reynolds submitted that the appellants  did  make  the  applications
    before the expiry of their leave to remain but accepted that he had  no
    concrete evidence to establish that it was made on time as asserted. He
    submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    to give the appellants an opportunity to address the issues  raised  in
    the reasons for refusal letter.

 9. I have considered the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  that  the
    appellants did not make an in time application for variation  of  leave
    to remain and I am satisfied that this decision was a  proper  decision
    based on the evidence before her.  There  was  then,  and  is  now,  no
    evidence to support the  assertion  that  the  appellants  made  online
    applications  on  26  February  2014.  The  application  form  in   the
    respondent's bundle, the same as that submitted by  Ms  Savage  at  the
    hearing before me, was signed by the first appellant on 6  March  2014.
    The covering letter is dated 5 March 2014 and does  not  refer  to  any
    previous online application. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no
    error in deciding that  the  applications  were  not  made  within  the
    currency of the appellants' previous leave to remain.

10. Section 82 (2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides for a right of appeal arising from an 'immigration  decision'.
    The immigration decisions in this case are to  remove  the  appellants,
    not, as asserted in the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    to refuse to vary their leave to remain. This is because they  did  not
    have leave to remain at the time of their applications. Accordingly the
    immigration decisions appealed against are under section 82 (2) (g)  as
    the appellants are to be removed  from  the  UK  as  overstayers  under
    section 10 (1) (a) of the Immigration Act 1999. Section 92 of the  2002
    Act provides that appeals under section 82 may not  be  exercised  from
    within  the  UK  unless  set  out  in  that  section.  Appeals  against
    immigration decisions specified in section 82 (2) (g) are not  included
    in those appeals which may be exercised from  within  the  UK.  However
    section 92 (4) provides for a right of appeal within the UK  if,  inter
    alia, the appellant has made an asylum or human rights claim  while  in
    the UK.

11. The Court of Appeal in Nirula, R (on the application of) v SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1436 considered the wording of section 92 (4) and said;

         "17.     The use of the auxiliary perfect tense in the phrase  "has
         made ... a human rights claim" strongly implies that the claim must
         precede any appeal and that must mean before the institution of  an
         appeal rather that the date of hearing of the  appeal.  The  reason
         why Parliament has chosen those words is, presumably, in  order  to
         give the Secretary of State the opportunity to give a  decision  on
         any human rights claim before the appeal is determined so that  her
         decision on that question can  become  part  of  any  appeal.  This
         orderly  process  will  be  disrupted   if,   without   any   prior
         notification to the Secretary of State, an appellant can simply put
         a human rights claim in his notice of appeal."

12. The application form submitted on 5 March 2014 makes no asylum or human
    rights claim. The reasons for refusal letters do not deal with any such
    claim. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal do not make any
    asylum or human rights claim. The appellants did not show, in  response
    to the direction of 4 April 2014, that there had been any human  rights
    claim. The first indication of any  human  rights  issue  came  in  the
    skeleton argument and the First-tier Tribunal Judge  decided  to  treat
    the letter to the Tribunal submitting additional grounds of  appeal  as
    an application to amend the grounds to include human rights grounds. In
    so doing the Judge fell into error. This  is  because  the  appellant's
    only had a right of appeal exercisable from outside the UK unless  they
    had made a human rights claim whilst in the  UK.  The  Judge  erred  in
    failing to consider the provisions of section 92 of the  2002  Act  and
    the decision in the case of Nirula. This is a material error  going  to
    the heart of the jurisdiction issue.

13. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  amend
    the grounds of appeal to include Article 8 grounds and in  relation  to
    the Article 8 issue. I preserve the findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge in relation to the date of submission  of  the  applications  for
    indefinite leave to remain. There is no further evidence before  me  in
    relation to that issue and that  decision  was  properly  made  by  the
    Judge.

14. The appellants did not provide evidence that they made a  human  rights
    claim before the decision or the lodgment of the appeal in  this  case.
    There was therefore no  in-country  right  of  appeal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to determine the  appeal.  The  appeal  is
    dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

I set it aside  and  remake  it  by  dismissing  the  appeals  for  want  of
jurisdiction.



Signed      Date: 19 May 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

