
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14762/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 February 2014                           |On 6 March 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               MRS rose kwakwa

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by IPS Immigration
Practitioners
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  10  September  1970.   She
    seeks to appeal against the decision made by the  respondent  dated  16
    April 2013 refusing to vary her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Warren  Grant  on  28
    November 2013 and was dismissed on all grounds.

3.   The appellant's husband had come to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2000  to
    study.  In September 2004 the appellant  came  to  join   him  and  was
    granted leave as his dependant.

4.   In 2012 the husband made an application for indefinite leave to  remain
    which was granted.  The appellant therefore  became  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person.  The respondent then considered her  application  under
    ELTRP and Appendix FM.   Her application as a  dependant  spouse  under
    paragraph 319A meant that she would have to satisfy the  "life  in  the
    UK" test  under  subsection  4(g)  as  well  as  the  English  language
    requirement.

5.   The appellant's husband Mr  Ampong  had  by  a  former  relationship  a
    daughter, Nana.  The daughter lived with his former partner but came to
    visit and stay with himself and the appellant at weekends on a  regular
    basis.

6.   The appellant's husband is  hopeful  of  completing  his  PhD  and  the
    appellant has worked since her arrival in the United Kingdom.

7.   It was accepted that the appellant could not presently meet  the  Rules
    as she was required to pass the English  language  test.   Further  the
    Judge went on to consider EX1 and  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to prevent the appellant from returning to Ghana either  with
    her husband or without him.

8.   Although reference  to  obstacles  is  made  in  paragraph  16  of  the
    determination  the  test  is  essentially  whether  or  not  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being conducted in  Ghana.  The
    Judge concluded that there were no such insurmountable obstacles.

9.   It was clear that the Judge misunderstood to some extent  the  evidence
    that was given in relation to contact with Nana.  She lived  in  Slough
    with her mother and the appellant and sponsor lived in Thamesmead.  The
    Judge did not find it credible that a 9 year old girl could travel from
    Slough to Thamesmead every weekend or spend her holidays in  Thamesmead
    away from her mother.  He accepted however that  the  sponsor  was  the
    father of Nana.

10.  The Judge concluded that the appellant did not meet any of  the  Rules.
    The Judge considered Article 8 of the ECHR briefly, concluding that her
    removal did not engage Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.  Concerns were raised in the grounds of appeal that  the  Judge  focused
    essentially upon the reasons why the appellant could  return  to  Ghana
    but did not consider the positive factors supporting her application to
    remain.   Scant consideration was given, it is said, to  the  interests
    of the sponsor and that of Nana herself.

12.   Indeed,  touching  the  issue  of  return,  although  EX1  speaks   of
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Ghana that is not
    the test that is to be applied in relation to Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    when the issue is one of reasonableness.

13.   There  would  appear  to  be  in  the   determination   little   about
    reasonableness and certainly proportionality is not considered  in  any
    detail or at all.

14.  There is no suggestion that the  appellant  has  breached  any  of  her
    conditions imposed upon her by the immigration  authorities.   She  was
    legitimately in the United Kingdom as  the  dependant  of  the  sponsor
    whilst he was a student and there is no suggestion other than it  is  a
    genuine marriage.

15.  The sponsor has achieved indefinite leave to remain and nowhere in  the
    determination is it considered why it would be reasonable to expect him
    to give up all that he has worked for, both in terms of study but  also
    in terms of status to go to live in Ghana.   An assessment  has  to  be
    made as to whether or not it is reasonable in all the circumstances  to
    expect the sponsor as well as the appellant to return to Ghana and  why
    such an expectation is proportionate in all the circumstances.

16.  All that seemingly stands in the way of the appellant  complying  under
    the existing case law  as  an  in-country  dependant  is  that  of  the
    language test.

17.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Judge failed  to
    assess proportionality of removal.

18.  Miss Brown, who represents the appellant, invites my attention  to  her
    skeleton argument. She submits that inadequate consideration was  given
    to the best interests of Nana  and  that  in  any  event  the  case  of
    Chikwamba was relevant as  to  the  issue  of  the  proportionality  of
    removal.  The  Judge  failed  to  ask  the  simple  question  "what  is
    proportional about  the  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom".

19.  In all the circumstances I do find there to be an  error  of  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside and to be remade.

20.  Given the extensive fact finding that would be required of the  various
    witnesses I consider in the light of the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions paragraph 7 that the appeal should remain to  be  considered
    within the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  Any further evidence that is to be relied upon should be  submitted  no
    later than 7 days prior to the hearing otherwise any further directions
    will be as determined by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

