
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14256/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th July 2015                             |On 14th August 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                             Chizoba Ivor Mbaeyi
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Nizami
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 12th December 1983 is a citizen of Nigeria.   The
    Appellant had made application for a residence permit on the basis that
    he was a spouse of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights.   The
    Respondent  refused  that  application  in  June  2013  and  a  renewed
    application was also refused  in  July  2013.   The  Appellant  made  a
    further application for a residence card on  the  same  basis  on  24th
    August 2013.  The Respondent had refused that application on 20th March
    2014.

 2. The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton sitting at Richmond on 23rd  October
    2014.  He had dismissed the appeal.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision.  The Respondent  had  opposed
    the application on 30th June 2015.  Permission to appeal was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 15th June 2015 on the basis that  it  was
    arguable the judge had not adequately given  reasons  for  his  finding
    that the Sponsor was the primary carer of the eldest child and that  he
    had not taken  into  account  the  potential  relevance  of  Regulation
    15A(7)(b)(ii) of the 2006 Regulations.

Submissions

 4. Miss Nizami had firstly made application  for  an  adjournment  as  the
    Appellant was not present having thought the case was tomorrow and  was
    prepared to travel from  Southend  to  the  hearing  centre  today.   I
    indicated that I would only be dealing with the question  of  error  of
    law today and therefore there would be no need in  any  event  for  any
    evidence from the Appellant.  I further indicated it was likely to be a
    lengthy delay before the Appellant could arrive and  there  were  other
    cases  in  a  full  list  for  the  day.   I  accordingly  refused  the
    application.

 5. It was submitted that the judge had provided inadequate explanations as
    to the conclusion that the mother was the  primary  carer  and  further
    that the judge had made no reference to Article 15A(7)(b)(ii).  It  was
    also noted that there had been an incorrect reference to Article 12  of
    the Citizen's Directive within the determination.

 6. Mr Bramble accepted that the judge had made an error in  not  providing
    any adequate explanation as to his conclusions on care  of  the  child.
    In indicated that I would provide a decision in writing.  I now provide
    that decision.

Decision and Reasons

 7. This was a case where the original application made  by  the  Appellant
    was to be granted a residence  card  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national, namely his wife a Polish citizen, when it was  said  she  was
    exercising treaty rights as a worker under Regulation  6  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  The  Respondent  had  refused  that  application  as  the
    Respondent did not accept that the Sponsor was in  work  and  therefore
    she was not exercising treaty rights under Regulation 6.

 8.  On  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   the   Respondent   was
    unrepresented due to the illness of the Presenting Officer.  The  judge
    had found for properly reasoned conclusions that the EEA citizen spouse
    was not currently working as claimed and therefore was  not  exercising
    treaty rights under Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

 9. However the judge had, perhaps understandably, gone on to consider  the
    question of the children and in that respect whether or not  there  was
    any derivative right of residence  applicable  to  the  Appellant.   At
    paragraph 49 the judge had found the EEA  Sponsor  to  be  the  primary
    carer and that "the right to remain in the UK derived  through  Article
    12 will not extend to the Appellant who  is  not  the  child's  primary
    carer".  At paragraph 48 the judge had referred to Article  12  of  the
    Citizen's Directive.

10. There appears to be no adequate reasons given for the judge's  findings
    that the EEA Sponsor mother  was  the  primary  carer.   There  is  for
    example no finding that there may have been such gained from  a  shared
    responsibility of the children or in a different way.  The reference to
    Article 12 of the Citizen's Directive  appears  an  error  and  perhaps
    should have been a reference  to  Article  12  of  Regulation  1612/68.
    There is no reference to or consideration of the potential relevance of
    Article  15A(7)(b)(ii)  of  the  2006  Regulations  as  noted  in   the
    permission granting appeal.  It was conceded by Mr Bramble  that  there
    was an error of law in this aspect of the case and that is a concession
    with which I agree.

11. I indicated at the hearing and I confirm that  now,  that  the  judge's
    findings on fact in respect of Regulation 6  of  the  2006  Regulations
    (whether the EEA citizen had been working at the  time)  should  stand.
    The judge had carefully considered the documentation and oral  evidence
    in this respect.  She had  given  clear  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusions at paragraphs 36 to 48  of  the  decision  and
    those conclusions disclosed no error of law or unreasonableness in  the
    conclusions reached.

12. The material  error  of  law  therefore  relates  specifically  to  the
    consideration  of  potential  derivative  rights  of  residence   under
    Regulation 15A of the 2006 Regulations and  the  relevance  and  impact
    upon findings made in this respect as to the position  of  the  non-EEA
    national Appellant.  It is appropriate that as there is a need to  make
    full and proper findings on fact in respect  of  this  issue  the  case
    should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for that  matter  to
    be fully considered.

Notice of Decision

13. I find that an error of law  was  made  by  the  judge  in  the  manner
    described and therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in so far as it relates to any potential derivative  right  of
    residence and direct that that aspect of this case  is  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

14. Anonymity not retained.



Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
