
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14265/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2014                                 |On 14 April 2014           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                           SALVACION PINUELA PLANA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born 22  September  1976.
    She first arrived in United Kingdom on 11 December 2010  in  possession
    of entry clearance conferring leave to enter until  21  June  2012.  On
    that date she made an application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General)  Student  Migrant.  This  application  was  refused  by   the
    respondent on 18 April 2013 and, on the same date, a decision was  made
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom pursuant to section  47
    of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed these  decisions  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds in a determination promulgated on 27 January  2014.  Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul in a decision of 13 March  2014.  In  doing  so  Judge  Rintoul
    stated as follows:

        "It is not arguable that the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law.
        While the burden is on the respondent to show that the decision  to
        remove is proportionate, it was sufficient for her  to  state  that
        (as is accepted) the appellant did not meet the requirements of the
        immigration rules.

        It is, however, arguable that the judge erred in stating [11]  that
        there was no evidence of any private life, as  she  had  adduced  a
        witness statement setting out the difficulties she faces.  On  that
        basis permission to appeal is granted."

 3. When dismissing the appeal Judge Lal observed that the  appellant,  who
    did  not  appear  before  him  having  requested  that  the  appeal  be
    determined on the papers, had accepted in her  witness  statement  that
    she had no valid CAS document. He, therefore, correctly  dismissed  the
    appeal brought in relation to the Immigration Rules. This decision  has
    not been the subject of challenge.

 4. As to the Article 8 ground,  the  crux  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasoning is as follows:

        "[11] The tribunal is satisfied that any intention  to  remove  the
        appellant will be an interference with her family life and  private
        life in the UK only to the extent that she clearly does not want to
        leave the UK by choice. Question (2) above is also perhaps answered
        in the affirmative. The interference is clearly lawful in  that  it
        seeks to maintain  effective  immigration  control,  the  appellant
        arrived on  a  visit  visa  and  this  would  likewise  provide  an
        affirmative answer in respect of question (4) above. The real issue
        is one of proportionality. The appellant has provided absolutely no
        evidence  as  to  why  removal  to   the   Philippines   would   be
        disproportionate to either her  family  or  private  life.  At  its
        highest she would be returned to her country of  origin  which  she
        left three years ago. She has provided no evidence  of  any  family
        life in the UK and has given no evidence as  to  any  private  life
        enjoyed in the UK in any event, other  than  to  say  she  has  her
        friends here. All the evidence suggests that the  appellant  is  an
        intelligent and healthy young woman who has spent the  majority  of
        her life in the Philippines and  who  has  no  doubt  improved  her
        situation by coming to the UK for 3 years.

        [12] The appellant is 37 years old and has lived in  the  UK  since
        2010. She has clearly spent the vast majority of her adult life  in
        the  Philippines  and  the  Tribunal  has  been  provided  with  no
        information  that   would   establish   that   removal   would   be
        disproportionate. In fact the Tribunal would go as far  as  to  say
        that the statement that returns  the  Philippines  "would  be  like
        going to a strange country" to be wholly misleading.  The  Tribunal
        finds that this is a claim wholly without merit."

 5. The pleaded grounds, drawn on the  appellant's  behalf  by  experienced
    counsel, submit that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  placing  the
    burden on the appellant to  prove  why  her  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would be disproportionate, rather  than  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to demonstrate why it  would  be  proportionate.  It  is  further
    asserted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  take  into
    account the contents of the appellant's witness statement  when  coming
    to its conclusions. Neither ground has any merit.

 6. As to the former ground, the  tribunal  correctly  directed  itself  in
    paragraph  9  of  the  determination  that  once  the   appellant   had
    established that article 8 is engaged the 'burden then  shifts  to  the
    Respondent  to  establish  that  any  such  interference  is  not  only
    legitimate but is also necessary and proportionate." In  my  conclusion
    there is nothing in the determination thereafter to  suggest  that  the
    tribunal  did  not  correctly  apply  such  self   direction   to   its
    considerations. The reference in paragraph 11 of the  determination  to
    the appellant having produced no evidence as to why her removal to  the
    Philippines would  be  'disproportionate'  is  not  indicative  of  the
    tribunal reversing the burden of proof but rather a reflection  of  the
    fact that the respondent  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  appellant's
    failure  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration   Rules   as
    justification for  removing  her,  and  that  such  reliance  would  be
    sufficient, absent the appellant  providing  evidence  as  to  why  her
    removal would be disproportionate in all the circumstances.

 7. Turning to the second ground, it is plain that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had in mind the contents  of  the  appellant's  witness  statement.  It
    identified in paragraph  4  of  its  determination  that  it  had  such
    evidence before it, and it makes reference  to  the  contents  of  this
    statement in paragraphs 6, 11 and 12 of the determination.

 8. I have considered the terms of this statement for myself. It runs to 12
    paragraphs  and  provides  limited  evidence  as  to  the   appellant's
    circumstances in the United Kingdom. In paragraphs  9  and  10  of  the
    statement it is asserted that the appellant regards the United  Kingdom
    as her main home, that she  (i)  has  integrated  into  United  Kingdom
    society, (ii) has all of her social and economic ties here,  (iii)  has
    many friends here, and (iv) could contribute to the  United  Kingdom's.
    As to her return to the Philippines, in paragraph 11 of  her  statement
    the appellant asserts that this would be like returning  to  a  country
    she has never been  before.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  and
    rejected this evidence when coming to its conclusions.

 9. It is to be  recalled  that  the  appellant  requested  the  appeal  be
    determined on the papers. When viewed through the prism of the  limited
    evidence that was before it, in my conclusion the reasons given by  the
    First-tier Tribunal for dismissing the appeal against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State refusing to vary the appellant's leave are clear
    and cogent, and its  conclusion  was  not  only  open  to  it  but  was
    inevitable.

10. Having considered the determination as a whole I find no  error  in  to
    the  appeal  brought  against  the  decision  refusing  to   vary   the
    appellant's leave.

   11. As identified above, the Secretary of  State  also  made  a  removal
       decision in relation to the appellant pursuant to section 47 of  the
       Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  In  Ahmadi  (s.47
       decision: validity: Sapkota) [2012] UKUT 00147  the  Upper  Tribunal
       held that a removal decision under section 47 could not be  made  in
       respect of a person until written notice of the decision  to  refuse
       to vary that person's leave to remain had been given to that person,
       and that the Secretary of State's  practice  of  incorporating  both
       decisions in a single notice was incompatible with the  legislation.
       The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       decision was dismissed by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of  State
       for the Home Department v  Javad  Ahmadi  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  512,  a
       decision by which we are, of course, bound. Given that  the  section
       47 removal decision was made prior to 8 May  2013  I  conclude  that
       this decision was unlawful. The First-tier Tribunal did not consider
       this aspect of the appeal and to that extent  its  determination  is
       flawed by legal error and must be set aside. I re-make the  decision
       on this aspect of the appeal, allowing it.


   12. The appeal brought in relation to the decision refusing to vary  the
       appellant's leave is dismissed for the reasons given by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.


 Decision


 The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


 The appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
       refusing to vary her leave is dismissed on all grounds.


 The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to remove
       her pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  2006  is
       allowed for the reasons given in paragraph 10 above.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 14 April 2014

