
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14838/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 July 2016                           |On 21 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FAUSTINA MANU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Phull promulgated on 18 January 2016 which allowed the  appeal  against
    refusal of an EEA residence card finding the respondent's  decision  to
    be not in accordance with the law.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the respondent and to  Ms  Manu  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Judge Phull found comprehensively against the appellant as regards  her
    claimed relationship with an EEA national. However, at paragraph 31  he
    stated:

         "The appeal is allowed to the limited extent because it is not  in
         accordance with the law".

 4. That statement followed comments at [19]-[21]  on  how  the  respondent
    evidenced her case as regards a visit by Immigration  Officers  to  the
    appellant's property on 12 March 2015.  The comments of the  judge  are
    as follows:

         "19.  I am placed in difficulty as the respondent has not  complied
             with  the  court  directions  and  filed  a  full  bundle   of
             documents. The  reasons  for  refusal  letter  refers  to  the
             Immigration Officer's (IO) report following  a  visit  to  the
             appellant's address, [ ] on 12 March 2015.  The  IO  spoke  to
             Joyce Dixon and Baffour Awuah who were present at the address.
              A copy of IO's report at page C1 respondent's bundle, however
             it  is  incomplete.  There  is   another   page   missing.   A
             contemporaneous record of the  conversation/interview  the  IO
             had with Joyce and  Baffour  has  not  been  included  in  the
             respondent's bundle.  This means that the  appellant  has  not
             had  the  opportunity  to  consider  all  the   evidence   the
             respondent's seeks to rely on.

         20.      I find the respondent has not complied with the  Procedure
             Rules to file all evidence relied on and has  also  failed  to
             file a full copy of the Immigration Officer's report including
             any interview with Joyce and Awuah relied on in  the  refusal.
             The respondent is under an obligation to provide the interview
             record  '(Miah  (interview,  comments;  disclosure,   failure)
             [2014]  UKUT  00515  (IAC)'  which  held  that  interview  and
             interviewers  comments  should  be  disclosed  routinely   and
             therefore the respondent has no right to assert  and  rely  on
             inconsistencies if the interview has not  been  disclosed.   I
             find on balance that the decision is not  in  accordance  with
             the law.

         21.   I find on balance that the respondent's failure  to  disclose
             the IO's full  report  and  any  interview  record  means  the
             appellant  does  not  know  the  full  case  against  her.   I
             therefore cannot make a just and fair decision  without  sight
             of all the evidence  the  respondent  seeks  to  rely  on.   I
             therefore  find  on  balance  that  the  decision  is  not  in
             accordance with the law."

 5. It might be thought that having made that categorical statement  as  to
    not being able to make a "just and  fair decision without sight of  all
    the evidence"  that the matter would end there  but  Judge  Phull  made
    comprehensive  negative findings against the appellant for a number  of
    reasons, set out at [22] to [30].

 6. The conclusion at [30] is that the appellant had not shown that she was
    in a durable relationship with an EEA national. The  decision  at  [30]
    goes on to state "However as the respondent has not complied  with  the
    Procedure Rules relating to the issue of 'marriage  of  convenience'  I
    find on balance the decision is not in accordance with the law and  the
    appellant awaits a lawful decision".

 7. It is not entirely clear to me what is being referred to in  this  last
    sentence.  There are no Procedure  Rules  relating  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience. It may be a reference to and to the  requirement  for  the
    respondent to provide a bundle of evidence on which she  relies  in  an
    appeal. The respondent did provide a bundle. It may be a  reference  to
    the ratio  of  the  case  of  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038(IAC)  which  places  an  initial
    evidential burden on the respondent to which the appellant  only  needs
    to respond if that evidential burden is shown to be met

 8. The only reason for Judge Phull to find that the respondent had not met
    the evidential burden here, however, is the absence an interview record
    from the visit to the home on 12 March 2015.  It is not  my  view  that
    this was sufficient to show that the respondent  had  not  made  out  a
    prima facie case on the basis of the evidence that she did provide.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's reliance at [20] on the case of Miah is  also
    misconceived.  The first paragraph of the head note of that case states
    as follows:

          "(i)    A decision that a marriage is a  marriage  of  convenience
             for  the  purposes  of  regulation  2(1)  of  the  Immigration
             (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 is a matter of  some
             moment. Fairness requires that the  affected  person  must  be
             alerted to the essential elements of the case against him."

10. Miah requires only that an appellant is given the  "essential  elements
    of the case against him". The note from the Immigration  Officer  meets
    that requirement, explaining who and what was asked.

11. In any event, it was not merely the interview or the conversation  that
    was had by an Immigration Officer with the residents of the house on 12
    March 2015 that led to the  refusal.  The  Secretary  of  State  raised
    further matters on page 3 of 6 of the  refusal  letter  concerning  the
    address used for the EEA spouse in Leicester and  not  at  the  claimed
    shared home in London and goes on to say that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show a  relationship  with  an  EEA  national,  rather  the
    appellant was still in a relationship with her former partner who was a
    non-EEA national.

12. It is therefore my view that Judge Phull erred in law in  finding  that
    the Secretary of  State  had  not  complied  with  directions  or  with
    Procedure Rules  or  with  the  evidential  burden  placed  on  her  by
    Papajorgji.  The appellant knew the case against her, knew that it  was
    to do with residence with her claimed spouse  and  knew  of  the  other
    evidential matters relied on against her by the Secretary of State. The
    error of law is such that the "not in accordance with the law" decision
    must be set aside to be remade.

13. As is made clear from my consideration of the error of law arguments, I
    do not accept that the appellant did not know the "essential  elements"
    of the case against her. As above, the Secretary of State put her  case
    clearly in the note of the visit to the home on 12 March 2015 and  also
    set out  in  the  refusal  letter  the  other  matters  concerning  the
    residence of the claimed spouse on which she relied.  The  findings  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull at [22] - [29] on the claim to be in  a
    relationship have not been challenged and admit of  only  one  outcome.
    This appellant cannot show that she is in a durable  relationship  with
    an EEA national.  The appeal on the basis  of  requesting  a  residence
    card as being in  a  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA  national  is
    refused.

Decision

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an  error  on  a
    point of law and is set aside.

15. I remake the appeal as refused.




Signed   [pic]                               Date 20 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


