








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14350/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on  |
|On: 14 December 2016                 |On:  18 January 2017                 |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                     Mr Maturkumar Purshottambhai Patel
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, counsel (instructed by Paul John and
Company)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of India, born  on  3  November  1980.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hamilton promulgated on 20 March  2015  dismissing  his
      application made on 22 January 2015 for leave to remain in the  UK  on
      human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant came to the UK in October 2009 on a Tier 4 student  visa
      valid until 17 April 2011. That leave  was  extended  until  3  August
      2015. In September 2014, his college had its licence revoked  and  his
      leave was curtailed to expire on 9 February 2015.


   3. In November 2014, he was  admitted  to  hospital  and  diagnosed  with
      disseminated TB in his lungs and abdomen.


   4. He applied on 22 January 2015 for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
      grounds. In a  covering  letter  from  his  representatives  dated  28
      January 2015, it was stated that he had been diagnosed with TB and was
      subject to a one year treatment  plan  and  could  not  travel  abroad
      because his infection is contagious.


   5. During the five years he has lived in the UK,  he  has  established  a
      family and private life. His family and friends have  been  supporting
      and accommodating him. He would not have to rely on public  funds.  It
      would be disproportionate to require him to return to India.


   6. Taking into account the  compassionate  circumstances,  he  should  be
      granted leave.


The First-tier Tribunal decision


   7. Judge Hamilton referred in detail to the evidence submitted  including
      documents relating to his medical treatment. His  GP  letter  dated  9
      March 2016 stated that the  appellant's  treatment  for  TB  had  been
      completed in August 2015 and that he continued to suffer  from  severe
      knee pain and he found it difficult  to  mobilise.   He  still  needed
      crutches to move around. He has  been  referred  for  an  arthroscopic
      procedure to relieve the symptoms, after  which  he  would  need  many
      months of rehabilitation to improve his strength in his knee.


   8. In his evidence before the  Tribunal  the  appellant  stated  that  he
      continues to attend outpatient appointments each  month.  He  did  not
      have a date for his knee operation. He was unable to  walk  for  long.
      His doctor told him that he was not  fit  to  travel  and  without  an
      operation his knee would lose mobility.


   9. He stated moreover that he is unable to return to India as his  mother
      was too old to care for him  and  he  would  not  be  able  to  afford
      medicine or surgery. He may  need  a  full  knee  replacement  in  the
      future. He made inquiries about treatment  in  India.  The  doctor  he
      consulted told him that it would cost 5-6 lakh for a knee replacement.




  10. As a disabled person in India he would not get any assistance from the
      government.


  11. Since coming to the UK, he  has  been  living  with  his  brother  and
      brother's family. His mother has her own house in India. He  would  be
      able to live there and his brother would also be able to pay  for  his
      day to day expenses. However, his brother would be unable to afford to
      pay for his medical treatment.


  12. Judge Hamilton set out the relevant  law,  including  the  Immigration
      Rules applicable in the case. He also directed himself  in  accordance
      with Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  13. He had regard to the factors set out in s.117B  of  the  2002  Act  in
      considering the public interest in the context of proportionality.


  14. In his findings, the Judge noted that there was no detail given  about
      the nature of the rehabilitation required. It was likely that it would
      entail  following  an  exercise  regime  and  possible  visits  to   a
      physiotherapist.


  15. There was no evidence to support his claim that he had been told  that
      he required or may require a total knee replacement.  The  arthroscopy
      was a minimally invasive procedure. Nor was there evidence to  support
      that he had been told that he was unfit to travel. Nor was  there  any
      evidence supporting what he claimed was said  to  him  concerning  the
      cost of medical treatment in India. It is  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to  have  produced  medical  evidence  to  support  such  an
      assertion.


  16. As to his brother being able to maintain and accommodate  him  in  the
      UK, his brother did not make a  statement  or  give  evidence  and  no
      documentary evidence about his financial circumstances or  the  nature
      of the accommodation available was provided. Nor was there independent
      evidence to support his claim that his family could not  pay  for  his
      medical treatment in India.


  17. It had not been argued on his behalf that he met the  requirements  of
      the family life provisions contained in Appendix FM of the  Rules.  It
      was argued that he met the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the
      Rules. That is because he was disabled and unable  to  integrate  into
      India.


  18. The Judge found that the appellant had lived in India for most of  his
      life. He had been in the UK for about six years. His mother  lives  in
      India. It is likely that he still has social  and  family  connections
      there. He would be able to live with  his  mother  in  India  and  his
      brother in the UK would continue to support him and pay for his day to
      day needs.


  19. He found that  the  appellant  did  not  provide  sufficient  evidence
      showing that he is unable to afford  the  arthroscopic  procedure  and
      rehabilitation referred to in his GP letter. Nor  was  there  evidence
      provided to support his claim that such treatment was beyond the means
      of his family.


  20. Even if he were unable to pay for  the  surgery,  the  fact  that  his
      mobility would be limited does not prevent him integrating  into  life
      in India, given  that  he  has  accommodation  and  financial  support
      available to him were he to return. There was no evidence that  people
      with limited mobility were unable to live in India. He would also have
      the advantage of living in a country  where  he  speaks  the  language
      fluently and which reflects his cultural background.


  21. At [32] the Judge concluded that looking at the evidence as  a  whole,
      it would not be  impractical  or  unrealistic  for  the  appellant  to
      integrate into life in India. Even if unable to work, his basic  needs
      will  be  met  and  he  will  have  access  to  adequate  support.  He
      accordingly found that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements
      under paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) of the Rules.


  22. The Judge considered his rights under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention. He referred to GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40. Even if  the
      appellant were suffering from a significant life  threatening  medical
      condition, there is little prospect that he would be able to show that
      returning him to India would breach his rights under Article 3 of  the
      Convention.


  23. He stated at [36] that while the appellant  has  been  unwell,  it  is
      likely that he has been dependent on his brother for financial support
      and accommodation and care. Although he  has  recovered  from  TB,  he
      still has significant problems with  his  knee  and  his  mobility  is
      restricted. He is still living with and  is  being  supported  by  his
      brother and  his  brother's  family.  The  Judge  found  that  he  had
      established a family life in the UK with his brother  and  the  family
      because of this level of dependency.


  24. At [37] he "accepted" that the  appellant's  brother  and  family  can
      continue to support him in India. Nevertheless, he considered  whether
      requiring the  appellant  to  return  to  India  would  amount  to  an
      interference with his family life.


  25. He found that he has also established a private life in the UK  within
      the meaning of Article 8  while  he  has  been  unwell  and  receiving
      treatment here. His private life is, to some extent, bound up with his
      family relationships. He is however not  receiving  medical  treatment
      because of his familial relationship with his brother.


  26. The Judge considered the public  interest  factors  in  assessing  the
      proportionality of  the  decision.  He  took  into  account  that  the
      appellant can speak English and has complied with the UK laws. He  has
      however only been in the UK on a temporary  basis  and  there  was  no
      expectation that he would be  allowed  to  remain.  Any  private  life
      established in these circumstances can be given little weight.


  27. He requires an operation and he says that  he  is  likely  to  require
      increased medical treatment in the future. His brother is  not  paying
      for his treatment in the UK. This is provided free by the NHS. He  had
      no inherent right to have the benefit of treatment on the NHS once his
      leave to remain had expired. The reality is that if he remains in  the
      UK, he will increase waiting times and  diminish  resources  available
      for those who already have a right to NHS treatment [42].


  28. He accepted that if the appellant were to return to India, life  would
      be significantly more difficult for him. However,  on  his  own  case,
      accommodation is available to him and his brother  would  continue  to
      pay for his day to day needs. He is still likely to  have  social  and
      family ties there.


  29. The Judge was not satisfied that his brother's family  are  unable  to
      pay for his medical treatment in India.  In  any  event,  he  has  not
      produced any cogent evidence to show that notwithstanding his  limited
      mobility and medical problems, he would be unable to live in India and
      re-establish a private life there.


  30. He will still be able to maintain his relationship  with  his  brother
      and extended family through visits and modern means of communication.


  31. Taking all those factors into account, the Judge held that  there  are
      no compelling circumstances applicable. The respondent's decision  was
      a proportionate interference with  his  or  his  family's  private  or
      family life rights.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


  32. On 15 November 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara granted the appellant
      permission to appeal on the basis that it is arguable that  the  Judge
      materially misdirected himself as to the correct test under  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. Permission was granted on all grounds.


  33. There were three grounds in support of the application for  permission
      to appeal.


  34. The first ground contended that the Judge misdirected  himself  as  to
      the correct test under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules,  which
      provides  that  there  must  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration into the country. The Judge asked himself at [31]  whether
      the appellant would be "unable" to live in India  rather  than  asking
      himself whether there were obstacles to  his  integration  which  were
      very significant [32], which it is contended is a less demanding test.


  35. He misdirected himself in asking whether it would be "impractical"  or
      "unrealistic" for the appellant to integrate into life in India.


  36. Of further concern is the fact that when considering Article 8 outside
      the Rules, the Judge stated that he accepted  that  if  the  appellant
      were to return to India, his life is likely to be  significantly  more
      difficult. That should have been part of  the  assessment  under  Rule
      276ADE(1)(vi).


  37. The Judge  ought  to  have  had  considered  the  respondent's  policy
      guidance entitled "Appendix FM  1.0  Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
      parent) and Private Life: Ten Year Routes" dated August 2015.


  38. When  assessing  whether  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
      integration, the starting point is to assume that the  applicant  will
      be able to integrate into  the  country  of  return  unless  they  can
      demonstrate why this is not the case.


  39. A very significant  obstacle  is  something  which  would  prevent  or
      seriously inhibit the applicant from integrating into the  country  of
      return. The decision maker is looking for more  than  obstacles.  They
      are looking to see whether there  are  "very  significant"  obstacles,
      which is a high threshold. Very significant obstacles will exist where
      the applicant demonstrates that they would be unable  to  establish  a
      private life in the country of return, or where establishing a private
      life in the country of return would entail very serious  hardship  for
      the applicant.


  40. There is also reference to the cultural background, the length of time
      spent in the country of return and  his  family,  friends  and  social
      network.


  41. It was submitted that had the  Judge  properly  directed  himself,  he
      would have concluded that the test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
      Rules was in fact met.


  42. Ground 2 refers to a lack of anxious scrutiny. The  Judge  misrecorded
      the name of counsel who represented the appellant. He gave  the  wrong
      date of refusal, as being 29 July 2014 when it was in  fact  20  March
      2015.


  43. The Judge failed to take into  account  the  evidence  in  respect  of
      tuberculosis and how contagious it is.


  44. The Judge should have  considered  that  the  evidence  submitted  was
      sufficiently compelling, meaning that his removal at the present  time
      while still receiving treatment was not  proportionate  or  reasonable
      under Article 8.


  45. It was also submitted that in the appellant's case, it was not  purely
      a health claim under Article 8, but there was a  genuine  family  life
      with the appellant's brother within Article 8. He  should  accordingly
      have treated this as a family life claim in accordance with  paragraph
      23 of MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 and [87] of GS (India) v  SSHD
      [2015] EWCA Civ 40.


  46. The third  ground  contended  that  the  Judge  erred  in  imposing  a
      requirement for corroboration and that he failed  to  have  regard  to
      relevant evidence. There was in fact evidence that the  appellant  had
      been told that he required a total knee replacement.


  47. In her submissions, Ms Revill contended that the Judge erred in asking
      himself whether the appellant would be able to  integrate  into  India
      rather than whether there would be very significant obstacles  to  his
      integration there. That imposes a higher threshold than  is  warranted
      by the Rules.


  48. She referred to the decision in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813  at
      [14]. This was a deportation appeal. Lord Justice  Sales  stated  that
      the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into the country  to
      which it is proposed he be deported, as set out in s.117C(4)(c)  is  a
      broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to  find  a  job  or
      live the same life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
      appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject to  some  gloss
      and it will usually be sufficient for a court or  tribunal  simply  to
      direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use.


  49. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to  be
      made as to whether the individual would be enough  of  an  insider  in
      terms of understanding how life in that other country  is  carried  on
      and a capacity to participate in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
      opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on  a  day-to-
      day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time  a
      variety of human relationships to give substance to  the  individual's
      private or family life.


  50. The appellant asserted that his mother was too old to care for him and
      that he would not be able to afford medicine  or  surgery.  The  Judge
      found at [43] that if he were to return to India, life was  likely  to
      be significantly more difficult for him. That, she submitted, does  go
      some way to a finding of discharging the requirements under  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi).


  51. It was not suggested that treatment was not available  in  India.  Had
      the lower test been applied, it cannot be said that  paragraph  276ADE
      would not have been satisfied.


  52. As regards ground 2, anxious scrutiny, Ms Revil referred to R (on  the
      application of YH) v Secretary of State [2010] EWCA Civ 116 where  the
      Court emphasised the need to apply anxious scrutiny in any  asylum  or
      human rights claim in view of the very special human context in  which
      the cases are brought. In ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844, the
      Court of Appeal made it clear that anxious scrutiny is  required  even
      where the appellant's case is  perceived  to  be  weak  and  that  its
      absence means that the appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing.


  53. Ms Revill submitted that the Judge incorrectly recorded  the  name  of
      the appellant's counsel,  mis-stated  the  date  of  the  respondent's
      decision and failed to have regard to  the  totality  of  the  medical
      evidence relied on, and in particular that contained at page 24 of the
      appellant's bundle.


  54. He also wrongly treated the  appellant's  Article  8  claim  based  on
      medical treatment as entirely separate from his claim to  family  life
      with his brother, contrary to the approach in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
      [2012] EWCA Civ 297 at [23].


  55. The third ground contended that the Judge erred in refusing to  accept
      his evidence on matters in the absence of  corroboration.  It  was  an
      error  to  have  rejected  his  evidence   solely   because   it   was
      uncorroborated.


  56. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Staunton adopted the Rule 24 response.




  57. The Judge set out at [6] of the determination  the  "very  significant
      obstacles" aproach. The finding that it would not  be  impractical  or
      unrealistic for the appellant to integrate into life in India was open
      to him.


  58. The test in fact applied by the Judge is a lower test than  the  "very
      significant obstacles" test required by the Rules.


  59. In any event, any error was  not  material  as  no  Tribunal  properly
      directing itself could reach  the  conclusion  that  the  difficulties
      regarding  the  appellant's  knee  could  possibly   meet   the   very
      significant obstacles test laid down by the Rules. The  error  "is  in
      semantics only." The Judge had directed himself appropriately.


  60. Mr Staunton referred to the decision at [32].  The  test  applied  was
      lower than the very significant obstacles test  imposed  by  paragraph
      276ADE. The Judge found that would not be "impractical or unrealistic"
      for the appellant to integrate into life in India.  The  test  was  in
      fact in the appellant's favour. Accordingly, if he  applied  the  very
      significant obstacles test, the outcome would be the same.


  61. As regards ground 2, he accepted that it was "sloppy" that  the  Judge
      did not properly record counsel's name and other typographical errors.
      However, he was at all times aware of the "factual matrix"  applicable
      in this case.


  62. Nor would the  fact  that  the  family  and  medical  components  were
      separately treated affect the outcome. If  both  were  considered  the
      outcome would have been the same.


  63. The Judge found that he would have medical  assistance  in  India  and
      would be assisted by his family.


  64. In reply Ms Revill submitted that the Rule is  solely  concerned  with
      whether or not there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's integration into India. It is not clear that the Judge was
      imposing a  lower  threshold.  She  submitted  that  "putting  it  all
      together" there has been a material misdirection.


      Assessment


  65. I have set out the Judge's detailed decision. He has concluded at [32]
      that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. The Judge had earlier [at 28] referred  to
      the argument that the appellant met the requirements under  that  Rule
      as he was disabled and unable to integrate into India.


  66. The Judge had regard earlier to the appellant's  assertions  that  his
      mother was too old to care for him and that he would not  be  able  to
      afford medicine or surgery.


  67. However, the Judge concluded that he had lived in India  for  most  of
      his life. He had only been in the UK for about six years.  His  mother
      lives in India. He still has social and family connections there.  The
      appellant accepted that he would be able to live with his  mother  and
      that his brother would continue to support him and pay for his day  to
      day needs.


  68.  In  the  evidence  presented  from  the  Orthopaedic  Registrar,   Mr
      Jayaweera, stated that the appellant  may  benefit  from  arthroscopic
      procedure for symptomatic relief as he is too young for a  total  knee
      replacement at this time.


  69. At [40] the  Judge  noted  that  the  appellant  continued  to  attend
      outpatient appointments but there was no date for his knee  operation.
      The Judge noted his claim that he was unable  to  walk  for  long.  He
      claimed to have been told that he was  not  fit  to  travel  and  that
      without an operation on his knee, he would lose mobility.


  70. The Judge took into account at  [36]  that  the  appellant  still  has
      significant  problems  with  his  knee  and  that  his   mobility   is
      restricted. He is still supported by his brother and his  family.   He
      found that there was no evidence to show that he was unable to  afford
      the arthroscopic procedure  and  rehabilitation  referred  to  in  the
      letter from his GP. Nor was there evidence  that  such  treatment  was
      beyond the means of his family.


  71. The Judge found that even if unable to pay for that surgery, the  fact
      that his mobility would be limited would not prevent  his  integrating
      into life in India, given the  fact  that  he  has  accommodation  and
      financial support available. There was no evidence  that  people  with
      limited mobility were unable to live in India. He would also have  the
      advantage  of  living  in  a  country  which  reflects  his   cultural
      background.


  72. He thus found that looking at the evidence as a whole, it would not be
      impractical or unrealistic for him to integrate into  life  in  India.
      His basic needs would be met. He could not meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) [32]. There was no evidence that  people  with
      limited mobility were unable to live in India.


  73. The Judge set out the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) at [6] and
      made repeated reference in his decision to that paragraph  -  at  [28]
      and again at [32]. It was noted  that  it  was  not  accepted  by  the
      respondent that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration into India.


  74. He also had regard to the appellant's evidence as to  his  ability  to
      return to India. At [17] the Judge records that the  appellant  stated
      that he would be able to live in India and his brother would  be  able
      to pay for his day to day needs, albeit that he  would  be  unable  to
      afford to pay for his medical treatment.


  75. The Judge found that it would not be impractical  or  unrealistic  for
      him to integrate into life  in  India.  He  also  noted  in  the  same
      paragraph [32] that his basic needs would be met  and  that  he  would
      have access to adequate support. He did not therefore find, looking at
      the  evidence  as  a  whole,  that  the  appellant  could   meet   the
      requirements under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.


  76. I accordingly do not find that the  Judge  was  unaware  of  the  very
      significant obstacles requirement under the Rules. Although  he  might
      have expressed himself more clearly in this respect,  I  do  not  find
      that the Judge failed to give proper effect to it.


  77. In any event,  the  finding  that  it  would  not  be  impractical  or
      unrealistic for him to integrate into life in  India  encompasses  the
      finding that there would not be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration there.


  78. I am thus satisfied that the Judge  was  fully  aware  of  the  issues
      involved and that his finding that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  had  not
      been met was based on the consideration of the relevant  evidence  and
      is sustainable.


  79. With regard to ground  2,  even  though  the  Judge  might  have  been
      "sloppy" as submitted by Mr Staunton, I do not find that this  amounts
      to evidence of a failure to give "anxious scrutiny" to the appellant's
      case. As noted, the Judge has set out in great detail the full  nature
      and extent of the  appellant's  claim.  I  do  not  accept  that  this
      constitutes a basis for the assertion that he has been denied  a  fair
      hearing.


  80. The Judge found at [30] that the appellant had not produced sufficient
      evidence showing he was unable to afford  the  arthroscopic  procedure
      and rehabilitation referred to in the letter from his GP. There was no
      independent evidence from his family to support his  claim  that  such
      treatment was  beyond  their  means.  The  Judge  found  that  it  was
      reasonable to expect him to have produced such evidence  or  explained
      why it was unavailable [27]. It was  the  duty  of  the  appellant  to
      present such evidence in order to discharge the burden of  proof  that
      was resting on him.


  81. Moreover, the Judge has considered and properly applied the principles
      of GS (India) v SSHD. He found that there was family life  in  the  UK
      with his brother and his family because of the level of dependency. He
      found however that they could continue to support  him  in  India.  He
      took into account that the degree of support that they can  offer  him
      is so different that requiring him to return to India would amount  to
      an interference with his family life [37].  His return to India  would
      significantly disrupt his life as established in the UK. It would  end
      free medical treatment. It would also  therefore  interfere  with  his
      private life.  If returned to India, he would have the opportunity  to
      maintain his relationship with his brother and extended family through
      visits and modern means of communication.


  82. Having regard to his decision as a whole, I find that the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  involve  the  making  of  any
      material error on a point of law.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material errors of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date 16 January 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

