
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14641/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons                |
|On 13th July 2016                         |On 28th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                             MS SHUKuRAT SURAKAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Nobody
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  15th  April  1988.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 15th  March  2015
    refusing to issue her with a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  the
    right of residence under European Community law as the family member of
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights in this country.  There was  a
    representative at the First-tier hearing but he had  instructions  that
    there was to be no oral hearing.  Both the Appellant and the Respondent
    were given a chance to lodge evidence and  make  representations.   the
    judge found that the appeal could be justly determined  on  the  papers
    before him.  The appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Blair on 9th December 2015 and dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on
    7th January 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nightingale  on  13th  June
    2016.  The permission states that the judge erred when he  stated  that
    no documents had been lodged as a 32 page bundle had been sent  to  the
    Tribunal by fax on 22nd November 2015  and  this  was  not  before  the
    judge.  The grounds maintain that had the contents of the  bundle  been
    taken into account the decision of  the  judge  might  well  have  been
    different.  The notice issued on 23rd  October  2015  by  the  Tribunal
    required that any written evidence or submissions had  to  be  sent  by
    20th November 2015 but the representative chose to send  the  documents
    on 22nd November 2015.  The fax transmission was dated at 6.02 hours on
    22nd November 2015 but the fax cover sheet is dated 23rd November 2015.
     In any case this 32 page bundle was not before  the  First-tier  Judge
    when the appeal was considered.   The  permission  states  that  it  is
    arguable that there was procedural  impropriety  which  amounts  to  an
    arguable error of law by no fault of the judge's making.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file by the Respondent which states that
    the Appellant chose to serve the material relied upon otherwise than in
    accordance with the directions of the Tribunal and no  explanation  was
    given for the tardy service or why  such  evidence  was  not  available
    prior to this.  The Rule 24 response states that the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.

 4. The Appellant did not appear for the hearing of this  appeal.   Neither
    did a representative on her behalf.  The clerk telephoned  Chancery  ES
    Solicitors London, (the Appellant's  representatives)  and  a  fax  was
    discovered dated 12th July 2016 asking for the matter to be dealt  with
    on the papers.

 5. The 32 page bundle is on file now.  I asked the Presenting  Officer  if
    she wished to make submissions and she submitted that she is relying on
    the Rule 24 response.   She  accepted  that  the  32  page  bundle  was
    supplied before the hearing and the judge  would  normally  have  taken
    this into account but it was not on file.  She  submitted  that  it  is
    clear that there was a representative at the Hearing Centre  and  there
    is no explanation of why he did not mention this bundle and  point  out
    that it should have been before  the  judge.   The  Presenting  Officer
    asked me to deal with the hearing on papers.

 6. It is clear that the 32 page bundle of the Appellant was  not  received
    on time by the Tribunal although it was received before the date of the
    hearing.  It is now on file and I  have  considered  this.   The  facts
    before the First-tier Judge have not been altered.  The bundle contains
    two witness statements, one medical report, the first page of an  Aviva
    insurance policy, bank account summaries for  the  Appellant's  spouse,
    family photographs, a Santander  four  month  statement  and  a  Lloyds
    statement for the Appellant and a Halifax letter to the Appellant.

 7. I have noted that the Appellant admits that she and her partner did not
    attend the interviews with the Respondent but she states  that  medical
    reports were sent to the Respondent explaining why she  was  unable  to
    attend.  This is confirmed in the Appellant's partner's  statement  but
    there is no evidence  of  medical  letters  on  file  which  state  the
    Appellant was not fit to attend the interviews.  The medical report  on
    file is by an independent psychiatrist and states  that  the  Appellant
    has been suffering from ICD of a mild  degree  but  the  depression  is
    improving and she is not receiving any  treatment  from  her  GP.   The
    Appellant's evidence is that she is receiving support  from  a  support
    group and does not require any antidepressant treatment at this  stage.
    This report is dated 18th February 2015 and states that  the  Appellant
    is likely to recover from the depressive episode within a period of six
    months.  The letter about the insurance policy from Aviva is dated 22nd
    August 2013.  It is not clear whether this policy is still in existence
    or whether the Appellant has  told  the  insurance  company  about  her
    medical condition.  There are no details of the policy in  this  letter
    apart from the policy number.  This is not  helpful.   The  photographs
    require clarification.  The Appellant's partner's bank statements  show
    an extremely small amount in his bank account which show  that  he  has
    been working but the bank accounts are dated in 2014.  The  Appellant's
    bank statements show a debit balance in 2013 and nothing more recent.

 8. It is clear from this bundle that had it  been  before  the  First-tier
    Judge his decision would have  been  no  different.   Perhaps  if  oral
    evidence had been given at the First-tier hearing,  explanations  could
    have been given to the judge about the issues he was not satisfied with
    but the evidence in the bundle is not up-to-date evidence and the judge
    made no error of law in his decision.  The evidence was also  submitted
    late and the representative who attended the hearing made no mention of
    this bundle when a paper hearing was requested.

 9. In January 2016 the Appellant had  overstayed  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since her leave was curtailed on 22nd May 2012.

10. The judge has given proper reasons for dismissing the appeal and I find
    that there are no material errors of law in the judge's decision.   His
    decision, which was promulgated on 7th January 2016, must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 28th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


