
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14669/2013
     IA/14676/2013
     IA/14702/2013
     IA/14711/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 September 2014                           |On 12 January 2014            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               mrs Anuoluwapo Esther Agboola (first appellant)
              mr Olugboyega Olayinka Onimole (second appellant)
               master David Damilare Onimole (third appellant)
              master Samuel Ayodeji Onimole (fourth appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss A Hashmi, instructed by Kabir Ahmed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  I shall hereafter refer to the
    first appellant as the "appellant".  She was born on 15  January  1933.
    The other appellants are her husband (the  second  appellant)  and  her
    children.  The appellant had been a student in the United  Kingdom  and
    had sought further leave to remain for herself  and  her  family.   She
    accepts that she and her family cannot succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and that her appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Ince)
    proceeded on Article 8 ECHR grounds only.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Robertson wrote:

         Although the judge has made more  than  passing  reference  to  the
         other appellants, it is arguable as submitted in the grounds of the
         application, that he has not made a finding on the best interest of
         the appellants' children pursuant to the provisions of  Section  55
         of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  which  would
         feature in any assessment as to  whether  or  not  the  appellants'
         circumstances are compelling for the purpose of the deciding  (sic)
         whether the decision will lead to  justifiably  harsh  consequences
         and in  any  subsequent  proportionality  exercise.   However,  the
         appellants must raise their hopes too  high  that  the  outcome  of
         their appeal would be successful simply because permission has been
         granted (sic).

 3. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I  have  reached  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.

 4. Ground 1 challenges the judge's finding [34] that "I therefore first of
    all considered whether there will be insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    family relocating to Nigeria.  I find that there are not".  The grounds
    submit that the judge failed to "prioritise the  position  of  the  two
    children with that of the main appellant's unborn child".

 5. I find that the judge  had  proper  regard  to  the  interests  of  the
    children in determining this appeal.  At [49],  the  judge  noted  that
    "the minor appellants, being so young, would be able to acclimatise  to
    the changed environment [in Nigeria]; there is no suggestion  that  the
    education system would not be adequate; and there are no health  issues
    applicable to any appellant".  The judge did not refer to Section 55 in
    terms but that is not in itself an error of law.   The  judge  has,  in
    effect, determined that the best interests of the children would lie in
    their remaining in the custody of their parents who,  he  found,  could
    return to Nigeria.  I do not accept that the judge has failed  to  have
    proper regard to the best interests of the children.

 6. The second ground of appeal also has no merit.  The judge is criticised
    for failing to have proper regard to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.   The
    judge noted that "it must not be forgotten that none of the  appellants
    or members of their family are  UK  citizens".   The  judge  was  doing
    little more than stating a fact.  He was also following  the  dicta  of
    the Court of Appeal recently expressed in EV  Philippines  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874:
   1. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of the
      children must be made on the basis that the facts are as they are in
      the real world. If one parent has no right to remain, but the other
      parent does, that is the background against which the assessment is
      conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
      background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child to
      follow the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?
   1. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up
      in the country of which they were citizens.
   1. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of the
      family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain in this
      country. If the mother is removed, the father has no independent right
      to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is entirely reasonable
      to expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge found
      it is obviously in their best interests to remain with their parents.
      Although it is, of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I
      cannot see that the desirability of being educated at public expense
      in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children of remaining with
      their parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the
      world, so we cannot educate the world.




 7. Ground 3 criticises the judge for finding that the  children  would  be
    able to build new private lives in Nigeria. The ground is no more  than
    a disagreement with a finding available to the judge on  the  evidence.
    No error of law is disclosed.

 8.  The  judge  found  that  there  was  nothing  extraordinary   in   the
    circumstances of the appellants.  He noted that the appellants  "should
    have expected [that they would have to leave the United Kingdom] having
    come here only with temporary leave as students".  It does not arguably
    render the  circumstances  of  the  appellants  exceptional  that  they
    happened to have met and had a family  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst
    living here as students.

 9. The fifth ground of appeal criticises the judge  for  failing  to  have
    regard to the appellants' good character whilst living  in  the  United
    Kingdom  in  assessing  the  proportionality  of   their   removal   in
    consequence of the immigration decision.  The judge  did  not  arguably
    err in law by having regard  to  the  alleged  good  character  of  the
    appellants.  His Article 8 ECHR analysis was cogent  and  supported  by
    adequate reasoning.

10. In the circumstances, these appeals are dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

11. These appeals are dismissed.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
