
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14590/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2013                            |On 8 November 2013           |
|Extempore judgment                            |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Bismark Obeng-Poku
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Popoola, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  a  decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies on 12th September  2013  allowing  the
    appeal of Mr Obeng-Poku (hereafter the claimant),  a  Ghanaian  citizen
    born on 14 November 1982 against the refusal of the Secretary of  State
    to issue him with a residence card as the spouse of a Belgian  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  The date of  the  decision  is  19
    April 2013.

2.   Judge Davies states that  he  has  considered  the  documents  and  the
    submissions and was satisfied that there was a customary marriage.   He
    does not address the specific reasons put forward by the respondent  in
    refusing the residence card, in particular the reference to  the  Ghana
    Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.   He  fails  to
    give adequate information in the determination as to the nature of  the
    documents that he has taken into account in reaching his  decision  and
    fails to give any or adequate reasons for reaching the decision he  did
    by  specific  reference  to  those  documents.   This  is  particularly
    important in this case because the decision was reached on the basis of
    papers before him, and the documents that were produced for that  paper
    hearing had not been produced to the Secretary of State.

3.   I am satisfied that there is an error of law in the  reaching  of  that
    decision such that the decision needs to be set aside to be remade.

4.   Both parties  had  submitted  additional  documentation  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Neither party had complied with the Upper Tribunal Procedure
    Rules in seeking permission to produce those documents.  The claimant's
    solicitors confirmed that the bundle that they had  submitted  was  the
    same as the bundle submitted to the First-tier Tribunal  but  with  the
    addition of the reported case  of  NA  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT  0009.   Ms
    Isherwood sought permission to adduce a document of a report of a visit
    by the Home Office to Ghana in January 2012.   In  the  absence  of  an
    application under the Rules for admission of such document,  I  refused
    to admit that report.

5.   In the papers before me there are two affidavits, one from the Head  of
    Mission Mr Quantson of the Ghana High Commission here in  the  UK,  and
    one from Mr Yahaya-Iddi of the Legal and Consular Bureau,  Ministry  of
    Foreign  Affairs  and  Regional  Integration,  in  Ghana.   Those   two
    affidavits certify that the signatures  on  the  statutory  declaration
    signed by Mr Isaac Frimpong and Daniel Kumi  were  genuine  signatures.
    Those affidavits do not  testify  to  the  validity  of  the  statutory
    declaration.  They testify as to the validity of the signatures on that
    statutory  declaration.   Those  affidavits  do  not  confirm  that   a
    customary  marriage  took  place,  they  confirm  that  the   statutory
    declaration signed by Mr Frimpong and Mr Kumi took place.

6.   That statutory declaration states that  they  are  the  fathers  of  Mr
    Obeng-Poku  and  his  claimed  Belgian  wife,  Ms   Kumi.    Subsequent
    paragraphs of the declaration say that those two men have the right  to
    represent Mr Obeng-Poku and Ms Kumi.  They then go on  to  say  that  a
    marriage was contracted between the couple in the presence of elders of
    both parties.  The Statutory  Declaration  does  not  state  who  those
    elders were.  The declaration states that the marriage  was  contracted
    by representatives of the couple, but  it  does  not  state  who  those
    representatives were.  It states that  principal  members  of  the  two
    families were present, but  it  does  not  state  who  those  principal
    members were.  It also states that the necessary  rights  precedent  to
    the validity of the marriage had all been complied with,  but  it  does
    not state what those necessary rights were.  There is no affidavit from
    either the claimant or  Ms  Kumi.   There  is  no  affidavit  from  the
    witnesses who are named on  the  marriage  certificate.   There  is  no
    explanation how a marriage certificate appears to bear the signature of
    the claimant, may or may  not  have  the  signature  of  Ms  Kumi,  has
    signatures of two witnesses, appears  to  have  been  completed  on  11
    September 2010 at Kumasi, appears to have been endorsed and stamped  by
    the Registrar of Marriages in Kumasi.  There is no explanation how  all
    of those events can have been done on the same day  when  the  claimant
    and Ms Kumi were not present in Ghana.  There is no  witness  statement
    from any of those people whereas  it  would  have  been  reasonable  to
    expect such statements  given  the  requirement  for  evidence  that  a
    marriage had indeed taken place.

7.   The case of McCabe [1994] 1FLR 410 is  relied  upon  by  the  claimant.
    That is a  case  which  looks  at  marriage  in  accordance  with  Akan
    customary law in Ghana where  the  parties  were  not  present  at  the
    ceremony.  There is no evidence before me that the  customary  marriage
    claimed by this claimant was an Akan  marriage.   The  case  of  McCabe
    quotes from the case of Yaotey v  Quale  [1961]  GLR  573  which  is  a
    decision of the High Court in Accra which  reviewed  decisions  on  the
    requirements for a customary marriage.  Those include agreement by  the
    parties to live together as man and wife.  There is no evidence to that
    effect before me so far as this claimant and  Ms  Kumi  are  concerned.
    McCabe continues

         "Consent of the family of the man that he should have the woman  to
         his wife, that  consent  may  be  indicated  by  the  man's  family
         acknowledging the woman as the wife of  the  man;  consent  of  the
         family of the woman that she should be joined in  marriage  to  the
         man, that consent is indicated by the acceptance of drink from  the
         man  or  his  family,  or  merely  by  the  family  of  the   woman
         acknowledging the man as the husband of the woman. Consummation  of
         the marriage, i.e. that the man and woman are  living  together  in
         sight of all the world as man and wife".

     Although there is a statutory declaration it does not specify that  any
    of those events have actually taken place.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    papers before me that this couple are living together in the  sight  of
    the world as man and wife.

8.   McCabe confirms that there is not a higher  standard  of  proof  for  a
    marriage with a non-Ghanaian but the court


         "....would require very  clear  evidence  that  the  foreigner  had
         consented to be married in such a ceremony but he did not  have  to
         actively participate."

     Ms Kumi is a Belgian national and there is no evidence  from  her  that
    she has agreed  to  participate  in  this  form  of  marriage.   McCabe
    considers how a customary law marriage could be  evidenced.   There  is
    reference to the preservation of tangible evidence and the evidence  of
    impartial witnesses.  There is no such evidence before me.

9.   McCabe states that

         "...in the absence  of  writing  or  registration  there  must  be
         credible evidence of the consents of the parties and the  families,
         which in almost all cases will not be available to satisfy a  court
         in the absence of impartial witnesses. "

      Although  there  is  before  me  what  purports  to  be   a   marriage
    certificate,  I  have  already  indicated  the  shortcomings  in   that
    certificate in terms of lack of witnesses and lack of explanation as to
    how that document came about.

10.  I am therefore not satisfied that there is  adequate  evidence  of  the
    procedure by which this purported marriage took place.  The declaration
    does no more than state that the marriage  was  contracted  by  unnamed
    representatives in an unspecified manner.  I am  not  satisfied,  given
    that the burden of proof is upon  the  claimant  to  show  that  he  is
    married to Ms Kumi, that he has discharged the burden  on  him  to  the
    balance of probabilities.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Conclusion

      I  find  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    determination and set aside the decision to be remade.

     I allow the appeal of the SSHD; the appeal of the claimant against  the
    SSHD's decision stands dismissed.



Signed                                  Date 7th November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


