
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/14824/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at: Field House              |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 21 November 2016                 |On: 22 November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AWAIS ALI ABBASI
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr  Abbasi's
appeal against the decision to refuse his application for  leave  to  remain
as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

The following Directions were issued on 4 November 2016:

                                 DIRECTIONS

    "1.  The respondent,  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  against  the
    decision to refuse his application for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Baker allowed the appeal and permission has been granted for  the
    Secretary of State to challenge that decision.

    2.   According to the appellant in the grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal, the respondent voluntarily departed from the UK on  4  November
    2015 subsequent to lodging his Notice  of  Appeal,  but  prior  to  the
    appeal hearing on 26 February  2016,  and  thus  abandoned  his  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

    3.   It is proposed,  in  the  circumstances,  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal against Judge Baker's decision be  allowed,  that  Judge
    Baker's decision be set aside and that Mr Abbasi's appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision refusing to vary his leave be treated  as
    abandoned.

    4.   In the absence of any reasonable objection to the above, no  later
    than 14 days from the date these directions are  sent  out,  the  above
    proposal shall come into effect."

There has been no objection to the above course, as set out at 3  and  4  of
the directions.

Accordingly, I set aside the decision of Judge Baker  allowing  Mr  Abbasi's
appeal. Mr  Abbasi's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
refusing his application for leave to  remain  is  treated  as  having  been
abandoned, with reference to [5] of the Secretary of State's grounds.




                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
