
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14470/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 4 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                 Faraz Aslam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, instructed by Haris Ali Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 26 March 2015 refusing him a residence card as the spouse of an
    EEA citizen, exercising treaty rights.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  9  November  1990.   He
    first entered the UK on 13  July  2010  and  was  subsequently  granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until April 2015.
     On 6 May  2014  he  married  his  wife  (the  sponsor),  a  Lithuanian
    national.  On 1 August 2014  he  applied  for  a  residence  card,  his
    application being refused on 26 March 2015.

3.   His sponsor came to the UK in February 2013.  They had previously  been
    in contact on Facebook  in  December  2012  through  a  common  friend.
    Following the sponsor's arrival in the UK their relationship  developed
    and on their account they moved in together on  14  February  2014  and
    were subsequently married on 6 May 2014 at Barnet Register Office.

4.   However,  the  application  was  refused  as  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that there was a genuine subsisting  marriage.   Taking  into
    account a visit undertaken by immigration officers to their address  at
    [38 ~], London, it was the respondent's view that the marriage was  one
    of convenience for the sole purpose of enabling the appellant to remain
    in the UK.  The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal
    was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 6 April 2016.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, the  sponsor  and  Mr
    Faisal [B], one of their friends.  It was  his  evidence  that  he  was
    present at the wedding  as  he  was  a  friend  of  both  parties.   He
    confirmed that he saw them once or twice a month and that  he  was  not
    aware of any connection the appellant had to Great Yarmouth, other than
    that he drove his wife to work there every week.

6.   The significance of Great Yarmouth arises in the context of whether  in
    fact the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  living  together  at  the
    appellant's home at [38 ~], London.  When immigration officers  visited
    on 14 November 2014 there appeared to  be  very  few  items  of  female
    clothing at the property and the appellant did not have  the  sponsor's
    telephone number on his mobile phone.  There was further evidence  from
    a Facebook page showing the sponsor's location in October 2014 as Great
    Yarmouth and her relationship status as "open" as at August  2014.   It
    was the sponsor's oral evidence that she worked three days  a  week  in
    Thetford and she  and  her  husband  stayed  with  a  friend  in  Great
    Yarmouth.  She had detailed her location on Facebook as Great  Yarmouth
    because she wished to avoid others knowing where she was as  those  who
    needed to know had the correct information.

7.   When considering the evidence the judge said that  he  considered  that
    the material issues arising from the  interview  and  indeed  from  the
    evidence related to the issues  over  the  sponsor's  clothing  at  the
    appellant's home, the matter of  the  mobile  phone  and  the  Facebook
    information.  The judge did not accept the appellant's  evidence  about
    the lack of clothing at his property when he asserted that the officers
    had declined to look at both sides of the cupboard.  He considered  the
    lack of the sponsor's number in the appellant's phone to be significant
    in assessing the genuineness of the relationship  between  the  parties
    and he did not find the sponsor's  evidence  as  to  why  for  Facebook
    purposes she had not detailed her address as London as opposed to Great
    Yarmouth.  He commented  that  it  was  notable  that  the  sponsor  on
    Facebook had detailed her relationship as  "open"  and  that  this  was
    completely inconsistent with the  suggestion  that  the  appellant  and
    sponsor were in a committed relationship.  He found that the respondent
    had discharged the onus of showing that the marriage  was  not  genuine
    and the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge gave undue  weight
    to the issues arising from  the  appellant's  interview,  the  lack  of
    female clothing at the appellant's home, the matter of the mobile phone
    and the Facebook  information,  so  wrongly  narrowing  the  parameters
    within  which  to  consider  the   genuineness   of   the   appellant's
    relationship to his wife.  It is further submitted that the judge erred
    by failing to make any findings  on  a  number  of  items  of  relevant
    evidence: the evidence of Mr Faisal [B], who had attended the  hearing,
    the phone records produced in evidence, the tenancy agreement  for  [17
    ~] and utility bills for that property.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the gamut  of  issues  which  fell  for
    consideration before concluding whether or not the marriage was genuine
    extended beyond the issues of the sponsor's clothing at the appellant's
    home, the matter of the mobile phone and the Facebook information.

10.  Ms Hulse submitted that the judge had not considered all  the  evidence
    and in particular had failed to take into  account  the  oral  evidence
    from Mr [B], the written evidence from other  supporting  witnesses  at
    165 and 172 of the bundle and the evidence of  the  phone  records  and
    utility bills.  She also sought to take issue with the weight  attached
    to the immigration officers' report in the  absence  of  oral  evidence
    from those who had compiled the report.

11.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge  had  carefully  recorded
    the evidence of the witnesses and the submissions  made  on  behalf  of
    both the appellant and the respondent.  He had gone on  to  assess  the
    evidence and had reached findings properly open to  him.   He  had  not
    erred in law by focusing on the evidence which he regarded as material.
     He had been entitled to draw an adverse inference on credibility  from
    the contradictions in the  evidence  of  both  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.  She conceded that when the judge set out his findings in [89]
    - [105] there was no reference to  the  evidence  of  Mr  [B]  but  she
    submitted that the judge's findings were properly open to  him  in  the
    light of  the  significant  discrepancies  he  had  identified  in  the
    evidence.


Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

12.  I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing to  deal  in  his
    findings with the oral evidence of Mr [B] or the  documentary  evidence
    which was capable of supporting the appellant  and  sponsor's  evidence
    about the nature of their marriage.   That  evidence  is  by  no  means
    determinative but it is relevant in the sense that it  is  material  to
    the issues in dispute and capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  Mr [B]'s  evidence  included  confirmation  that  he  saw  the
    parties once or twice a month and that the appellant drove the  sponsor
    to Great Yarmouth  every  week  because  of  her  work.   There  is  no
    indication in the judge's  findings  of  what  view  he  took  of  that
    evidence or of the tenancy agreement, the phone  records,  the  utility
    bills and the statements of other witnesses  to  the  effect  that  the
    relationship was genuine.

13.   Without  some  reference  to  this  evidence  in  the   findings   and
    conclusions, it is not possible to infer  that  in  the  light  of  the
    judge's other findings of fact, he must  have  concluded  that  it  was
    unreliable.  I am, therefore, satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law
    either by failing to take relevant evidence into account or by  failing
    to explain why it did not affect the conclusions he had reached on  the
    aspects of the evidence he had identified as material.

14.  I am satisfied that the error is such that the decision should  be  set
    aside and that the proper course is for this appeal to be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration  afresh  by  a  different
    judge.

Decision

15.  I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    at Hatton Cross for reconsideration by a different judge.  No anonymity
    direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 3 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


