
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14249/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 3 February 2015                  |On 10 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MELODY FLORES ANDRES
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Maqsood. A-R Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Osborne in which he allowed the appeal
    of Ms Andres, a citizen of the Philippines, against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to grant leave to remain. I shall  refer  to
    Ms Andres as the Applicant, although  she  was  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings below.

 2. The application under appeal was  made  on  2  February  2013  and  was
    refused by reference  to  Article  8  ECHR  and  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC395)  on  6  March  2014.   The
    Applicant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Osborne on 30 September 2014
    and was allowed both under the  Immigration  Rules  and  by  virtue  of
    Article 8 ECHR. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge T R P Hollingworth on 24 November 2014 in the  following
    terms

        It is arguable that the findings that the  Appellant  can  meet  the
        requirements of the rules on the basis of  lack  of  ties  with  the
        Philippines, are insufficient.

        So  are  the  ultimate  findings  under  Article  8   applying   the
        Immigration Act 2014.

        All the grounds are arguable.

 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Maqsood represented the Applicant.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in the  Philippines  on  17
    December 1988. She came to the United Kingdom with leave to enter as  a
    visitor on 9 December 2006. The Applicant came to the United Kingdom to
    visit her mother who had a terminal illness and to help to  look  after
    her  two  younger  half  sisters  whilst  their  mother  was  ill.  The
    Applicant's mother died on 23 May 2007. At the time of her entry to the
    United Kingdom as a visitor the Applicant  had  an  outstanding  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance to join her mother and stepfather in
    the United Kingdom. On 4 June 2007 the Applicant  made  an  application
    for leave to remain on compassionate  grounds.  On  16  July  2007  her
    appeal against refusal of leave to enter as a dependent child was heard
    and dismissed. On 28 August 2007 her application for leave to remain on
    compassionate grounds was refused and  according  to  the  Respondent's
    refusal letter there was no right of appeal. The Applicant remained  in
    the United Kingdom and on 5 June 2013 made a  further  application  for
    leave to remain on compassionate grounds. The Applicant said  that  she
    had become an integral  part  of  the  family  in  the  United  Kingdom
    comprising her two step sisters and their father Jonathan Goodwin,  all
    British citizens. In particular since the death of their mother in  May
    2007 the Applicant has taken a maternal  role.  The  Applicant  was  18
    years old at the time of their mother's death and her sisters were aged
    9 and 3. The children's father, the Applicant's step father, works as a
    tunneller in London and returns to the family home in mid- Wales  on  a
    monthly basis.

Submissions

 5. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Richards relied on the  grounds  of
    appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  He  said  that  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules the grounds were entirely made out and  the  findings
    in relation to the rules  plainly  wrong.   So  far  as  Article  8  is
    concerned it is asserted that the Judge failed to properly  reason  his
    findings.

 6. For the Applicant Mr Maqsood said that in  respect  of  the  rules  the
    Judge had properly directed himself towards the question of ties in the
    Philippines. He referred me to paragraphs 11(iii) and  11(vii)  of  the
    decision. The Judge correctly self directs following Ogundimu  (Article
    8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 and looks at the quality of ties.
    There should not be a mechanical approach. In respect of Article 8  the
    Judge's reasoning  is  clear  and  unassailable  properly  taking  into
    account part 5A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Immigration Rules decsion

 7. In my judgement the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  a
    clear and material error of law so far as  the  Immigration  Rules  are
    concerned. At paragraph 11(viii) of his decision the Judge finds

        'I have read section  S-LTR:  Suitability  -  leave  to  remain  in
        Appendix FM and find that the Appellant does not fall  for  refusal
        so far as the suitability section is concerned'.

    He then goes on to say that the Applicant

        '... has no ties with the Philippines  and  that  consequently  she
        fulfils the requirements of the Immigration Rules'.

 8. The finding that the Applicant fulfils the suitability requirements  is
    not challenged. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) at the date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision (6 March 2014) required the Applicant to show that she

        ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
        less than 20 years ... but has no ties (including social,  cultural
        or family) with the country  to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
        required to leave the UK.

 9. Before finding that the  Applicant  has  no  ties  (paragraph  11(v)  -
    11(vii)) the Judge finds

        'Before  leaving  the  Philippines  the  Appellant  had   a   close
        relationship with her maternal grandmother who still lives  in  the
        Philippines but who now resides with the Appellant's uncle ...  her
        grandparents are old and are cared for by the Appellant's uncle ...
        The Appellant remains in contact with one or two  friends  ...  but
        that contact over a period of approximately eight years has been at
        a considerable distance ... The Appellant remains in correspondence
        ... with her grandmother and one of two  "close"  friends  but  her
        only ties now are to her two sisters ... and her  step  father  ...
        there is now nothing which 'ties' the Appellant to the Philippines'

10. In my judgement these clear findings of  fact  militate  very  strongly
    against the conclusion reached by the Judge. Ogundimu  holds  that  the
    word 'ties' imports something more than  'merely  remote  and  abstract
    links'. What the judges describes here is more, a lot more, than merely
    remote and abstract links. It is a grandmother with whom the  Applicant
    lived before she left the Philippines and with whom  she  had  a  close
    relationship and remains in correspondence. It is friends with whom she
    remains in contact and correspondence and it is an uncle.  Further  the
    Respondent's refusal letter, referring to the Appellant's statement  in
    relation to her July 2007 appeal, refers  to  the  Appellant's  brother
    with whom the Appellant lived prior to coming to  the  United  Kingdom.
    The brother is also referred to at  paragraph  6.12  and  6.17  of  the
    application made in 2013 (form FLR(O)). The Judge makes no reference at
    all to this brother. The brother is yet another close tie.  Taking  all
    of this into account along with the fact that the  Applicant  was  born
    and educated in the Philippines and lived there until she was 18  years
    old  the  finding  that  she  has  no  ties  with  the  Philippines  is
    unsustainable. Having reached this conclusion I do  not  need  to  deal
    with the assertion that the Judge should instead  have  considered  the
    rules in force from July 2014.

The Article 8 decision

11. It is clear in  my  judgement  that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of the Article 8 appeal contain no  error  of  law.
    The Judge deals with Article 8 in very clear and  detailed  terms  from
    paragraphs 13 to 34 of his determination. He properly self  directs  to
    the applicable  law  including  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  part  5A
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The grounds of appeal only
    challenge the finding in respect of proportionality asserting that  the
    Judge failed to take into account alternative caring  arrangements  for
    the Applicant's siblings and the alternative of a  greater  role  being
    taken by their father.

12. At the hearing of this appeal the Judge heard evidence from  the  elder
    child Lucy and her father. He found both to be impressive witnesses and
    made wholly positive credibility findings in respect of their evidence.
    He makes particular findings as to why the father,  Mr  Goodwin,  would
    not be able to provide the quality  of  care  given  by  the  Applicant
    (paragraph 24). He makes further findings as to  the  effect  it  would
    have upon the family if Mr Goodwin had to give up his employment  which
    would be the inevitable consequence if the Applicant was unable to look
    after her siblings. The Judge considers section 55 Borders  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 and takes into account the best  interests  of
    the children.

13. The circumstances of this Applicant are fully detailed by the Judge and
    in  doing  so  he  makes  the  unusual,  exceptional   and   compelling
    circumstances leading him to his decision very clear. The Applicant  as
    an elder sibling has taken a maternal role in the care of two  children
    aged 3 and 9 at the time their mother died and who at the time  of  the
    Judge's decision were aged 16 and 10. The Applicant had  a  significant
    role in the lives of her younger siblings both at a time when they lost
    their natural mother and thereafter throughout their  formative  years.
    It is a continuing relationship and it is not a relationship  that  can
    be carried on remotely and it is not one that the father, working  away
    from home much of the time to support the  family,  can  reasonably  be
    expected to carry out by  way  of  substitution.  In  my  judgment  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this  respect  is  unassailable.
    There is no error of law.

14. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal by reference to Article 8  ECHR.  The  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is therefore dismissed.



Summary

15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law in respect of the decision to  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules. I set aside that decision and substitute a
    decision dismissing the appeal.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law in respect of the decision to allow the appeal on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. In this respect  I  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed:     Date: 3 February 2015

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
