
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14947/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th August 2015                  |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                             MARYam rostamijame
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Solicitor instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

 1. On 9th April 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer  gave  permission,
    on renewed application to the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  the  appellant  to
    appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal T  R  P
    Hollingworth in which he dismissed the appeal on immigration and  human
    rights grounds against the decision of the respondent to refuse further
    leave to remain as a  spouse  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    paragraphs 284 and 276ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. Judge Archer noted that the grounds contended that the judge's analysis
    was fatally undermined by a flawed analysis of the  appellant's  rights
    under Article 8 particularly in relation to the issue  of  the  parties
    returning together to Iran in the light of  the  appellant's  husband's
    medical difficulties.

 3. Judge  Archer  thought  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to Section 117B(3) when taking into  account  the  future
    costs and duration of the husband's treatment and care when the husband
    had actually been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  2009.   The
    judge's consideration of the economic wellbeing of the  United  Kingdom
    should have been limited to the appellant's financial  independence  or
    otherwise.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Gayle confirmed that the  appellant  relied
    on the grounds.  He then pointed out that the appellant had applied  to
    remain as a spouse and so could have been entitled to  settlement  with
    her husband who had been granted indefinite leave to remain.   However,
    the leave application was refused under paragraph 284(ix) of the  Rules
    in view of the appellant's  failure  to  produce  an  English  language
    qualification approved by the respondent.  The judge's consideration of
    the claim on Article 8 grounds was,  he  contended,  wholly  inadequate
    because of the failure to recognise that it  was  economically  to  the
    advantage of the parties and the country for the appellant to remain as
    a carer.  He also indicated that the  appellant's  daughters,  who  are
    independent, had been granted further leave to remain so  it  was  only
    the appellant who might be required to leave.

 5. Mr McVeety questioned why the appellant had  not  applied  for  another
    test and made a further application with the right test result if  that
    was the only issue.  He thought that the judge had properly  considered
    the medical evidence which was of limited value as it was three  years'
    old.  The treatment available in Iran for the husband's  condition  had
    also been considered.  He believed that the judge's findings were  open
    to him.

 6. In conclusion Mr Gayle contended that  such  medical  evidence  as  was
    available had been provided and there was no prospect of  any  dramatic
    improvement in the husband's condition.  Thus, the medical evidence was
    relevant.  The judge had also been aware of  the  prospect  of  further
    leave for the daughters.  He added that if an error was found  then  he
    believed a full re-hearing of the appeal was required.

Conclusions

 7. I have little difficulty in reaching the conclusion  that  the  judge's
    consideration of the proportionality of the  respondent's  decision  by
    applying Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended) is flawed.  That  is
    because the appellant's  husband,  a  holder  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, was entitled to medical treatment and care  at  public  expense
    and, indeed, the cost of such might  well  have  been  reduced  by  the
    presence of the appellant who is his carer.  In  paragraph  59  of  the
    decision the judge states that it is not inappropriate for  the  future
    costs and duration of the sponsor's treatment and care  in  the  United
    Kingdom to play a  part  in  the  balancing  exercise.   However,  that
    conclusion appears to be based  on  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    parties  could  live  together  in  Iran  despite  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's husband had the right to remain in the United Kingdom  with
    an entitlement to relevant treatment.  The judge's conclusion  in  this
    respect forms a material part of his decision but  is  tainted  by  the
    error.  It is also arguable that the judge's conclusion about Article 8
    family life is flawed because of his failure to give any  consideration
    to the existence of family life or to give reasons for  his  conclusion
    that the daughters are "effectively leading independent lives".

 8. Although not raised in the grounds it appears  to  me  to  be  Robinson
    obvious that the judge may also  have  been  in  error  in  failing  to
    consider the appeal under the Immigration Rules. That is because of the
    terms of the respondent's refusal decision of 11th  March  2014  which,
    although dismissing the application under paragraph 284 of  the  Rules,
    indicates that the respondent was satisfied that  the  appellant  meets
    all the requirements of R-LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d)  so  that  paragraph
    EX1 applies.  The respondent then considered the issue of  whether  the
    husband, who was settled in UK,  would  be  faced  with  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.  The judge gave  no
    consideration to that issue.

 9. For all the above reasons, I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  shows
    errors on points of law such that it should be set aside  and  re-made.
    Having regard to the  provisions  of  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements  for  the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals dated 25th September 2012, I am  satisfied  that
    the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision to be  re-made  is  such,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2, that it is appropriate to remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested nor do I consider it appropriate.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of
    law such that it should be set aside and re-made afresh by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The re-hearing of the appeal will take place at the Nottingham  Hearing
    Centre on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

 3. The time estimate is two hours.

 4. A Farsi interpreter will be required for the hearing.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

