
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14383/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |On 25th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              Isaac Paul Laing
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by Scudamores
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Jamaica born on 2nd  February  1977.
    He first arrived in the UK on 31st October 1998 when he was given leave
    to enter as a visitor.  The Appellant then overstayed,  but  eventually
    he was granted exceptional leave to remain as a spouse until 22nd  July
    2005.  On 7th October 2005, the Appellant was sentenced to  a  term  of
    four and a half years' imprisonment for the offence of possession of  a
    class A controlled drug with intent to supply namely crack  cocaine  to
    which the Appellant had pleaded guilty.  He was released from prison in
    August 2007.

 2. On 25th April 2007, the Respondent decided to deport the  Appellant  on
    the basis that to do so would be conducive to the public good.  After a
    series of appeals which were  ultimately  unsuccessful,  a  Deportation
    Order was signed against the Appellant on 5th June 2008.  The Appellant
    made further representations to the Respondent  in  August  2008  which
    were treated as an application to revoke the Deportation Order.   After
    a series of legal manoeuvres, the Respondent  eventually  refused  that
    application for the reasons given in a letter of 18th June  2012.   The
    Appellant appealed that decision, and his appeal was heard by  a  panel
    chaired by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Malone  (the  Panel)  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 15th July 2013.  The Panel decided to allow the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons
    given in its Determination of 18th July 2013.   The  Respondent  sought
    leave to appeal that decision and on 9th October 2013  such  permission
    was granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the Panel made an error on a  point  of  law  so
    that its decision should be set aside.

 4. The findings of fact made by the Panel and  upon  which  it  based  its
    decision are that the Appellant entered the UK on 31st October 1998  as
    a visitor and then overstayed until he was granted leave to remain as a
    spouse in 2001.  On 9th December 2000 the Appellant  married  his  wife
    known as Ms Laing.  She is a British citizen born and raised in the  UK
    where she has lived all her life.  Ms Laing had a child from a previous
    relationship named Lavell born on 7th June 1996.  He lived mostly  with
    his father but visited his mother  at  weekends  and  stayed  with  her
    during holidays.  The Appellant and Ms Laing had four  children  namely
    Natalia born on 24th February 2000, Tia born on 1st  April  2003,  Reko
    born on 30th June 2004 and Nashane born  on  22nd  December  2009.   Ms
    Laing was expecting a further child due to be born in August 2013.  The
    Appellant and Ms Laing have lived together since 1999  except  for  the
    period when the Appellant was imprisoned.  In October  2005,  upon  his
    plea of guilty, the Appellant was sentenced to four and a  half  years'
    imprisonment for the offence of possessing a class A drug  with  intent
    to supply namely crack cocaine.  There  was  an  incident  of  domestic
    violence between the Appellant and Ms Laing some  time  in  2009.   The
    Appellant was remorseful for his crime, and had been a model  prisoner.
    He has not used drugs since February 2005.  The Appellant was a loving,
    dutiful, and "hands-on" father.  Lavell considered him to be  a  second
    father.  Based upon the evidence of Mr Horricks, an Independent  Social
    Worker, the Panel found that the Appellant's deportation  would  result
    in emotional turmoil for his wife and children and the collapse of  the
    family.  It was likely that the children would have to  be  taken  into
    care.  This was because Ms Laing suffered from depression and would not
    be able to cope by herself.  The  Appellant  was  the  children's  main
    carer.

 5. Finally, the Panel found on the basis of  an  assessment  by  a  Parole
    Board that the risk of the Appellant reoffending was low and  that  the
    risk of harm to the public was also low.  If the Appellant was deported
    to Jamaica, no meaningful family life could be  adequately  carried  on
    from such a distance.  Ms Laing and her children would not be  able  to
    afford to travel to Jamaica to visit the Appellant.

 6. On the basis of these findings, the Panel allowed the appeal because it
    found the decision to refuse to revoke  the  Deportation  Order  to  be
    disproportionate.  The Panel considered the Appellant's offending to be
    very serious, but following the decision in Sanade and Others  (British
    children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC)  the  Appellant's
    wife and children, who were British citizens, could not be expected  to
    live in Jamaica with the Appellant as Jamaica was outside the  European
    Union.  Treating the best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration, the public interest was outweighed by other factors.

 7. At the hearing, Mr Saunders argued that the Panel had erred in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and declined the opportunity to expand upon them.

 8. In response, Mr Lams referred to the Skeleton  Argument  considered  by
    the Panel and submitted that it had not made any  error  of  law.   The
    Panel had correctly interpreted the decision in Ruiz Zambrano  Case  C-
    34/09  as  explained  in  Sanade.   The  Panel  had   carried   out   a
    proportionality assessment as required by the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192.   The  Panel  had
    attached the appropriate weight to the public  interest  but  had  been
    entitled to conclude that other factors carried more weight.

 9. At the end of the hearing I found that there was no error of law in the
    decision of the Panel.  I now give my reasons for that conclusion.

10. I find that I am in agreement with the submissions  of  Mr  Lams.   The
    Panel's decision is based upon a proportionality  assessment  which  it
    was bound to make.  In carrying out that  assessment,  it  is  apparent
    from what is written at paragraphs 66 and 98 of the Determination  that
    the Panel properly took into account the public interest  and  attached
    due weight to it.  However, on the facts of this case it  was  open  to
    the Panel to find that other factors carried a greater  weight.   There
    is no error of law in the  Panel's  decision  that  Ms  Laing  and  the
    children of the family could not be expected to settle in Jamaica  with
    the Appellant.  It was not perverse  of  the  Panel  to  conclude  that
    meaningful family life could not be conducted from a distance, and that
    the Appellant's deportation would have a catastrophic effect upon  this
    family probably resulting in the children going into  care.   The  best
    interests of the children are a primary consideration and  it  was  not
    perverse of the panel to find that the weight to be  attached  to  them
    was greater than the weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest
    bearing in mind the facts that the Appellant  had  not  offended  since
    2005; he had been free from drugs since February of that year; and that
    he was of a low risk of reoffending and of being a harm to the public.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and  I  am  not
persuaded that one is necessary.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
