
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14373/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th June 2014                                |On 24th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                             priyamvada mandalia
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed on behalf
                    of Edwin Coe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on 23rd December 1949.

The factual background:

 2. Following a hearing held on 4th February 2014  the  Panel  (Mr  Justice
    Hickinbottom and Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds) found an error of  law  in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Prior)  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 5th December  2013  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the refusal to vary her leave to remain as a dependent relative
    under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

 3. The factual background to the appeal may be briefly summarised.  At the
    age of 21 years, the Appellant married Kirtikumar Mandalia,  an  Indian
    citizen.  They lived together for over 40 years in a rented flat in Dar-
    es-Salaam, Tanzania until 7th April 2012 when sadly  Mr  Mandalia  died
    suddenly.  It was following his death that  the  Appellant  utilised  a
    multi-entry visit visa originally issued  in  May  2008  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom on 30th May 2012 to visit her son and daughter, both  of
    whom are resident in the United Kingdom.

 4. On 6th July 2012 she applied to vary her leave to remain by  making  an
    application for indefinite leave as a dependent  relative  of  her  son
    Rajesh  Mandalia,  a  British  citizen,  under  paragraph  317  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. That  application  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  in  a  notice  of
    immigration decision dated 16th April 2013.  In that refusal letter, it
    was noted that whilst she was under 65 years of  age  and  widowed  and
    that her son had been providing financial support,  it  was  considered
    that he could continue to do so  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  India.
    Whilst it was further noted that she would feel isolated  in  Tanzania,
    it was said that she would be returned to India where she had  numerous
    family members who, whilst they could not offer  financial  support  or
    accommodation, could offer emotional support.  It was stated there  was
    no evidence to demonstrate she would not receive  adequate  support  in
    India.  The Ground of Refusal was that she had  not  demonstrated  that
    she was a widow over the age of 65 years or that she  would  be  living
    alone  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  the   "most   exceptional
    compassionate circumstances".  The decision also gave consideration  to
    Article 8 and set out the change in the Immigration Rules brought in on
    9th July 2012 as set out in Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Those Rules were applied to the  Appellant  but  it
    was found she could not meet them.

 6.   The Appellant exercised her right to appeal and it  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Prior)  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  29th
    November 2013.  In a determination promulgated on  3rd  December  2013,
    Judge Prior dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    Article 8 grounds.  In summary the judge identified the issue  that  he
    was required to consider by the parties at paragraph 12 namely that  it
    was not in dispute that the Appellant was a parent under the age of  65
    living alone outside  the  United  Kingdom  and  was  mainly  dependent
    financially on a relative settled in the UK but that the Appellant,  if
    she either returned to Tanzania or India, would be living in the  "most
    exceptional  compassionate  circumstances".   The  judge  reached   the
    conclusion on that issue that he was not satisfied that she would be so
    living in the most "exceptional compassionate circumstances"  and  gave
    his reasons at paragraphs 12 to 19  of  the  determination.   Thus  the
    appeal was dismissed.





The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  and  on  13th
    December 2013 permission was granted  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Brunnen) on 31st December 2013.  Thus the  appeal  came
    before the Upper Tribunal Panel  (Mr  Justice  Hickinbottom  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Reeds) on 4th February 2014.  The Upper Tribunal,  in  a
    determination following that hearing reached the conclusion that  there
    were errors in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal in  respect
    of the decision on human rights grounds.  There  is  attached  to  this
    determination a copy of the decision and directions of the Panel  which
    should be read in conjunction with this determination.

 8. Following promulgation of  the  determination  the  appeal  was  listed
    before the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision, the Panel having  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   At  that  hearing  Mr
    Deller  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of   State   and   Ms
    Panagiotopoulou appeared on behalf of the Appellant.  It was plain from
    the submissions made by each of the advocates that since  the  decision
    not only of the First-tier Tribunal but also the Upper Tribunal,  there
    had been significant issues that had arisen, both in fact and  in  law.
    Dealing with the factual issues,  it  was  observed  that  the  factual
    circumstances of the Appellant had changed including the death  of  two
    family members residing in India  and  also  new  psychiatric  evidence
    advanced on behalf of the Appellant.  Furthermore,  Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    raised an issue that had not been raised before the Upper  Tribunal  in
    February concerning the issue of removal of the Appellant.  The reasons
    for refusal letter  referred  to  Tanzania  but  also  considered  that
    removal to India was in contemplation.  Given that  the  Appellant  was
    not a national of Tanzania but of India and  had  no  right  to  reside
    there, that was a further issue that  required  consideration.   As  to
    Article 8, both parties were in agreement that further  issues  of  law
    had arisen which had not been identified  by  the  parties  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal nor before the Upper Tribunal in February.  It  was
    noted that the initial application in the case was  made  on  6th  July
    2012, before the changes made to the Immigration Rules as they  related
    to cases raising issues of private and family life of Article 8 of  the
    ECHR ("the new Rules").  Thus there was an issue as to whether  or  not
    the new Rules applied, as set out in the decision  letter  and  Counsel
    identified the legal dispute as  to  whether  the  new  Rules  had  any
    bearing if they were not the ones  against  which  an  application  was
    considered (see Edgehill and Anor v the SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  402  and
    the decision in Haleemudeen v the SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, both  cases
    having been considered after the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    February).  Accordingly directions were given to the  parties  on  12th
    May including the Secretary of State to file and serve a letter setting
    out the Secretary of State's position  concerning  the  destination  of
    removal and for each party to file skeleton arguments dealing with  the
    outstanding factual and legal issues.  The hearing was  listed  on  9th
    June 2014.

 9. Since the date of hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper
    Tribunal, as recognised by the parties there  had  been  a  significant
    change of circumstances relating both to factual and legal issues.  The
    Upper Tribunal had set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the scope of the hearing to re-make the decision should  take  into
    account those change of circumstances (see Sarkar  v  the  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 195).  The Tribunal had directed the Respondent to set out her
    position as to the issues relating to  removal  and  destination.   The
    factual background, as can be seen is that the Appellant had resided in
    Tanzania for 40 years prior to  the  death  of  her  husband,  but  had
    remained a citizen of India.  The Secretary of State's refusal to  vary
    leave decision of 16th April 2013  was  accompanied  by  a  Section  47
    removal decision which was subsequently withdrawn as unlawful on Ahmadi
    principles.  The notice of decision specified  that,  absent  voluntary
    departure, the Appellant would be removed "to India".  However  as  the
    accompanying reasons for  refusal  letter  demonstrates  and  also  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the position of the Appellant  was
    considered in the light of her circumstances in both  Tanzania  and  in
    India.  The findings of fact which led to the conclusion of the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellant had not demonstrated that she would be
    living in the "most exceptional compassionate circumstances" were  seen
    in the context of both countries  and  thus  the  decision  made  under
    paragraph 317 related to  both  of  those  countries.   However,  after
    reviewing the case the Secretary of State's position was that the  only
    destination in contemplation in the  appeal  could  be  India.   Whilst
    Tanzania was the Appellant's former place of habitual residence, it was
    realistically conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  since
    the passage of time namely two years since she had  left  Tanzania,  it
    would be unrealistic to believe that she would be able to return  there
    for the reasons given in  their  letter  of  23rd  May  2014.   In  the
    intervening period, further medical evidence had been produced relating
    to the Appellant's circumstances, two members of her family residing in
    India had died and in the light of the significant changes relating  to
    the nature of the cases advanced on behalf  of  both  parties,  it  was
    agreed by the parties  that  the  Tribunal  should  reopen  the  issues
    relating to paragraph 317 and Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  including  the
    legal issues  raised  by  both  advocates.   The  issue  of  the  "most
    exceptional   compassionate   circumstances"   had   been    considered
    holistically by taking into account the circumstances in  Tanzania  and
    India, Tanzania no longer being part of the factual matrix relied  upon
    by the Respondent.  In those circumstances it was difficult to separate
    those issues relating to Tanzania from  the  overall  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and in those circumstances, it was accepted  by  Mr
    Deller on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that  the  scope  of  the
    hearing should be widened to ensure that all matters were heard fairly.
     The findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal were  to  be  the
    starting point and I was invited to make any  fresh  findings  of  fact
    from the evidence advanced before the Tribunal.

The evidence:

10. The documentary evidence on behalf of the Appellant  was  contained  in
    two bundles; bundle 1 which included the documents that had been placed
    before the First-tier Tribunal (comprising of witness statements from a
    number of family relatives, letters and medical reports) and  bundle  2
    which was the updated bundle including further witness statements,  and
    psychiatric report.  In addition  Ms  Panagiotopoulou  had  produced  a
    skeleton argument in accordance with  the  directions  ordered  by  the
    Tribunal.  Mr Deller relied on a previous skeleton  argument  that  had
    been produced and upon the Respondent's bundle.

11. The Tribunal heard evidence from five witnesses.  The first witness  to
    give evidence was the Appellant who is now aged 64� years.  She adopted
    as her evidence-in-chief the letter at page 12, her statement at  pages
    2 to 4 of the first bundle.  In her oral evidence  she  confirmed  that
    contrary to the view expressed by the First-tier Tribunal,  her  mental
    health had not improved and in fact it had deteriorated  and  that  she
    had difficulty remembering things and had had  feelings  of  self-harm.
    It was plain from seeing the witness give  evidence  that  she  was  in
    distress and was tearful.  She confirmed she had had no recent  contact
    with family in India and could not remember the last time that she  had
    seen them.  In cross-examination, she confirmed  that  in  the  distant
    past she used to talk to some of her relatives but  had  only  been  to
    visit them in November 2009  and  a  visit  in  May  2011  for  medical
    treatment.  She had travelled with her husband.  She could not remember
    the visit in 2009 but that in 2011 she had gone to Bombay  for  medical
    treatment.  She had not met any relatives from the maternal side of the
    family but had met two of her husband's brothers.  Of those two one  of
    them had since died.

12. The Tribunal heard evidence from  Mr  Rajesh  Mandalia  who  adopted  a
    letter at page 19  of  bundle  1  and  witness  statements  dated  29th
    November 2013 and 20th January 2014.  He updated the Tribunal as to the
    developments that had happened since the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to family members and that two of them had died.   He
    set out in his evidence the circumstances of the  family  members  that
    did remain in India.  He had produced a  map  before  the  Tribunal  in
    which he sought to  convey  the  distances  between  the  relatives  to
    demonstrate how they were dispersed in India and that contrary  to  the
    view taken by the First-tier Tribunal, and the  Respondent,  there  was
    long distances between extended family members which  was  relevant  to
    the Appellant's circumstances should she be returned to India.  He gave
    evidence concerning the visits  made  to  India.   He  could  not  give
    details of the visit in 2009 but in 2011 he confirmed  that  it  was  a
    visit for medical reasons and was for a short period of time.  She  did
    not visit family members during that time but had stayed  for  a  short
    period at the home of his father's brother and had  also  stayed  in  a
    hotel.  When asked how he thought  his  mother  would  cope  living  in
    India, a country in which she had not lived in for 40 years, he  stated
    that for her it would be very difficult and referred  to  her  previous
    life with his father in that she had lived with her  parents  up  until
    the age of 21 and had been looked after then and had then embarked upon
    "a traditional marriage" at the age of 21 and that  they  had  remained
    together for over 40 years following that marriage out of India  living
    in Tanzania.  He said that she had no real links with India despite her
    nationality, and that he could not see her surviving alone in a country
    that she had little knowledge of.  He referred to her present condition
    and her upset and distress in relation to the death of her husband.  It
    was plain from hearing his evidence that he  was  also  distressed  and
    thus a break was given for the witness  to  compose  himself.   On  the
    resumption of his evidence he was asked about the last  two  years  and
    the circumstances of his mother.  He said that she had been under a lot
    of stress when contemplating being left alone in a country that she had
    not lived in for over 40 years.  She was worried about  how  she  would
    survive on her own bearing in mind that she had always  been  dependent
    on her husband who had provided everything for her.  He  described  her
    mental state as poor and that the medical evidence and the psychiatrist
    made reference to her needing and requiring the care of  her  immediate
    family.

13. In cross-examination, he was asked about resettling his mother and  why
    it could not come from the extended family.  The witness explained that
    culturally it was the son's responsibility to provide financial support
    and that whilst he would do what he could for his mother, in  terms  of
    his financial circumstances he would not be able to use  his  resources
    to in effect support two households, his own in the United Kingdom  and
    his mother in India.  He thought that the extended family in the United
    Kingdom, whilst they have been supportive would not be able to  provide
    any long term financial assistance and that it could not be expected of
    them to support her realistically.  He was asked how often the extended
    family in the United Kingdom visited India.  The witness  said  it  was
    difficult to say but that some of the family members who have  siblings
    have family there but the majority  of  the  relatives  had  no  family
    members in India to whom they visited.  The question posed by Mr Deller
    was that his mother had not been in India for a very  long  period  and
    where did the witness think his mother could belong  if  returned.   Mr
    Mandalia said that he could not even think of  a  place  in  which  she
    would feel that it was her home and referring to the map, he said  that
    the relatives as a whole would not be able to  assist  or  provide  the
    emotional support that she would require and made reference to  the  24
    hour support that he thought she  required.   When  Mr  Deller  queried
    whether she needed that sort of care, Mr  Mandalia  said  that  in  her
    current state of mind, she was worried about being alone  and  how  she
    would manage things and that she had never lived alone  throughout  her
    life.

14. As to the change in her circumstances, over the last  two  years  since
    the passing of the death of her husband, he  gave  evidence  concerning
    the effect upon her daily life and that she had become  forgetful,  she
    remained tearful and distressed and that the length  of  time  had  not
    changed her outlook or presentation during this time.  When asked about
    the nature of the marriage that he  had  described  as  a  "traditional
    marriage" between the Appellant and her husband, he confirmed that  the
    family responsibilities had all been undertaken by her husband and that
    she was in effect a housewife, she had never travelled on her own,  her
    husband would arrange the local workers when the language was an issue,
    she had never learnt the local language.  He described that his  father
    passing away so suddenly had turned "her life upside down".

15. The Tribunal also heard from Mrs Swat Joshi who adopted a  letter,  and
    two witness statements contained in bundles 1 and 2.  She gave evidence
    about the deterioration in the Appellant since  the  last  hearing  and
    referred to her becoming more and more depressed and the stress of  the
    case building up and that this had affected not only the Appellant  but
    also the family members.  When asked  how  she  thought  the  Appellant
    would cope living in India on her own, the witness stated that  in  her
    view and based on her knowledge of the Appellant that she would not  be
    able to cope.  She referred to her needs as requiring  a  close  family
    and providing the care that she required.  She  was  presently  feeling
    loved by the family and that this had assisted her to some extent.  She
    described her mother from coming from a "very traditional marriage" and
    that she thought that she would be lost on her own and not able to cope
    and that the family members that there were in India were  spread  out.
    She would not get the support that she  needed.   As  to  her  physical
    health, she said that she was not able to do day-to-day chores  lifting
    heavy things.  When asked if there had  been  any  improvement  in  her
    physical condition, the witness confirmed that it had become worse  and
    gave an example concerning the arthritis in her hands.

16. There was no cross-examination of that witness.  There were two further
    witnesses Dr Pragna Mandalia who did not give evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal but provided a letter at pages 23 to 24  of  the  bundle.
    That evidence was not challenged nor  was  the  evidence  of  the  last
    witness  Rasika  Rajesh  Mandalia  who  had  also  provided  a  witness
    statement and gave brief oral evidence.

The submissions:

17. At the conclusion of the evidence, the Tribunal heard submissions  from
    each of the parties.  In respect of paragraph 317 Mr Deller  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State  accepted that the application  was  made  on
    6th July 2012 and in those circumstances it fell to be considered under
    paragraph 317 under Part  8  of  the  Rules.   He  confirmed  that  the
    decision of the Respondent established that all the criteria  were  met
    save for paragraph 317(i)(e) and the  issue  was  whether  or  not  "if
    living alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances".  It was  accepted  that  she  was  mainly
    dependent financially on relatives settled in the United  Kingdom  thus
    he submitted if the Tribunal found that  her  circumstances  were  such
    that the test was met then the decision would not be in accordance with
    the Immigration Rules.  However he  submitted  that  the  phrase  "most
    exceptional compassionate  circumstances"  was  a  high  test  and  the
    question was whilst the circumstances were compassionate were they  the
    most exceptional compassionate circumstances and was the test met.  The
    refusal letter made reference of the need to take into  account  living
    abroad with support however he submitted, applying the facts  from  the
    evidence there were relatives that were scattered around India on  both
    sides who were either elderly and/or limited in the capacity to provide
    assistance to alleviate the most compassionate circumstances.   It  was
    further a question of where she could be established in India and  that
    had not been made clear.  He submitted that detailed evidence  had  now
    been provided as to the circumstances in  which  she  would  be  living
    which included her physical frailty, her psychological frailty and that
    as the First-tier Tribunal had considered it on a flawed basis  it  did
    require to be considered again  notwithstanding  that  it  was  a  high
    test.

18. In respect of Article 8, he relied upon his earlier  skeleton  argument
    and that the initial application was made on 6th July 2012, three  days
    before the changes made to the Immigration Rules  as  they  related  to
    issues raising issues of private and family life under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.  Thus he relied upon the Statement of Changes
    HC 194.  The implementation paragraph at page  1  provided  a  "classic
    transitional provision" namely that if the application  had  been  made
    before 9th July 2012 and the application had not been decided, it would
    be decided in accordance with the Rules in force on 8th July  2012  and
    that was made  apparent  by  A280(c)(i)  and  therefore  the  old  Rule
    applied.  However he submitted the Secretary of State looked at the new
    Rules (in relation to Article 8) because of the Statement of Changes in
    Immigration Rules HC 565.  In that document the implementation set  out
    that the changes set out in paragraphs 1 to 222 of the  statement  took
    effect on 6th September 2012.  He relied on A277B where it is said that
    the Secretary of State is considering an  application  for  "indefinite
    leave to remain" to which Part 8 of the Rules  continue  to  apply  and
    where the application does not meet the requirements of paragraph 8 for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  then  the  Applicant's  case  would   be
    considered under Appendix FM and 276ADE.  However  whilst  the  refusal
    letter said that she could not meet paragraph 276ADE, under the  parent
    route, there was a query as to whether or not she would  succeed  under
    276ADE(vi) relating to the high absence of ties since she had moved  to
    Tanzania.  Whilst the Secretary of State considered that  twenty  years
    was the cut off for severing of ties, the question of  whether  someone
    had severed ties with the country of nationality is fact-sensitive (see
    the decision of the Tribunal in Ogundimu).

19. Mr Deller also submitted that  looking  at  the  Article  8  under  the
    "classic jurisprudence" it would be conceded on behalf of the Secretary
    of  State  that  on  the  evidence  now  provided  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances that she  had  established  dependency  upon  her  family
    members and thus Article 8(1) was engaged and that  all  the  questions
    were in the affirmative leading to the question of  proportionality  as
    to what  went  in  the  balance.   In  his  submissions  he  sought  to
    distinguish the case of Edgehill (as cited) from that  of  Haleemudeen,
    in  which  the  decision  which  he  submitted  should  be   preferred.
    Paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM was passed in September 2012  and  the
    policy was to look at the  new  Rules  even  if  the  application  fell
    primarily under the old one and translating  this  to  the  Appellant's
    case, it fell to be considered  under  paragraph  317  but  also  under
    Appendix FM.  He argued that the new Immigration Rules had  a  powerful
    life in the Article 8 equation because the new Rules were  a  statement
    of executive policy and thus were part of the  proportionality  balance
    thus the public interest could not be ignored.  Thus the  key  question
    was whether the powerful factor of the new Rules should it form part of
    the proportionality exercise or is the position as  straightforward  as
    Edgehill and any relevance  of  the  new  Rules  therefore  disappears?
    However, he posed the question as to whether or not the new  Rules  did
    made adequate provision (applying the decisions in Nagre and  Gulshan).
    The new Rules do not make provision for those in the  position  of  the
    Appellant as a dependent relative and therefore it is arguable that her
    circumstances in any event would fall outside Appendix FM and paragraph
    276ADE and that there would be arguably good grounds for granting leave
    to remain outside the Rules and therefore  it  would  be  necessary  to
    consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  that  were  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

20. Ms Panagiotopoulou, relied upon her skeleton argument produced for  the
    hearing and identified the issues that the Tribunal  was  to  consider.
    She began her submissions  under  paragraph  317  of  the  Rules.   The
    factual matrix was such, she submitted, that it did meet the high  test
    of the "most exceptional compassionate circumstances".  This was a case
    where the Appellant had not lived in India for over 40 years.  She  was
    now nearly 65 (64 years 6 months) and had not lived in India since  the
    age of 21.  She had led a  sheltered  life  and  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses gave support for her  having  been  part  of  a  "traditional
    marriage" during the last 40 years.  She  has  no  real  connection  to
    India, the nature of her marriage was such that  she  had  never  lived
    alone and had not been used to dealing with day-to-day aspects  of  her
    life.  Ms Panagiotopoulou referred to the evidence in support of  this.
    She made reference to her physical health which was frail by  reference
    to the medical evidence and to  that  of  the  witnesses.   As  to  the
    psychological affect of the bereavement, that evidence came from  three
    different sources including doctors and  a  psychiatrist.   The  report
    from the GP (see page 24)  made  reference  to  her  isolation  and  to
    suffering moderate to severe depression and the counsellor (at page 45)
    referred to her  suffering  "moderate  depression"  however  since  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal there had been no real progress  and
    indeed the evidence demonstrated that her  condition  had  deteriorated
    and reference was made to the psychiatric report and her examination on
    21st January  2014.   Thus  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  she  had
    deteriorated in her self-care, she was vulnerable, of an  advanced  age
    with a degeneracy of physical ailments and of a  fragile  psychological
    state with no likely improvement in her  situation.   She  had  a  high
    dependency on her family.  The two most important  factors  related  to
    her loneliness and isolation which she would expect on return to  India
    bearing in mind her lack of connections.

21. Whilst she submitted that it was a high threshold, each  case  must  be
    "fact-sensitive" and that the  circumstances  of  this  case  met  that
    threshold given her lack of residence and  ties  to  India.   She  made
    further submissions concerning the evidence relating to family in India
    by reference to the oral evidence given but also by  reference  to  the
    map showing the family members  dispersed  over  a  large  geographical
    area.  Whilst the evidence of Mr Mandalia  was  that  he  had  met  her
    expenses and could do  so  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom,  that  was
    different in terms of expecting the family to provide financial support
    in effect for two households both in the United Kingdom and  India  and
    she referred to  the  breakdown  of  costs  provided  in  the  evidence
    concerning resettlement in India, obtaining accommodation and  a  carer
    for her.

22. The main concern, she submitted was that she would not be able to  cope
    on her own which was supported by the evidence of  the  family  members
    and the historical evidence concerning her past.   The  conclusions  of
    the psychiatrist were such that show  that  her  immediate  family  are
    those who give her a sense of purpose and alleviate the depression that
    she undoubtedly suffers from.  For  those  reasons,  not  only  do  her
    circumstances evoke  compassion,  they  met  the  test  required  under
    paragraph 317.

23. In relation to the legal issues identified by  Mr  Deller,  she  relied
    upon her skeleton argument in this  respect  and  on  the  transitional
    provisions set out in HC 194.  In her submissions,  she  submitted  the
    decision of Edgehill was to be preferred and that as stated at [32] the
    Immigration Rules needed to be understood by ordinary people  thus  the
    natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  words  in  the   transitional
    provisions were that the Secretary of State would not place reliance on
    the new Rules when dealing with applications made before 9th July  2012
    and that a decision made with reference  to  the  new  Rules  when  the
    application predated 9th July 2012 would be unlawful.

24. She submitted that whilst  it  was  asserted  that  Edgehill  could  be
    distinguished on its facts by the Respondent, it  is  not  evident  how
    that could be so.  However whilst the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in Haleemudeen (as cited)  where  it  was  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was in error for failing to consider the new Article  8  Rules
    (at 40 - 41), this is a case where the original  application  had  been
    made on 28th February 2012 before the new Rules were introduced however
    the decision of Odelola v the SSHD [2009] UKHL 25 was relied upon  that
    the material date was the date of decision  and  not  the  application.
    However the decision of Edgehill sought to distinguish the decision  of
    Odelola (as stated) as there was no  express  provision  that  the  old
    Rules would continue to  govern  applications  made  before  the  Rules
    changed (see paragraph 27).  Thus she submits, that  in  Odelola,  Lord
    Hoffman stated that the Rule at the date of  decision  applied  in  the
    absence of any statement of the contrary.  However HC  195  provided  a
    clear statement to the contrary which did not appear to have been taken
    into account in the decision of Haleemudeen.

25. Thus she submitted that the classic Article 8 principles should  apply.
    The Secretary of State had conceded the  issue  of  dependency  on  the
    particular facts of  this  case  and  thus  it  fell  to  consider  the
    proportionality of the decision.  She submitted that the  circumstances
    that had been advanced on behalf of the Appellant under  paragraph  317
    would be those that would be advanced on her behalf under Article 8 and
    the factual matrix would consider the  same  namely  the  very  lengthy
    absence from India, no additional recourse to public funds, the  impact
    on the Appellant taking into account Huang.

26. She submitted that even if paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM did fall to
    be considered, when considering lack of ties, the  Secretary  of  State
    had relied upon twenty years as the benchmark in the United Kingdom and
    thus that could be applied to the Appellant's circumstances in which 40
    years had elapsed since she had lived in India and thus could  be  seen
    as having relinquished ties with her country of nationality  by  virtue
    of that time.  Furthermore, this is a case that  even  on  the  Gulshan
    principles  will  demonstrate  the  circumstances  are  compelling  and
    exceptional.

27. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

28. Paragraph 317 of the Rules provides as follows:

         "317. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parent,
         grandparent or other dependent relative of  a  person  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom are that the person:

         (i)  is related to a person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom in one of the following ways:

             (a)  mother or grandmother who is a widow  aged  65  years  or
                  over; or

             (b)  father or grandfather who is a widower aged 65  years  or
                  over; or

             (c)  a parent or grandparents travelling together of  whom  at
                  least one is aged 65 or over; or

             (d)  a parent or grandparent aged 65 or over who has remarried
                  but cannot look to the spouse or children  of  the  second
                  marriage for  financial  support;  and  where  the  person
                  settled in the United  Kingdom  is  able  and  willing  to
                  maintain the parent or grandparent and any spouse or child
                  of the second  marriage  who  would  be  admissible  as  a
                  dependant; or

             (e)  a parent or grandparent under the age  of  65  if  living
                  alone outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional
                  compassionate   circumstances   and    mainly    dependent
                  financially on relatives settled in  the  United  Kingdom;
                  and

             (f)  the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle  or  aunt  over
                  the age of 18 if living alone outside the  United  Kingdom
                  in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  and
                  mainly dependent financially on relatives settled  in  the
                  United Kingdom; and

         (ii) is joining or accompanying a person who is present and settled
             in the United Kingdom or who is on  the  same  occasion  being
             admitted for settlement; and

         (iii)    is financially wholly or mainly dependent on the  relative
             present and settled in the United Kingdom; and

         (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately, together  with  any
             dependants, without recourse to public funds, in accommodation
             which the Sponsor owns or occupies exclusively; and

         (iva)    can, and will, be maintained adequately, together with any
             dependants, without recourse to public funds; and

         (v)  has no other close relatives in his own  country  to  whom  he
             could turn for financial support; and

         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid  UK  entry  clearance
             for entry in this capacity."

    The issue  that  the  Tribunal  has  to  decide  relates  to  paragraph
    317(i)(e) as set out above.  There is no dispute  between  the  parties
    that the Appellant meets all the other requirements  of  paragraph  317
    and also that she is mainly dependent financially on relatives  settled
    in the United Kingdom and also that she is under the  age  of  65  (now
    aged 64 and 6 months) thus the issue is "if living  alone  outside  the
    United Kingdom in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances".

      In reaching a decision on this issue, I am required to make  findings
    of fact upon the evidence.  Both parties have recognised the reality of
    the circumstances of the Appellant and that there have been significant
    developments in  the  appeal  since  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and for those reasons, the starting point must be the findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal but that fresh findings may be required as a
    result of the evidence that has been produced.

29. The First-tier Tribunal's findings that relate to her circumstances  in
    Tanzania are no longer relevant in view of the change to the  Secretary
    of State's decision.  Thus I turn to the Appellant's  circumstances  in
    India.  It appears to be accepted on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    that the family members in India could not offer financial  support  or
    accommodation (see refusal letter; referred to in the decision  of  the
    FTT at [5]).   The  only  findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    relating to India can be  found  at  [14]  -  [15]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  Those findings are as follows:-

         "14. If the Appellant chose to live in  India  then  she  would  be
             living in the country where the evidence  indicated  that  her
             aged mother lived as well as her siblings in  Mumbai,  a  city
             that the Appellant travelled to, and entered, on 28th November
             2009 and 6th  May  2011.   In  Mumbai  there  also  lives  two
             brothers of the Appellant's husband.

         15.  There was strong  evidence  before  me  that  the  Appellant's
             extended family - going beyond her children -  in  the  United
             Kingdom were very supportive of her.  The Appellant had  never
             lived in the United Kingdom but had visited  that  country  as
             she  had  also  visited  India.   Despite   the   reservations
             expressed by Swati Joshi in her testimony I took the view that
             there was no more  persuasive  ground  to  find,  despite  the
             Appellant's departure from India more than 40 years ago,  that
             the extended family in India would not equally  be  supportive
             of her if she were to decide to live in  that  country.   Upon
             such a decision, although it would throw an extra burden  upon
             the Appellant's children, they made it clear in testimony that
             they would do all that they could do to support her  in  India
             and thus the situation would be - despite the  strain  on  the
             children - that they would use  every  endeavour  to  seek  to
             ensure that the Appellant did not unduly suffer from having to
             live in India rather than the United Kingdom."

    It is plain from those findings that  the  judge  considered  that  the
    Appellant would be living in a country where the evidence indicated her
    mother lived as well as her siblings and that she had  travelled  there
    on two occasions in 2009 and 2011.  However it is  equally  plain  from
    those findings that  nothing  more  was  said  about  those  particular
    relatives, their own  circumstances  nor  their  respective  locations.
    That has been dealt with in the evidence heard by this Tribunal.  As to
    the visits that have been made, the evidence of the Appellant was  that
    she has not been back for four to five years and whilst it  was  common
    ground that she had visited in November 2009 she could give no details.
     Similarly the witnesses could not  recall  the  circumstances  of  the
    visit in November 2009.  As to the visit in  May  2011,  the  Appellant
    recalled this visit noting that she had gone to India to access medical
    treatment being accompanied by  her  husband.   She  did  not  see  her
    sisters but had spoken to one of them on the telephone and the evidence
    of Rajesh Mandalia was this was a short period of time  where  she  did
    not visit family members although she stayed with her father's  brother
    before relocating to a hotel.  Thus I find as a  fact  there  were  two
    visits made, the most recent visit in 2011 was not for  family  reasons
    but was ostensibly for accessing medical treatment, it was of  a  short
    duration and there had been little contact with  family  members.   She
    was accompanied by her husband on that visit.

30. Dealing with the family relatives.  It is necessary to  consider  their
    circumstances in greater depth albeit it is accepted by the  Respondent
    that they could not offer  financial  support  or  accommodation.   The
    evidence before the Tribunal is that originally on her  husband's  side
    of the family he had three brothers and she has two sisters  in  India.
    One of her husband's brothers has since died (Mr Mehta).   There  is  a
    second brother Mr  Mehta who is 69 who lives in Bhuj who  is  partially
    disabled and is looked after by the third brother Ashok  Mandalia.   He
    provided a letter (at page 28) who at the date of the  letter  in  2012
    was 58 and therefore now in his early 60s who refers to  looking  after
    his mother who is disabled and elderly and therefore  could  not  offer
    any support.  The Appellant has two sisters; the first sister is in her
    70s Mrudhula Kothi who spends time between her  children  in  Bhuj  and
    Sirat.  The younger sister is Kokila Mehta  who  lives  in  Mumbai  who
    lives with her husband and son and grandchild in a two bedroom flat  in
    Mumbai.  In relation to the husband's relatives, there are two brothers-
    in-law however since the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  one  has
    since died and there is one further brother in Mumbai  who  is  in  his
    late 80s.

31.   I am satisfied that no other family relatives  have  been  identified
    and the map  provided  for  the  Tribunal  demonstrates  the  distances
    between those family relatives which shows that they are  scattered  in
    India  and  there  is  no  evidence  before   me   that   they   retain
    communications  with  each  other  or  that  there  is  any   form   of
    communication between the relatives on the paternal side with those  on
    the maternal side.  I also find on the evidence that  there  is  little
    contact between the Appellant and those relatives historically  and  at
    best the last visit  was  in  2009.   I  have  considered  whether  the
    extended family  in  India  could  provide  emotional  support  if  not
    practical support as the Respondent concedes that they could not  offer
    accommodation or financial assistance.  Having considered the evidence,
    I do not find that they are in a position either individually or acting
    together, to offer practical support in the light of the acceptance  by
    the Respondent that they cannot provide accommodation or financial help
    due to their age and in  some  cases  their  infirmity.   I  take  into
    account the evidence that I have heard  that  makes  reference  to  the
    cultural tradition that it is the eldest son who would look  after  his
    mother.  That factor should be given some  weight.   I  have  also  had
    regard to the map and the distances between the relatives and there  is
    no reason to believe that they would be able to offer emotional support
    of the level required for the Appellant other than occasional telephone
    calls or the occasional visit.  It would be a  case  of  the  Appellant
    having to move between the relatives  rather  than  those  others,  who
    whilst are related, have historically offered little by way of  support
    be it emotional or otherwise.  The question as Mr Deller posed  to  the
    Tribunal, because the Appellant has been out of India for so  long  for
    over 40 years, where in India would she belong?  It is evident from the
    Appellant's own evidence that she has no real ties to  India  save  for
    that of her nationality.  It is common ground that for  over  40  years
    and for the duration of her married life between the ages of 21 and  62
    she has been resident out of India.  She  still  refers  to  Mumbai  as
    "Bombay" and there is no evidence before  me  that  she  has  any  real
    understanding of India as it now is.  I take into account  that  it  is
    likely that having lived  in  Tanzania  she  will  have  retained  some
    cultural links but that is different from being expected to live  in  a
    country in which she has not resided for a significant  period  of  her
    life.  This is, in my judgment, a significant  factor  in  establishing
    that she  would  be  living  in  the  "most  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances" if living in India.

32. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal  made  some  reference  to  the
    extended family and any assistance that they could provide.  The First-
    tier Tribunal set out those findings at [15] set out above.  At [34] of
    the UT decision, reference was given to the finding made by  the  judge
    that there was "strong  evidence"  before  him  that  went  beyond  the
    children's evidence that the  Appellant's  extended  family  were  very
    supportive of her.  As said at [34] this must refer to the letter  that
    was co-signed by a number of relatives in the UK.  That letter is found
    in the bundle at 21 to 22 (bundle 1).  They are family who  are  living
    in close proximity presently to the Appellant in approximately a  three
    mile radius.  It is plain from the evidence not only in  their  letters
    but also from the witnesses who have given oral evidence that  she  has
    strong ties in the  United  Kingdom.   However  the  question  is  what
    support would the extended family in the United Kingdom provide for her
    to enable her to live in India?  The judge found that the relatives  in
    the UK would provide support.  The question is  what  type  of  support
    they would give to her India?   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  go
    beyond its finding by stating that it would be support, and whilst that
    by itself was a matter the judge could take into account, this Tribunal
    has heard further evidence about  this  issue.   I  am  satisfied  from
    hearing the oral evidence of the witnesses that there  is  a  world  of
    difference of the extended family providing help in the United  Kingdom
    as I am satisfied that they have done in an emotional  sense  and  that
    which can properly be said to be provided if the Appellant is living in
    India.  The evidence of Mr Mandalia was that they were  not  likely  to
    provide  financial  help.   That  is  realistic,  all  have  their  own
    commitments and family members who they support or are supported by.  I
    find that whilst the First-tier Tribunal was right to  reach  the  view
    that the extended family in the United Kingdom are  supportive  of  the
    Appellant, and that is a factor, it does not take into account that any
    financial support would be realistically in the short term and  not  on
    any long term basis as that would be unsustainable and I  place  weight
    upon the evidence of Mr Mandalia in describing the circumstances of the
    family relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  taking  a  commonsense
    approach.  As to the visits made to India by the extended family, it is
    plain from the evidence that the Tribunal has heard that this  has  not
    been frequent; some of the members do have their own siblings  but  the
    majority have no family members in India as they are all  residing  now
    in the United Kingdom.

33. In  reaching  conclusions  on  the  evidence,  it  is  plain  from  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal at  [16]  that  he  found  the
    evidence from the  family  members  to  be  "clearly  tendentious"  and
    "sought to achieve the preference"  of  the  Appellant  living  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I am, of course, alive  to  that  preference  and  the
    example given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at [16]  concerning  the
    evidence of Skype which was quite properly made.  However, I  have  had
    the opportunity to  hear  the  evidence  and  see  the  witnesses  give
    evidence before me and additionally read  and  take  into  account  the
    evidence of two additional witnesses whose evidence was not before  the
    First-tier Tribunal nor was it challenged in  cross-examination  before
    this Tribunal.  The family are undoubtedly  feeling  under  stress  and
    pressure of their close family member and the present predicament  that
    the Appellant is in.  At times as I  have  noted,  the  witnesses  were
    tearful and plainly found the giving of  evidence  and  discussing  the
    issues  involved  difficult  at  times.   Notwithstanding   their   own
    preference which is understandable to have  their  mother  living  with
    them,  I  did  not  reach  the  conclusion  that  their  evidence   was
    exaggerated or that they were seeking in their oral evidence  to  paint
    the worst case scenario but had tried as much as they could to  give  a
    truthful picture of her circumstances based on their knowledge  of  her
    and her background and history.  I was particularly impressed with  the
    evidence of Ms Swat Joshi who gave cogent and descriptive  evidence  of
    the deterioration and the physical frailty of the Appellant and gave  a
    vivid picture of her inability to carry her grandson  whom  she  spends
    much time with and gave a description of looking at her hands after she
    had tried to carry him for a short while noting her  hands  were  stiff
    and bent and her fingers had to be physically straightened for her.   I
    further  find  that  all  the  witnesses  were  consistent   in   their
    descriptions of the nature of  her  emotional  dependency  upon  family
    members and the emotional and practical support that  she  had  derived
    from her late husband with whom she had relied upon  for  the  last  40
    years and the lack of emotional support that there would be in India.

34. I now turn to the medical evidence before the Tribunal.   There  is  no
    dispute that she is physically frail.  Indeed it is common ground  that
    she has osteoporosis and there are degenerative changes  in  her  lower
    back and her knee joints (see medical report at page 32).  There  is  a
    letter dated August 2012 referring to the circumstances of the death of
    her husband which described her presentation as being "quite  confused"
    and the physiotherapist thought that if her presentation continued that
    she should seek further help as she appeared to  be  depressed.   As  I
    state, there is no dispute that she is physically frail  and  I  accept
    the descriptions given by the family members concerning  her  inability
    to carry out and  function  in  many  ways.   The  relevant  First-tier
    Tribunal findings are at [16] and [17].  The judge  took  into  account
    the GP's letter of 8th November 2013.  And that "It might yet  be  that
    the Appellant will regain that past strength and  confidence  when  the
    great shock of her bereavement gradually subsides."   In  this  context
    the judge noted the GP's  letter  referring  to  the  enabling  of  the
    Appellant ... "to overcome the trauma of her bereavement."  That was  a
    finding that was challenged before this Tribunal as set out at [36]  of
    the UT decision.  We found that the wording might have been better  but
    did not think it was speculative but that there was a good chance  that
    the Appellant may regain her former strength and  confidence  and  thus
    reached the conclusion that there was a good chance that it  would  not
    be longstanding and would subside.

35.   I have been required to revisit that finding  in  the  light  of  the
    passage of time and further evidence from a psychiatrist  and  evidence
    from the family members.  The evidence is contrary  to  that  expressed
    above, the Appellant has not overcome the trauma of her bereavement and
    rather  than  show  improvement  with  the  passage  of  time  she  has
    conversely deteriorated rather than having  become  stronger.   I  take
    into account the likely effect of the stress of the ongoing immigration
    proceedings upon her and that this must have some effect upon  her  and
    her state of mind but the  description  from  her  relatives  which  is
    consistent with the psychiatric report. demonstrates that  whilst  this
    may be a feature, it cannot account for her presentation on its own.

36.   It is right in this context to note that  the  Upper  Tribunal  found
    that there was an error of fact in the First-tier Tribunal decision  at
    [16] when in terms of her ability  it  was  noted  that  the  Appellant
    travelled alone to the United Kingdom at the end of May 2012.   As  the
    Panel noted at [39] that was an error  of  fact  because  she  did  not
    travel on her own but with family relatives.

37.  The psychiatric report is found at [22]  -  [34]  of  bundle  2.   The
    history of the present illness is set out at paragraph  6.1  and  makes
    reference to her low mood, her inability to sleep and some thoughts  of
    self-harm.  It refers to her forgetfulness and inability to concentrate
    and mistakes made such as leaving the gas fire on in the  kitchen.   At
    6.2, there is reference concerning thoughts about her husband  and  her
    physical symptoms having increased in intensity.   The  examination  of
    her medical state on 21st January is set out at paragraph 12.1  and  at
    12.3 it was found that her cognitive functions were grossly intact  and
    had partial insight into her illness.  The opinion is set out at 13.1 -
    13.9.  The psychiatrist reaches the conclusion that her bereavement  at
    the age of 64 was complicated by the history of her profound dependence
    on her late husband throughout the major part of her adult  life.   The
    dependence was not only on her day-to-day living but  more  importantly
    emotional dependence which left her  unable  to  cope  without  similar
    support at present and in  the  foreseeable  future.   He  stated  that
    "living alone is thus unimaginable and fearful for her.   This  may  be
    one of the factors why she has developed signs  of  major  depression."
    At paragraph 13.2 her depression  by  reference  to  the  criteria  was
    characterised by low mood, inability  to  enjoy,  of  her  feelings  of
    restlessness, poor sleep, early morning  wakening,  decreased  appetite
    and forgetfulness.   Whilst  at  13.3  the  doctor  did  not  find  she
    presented  with  active  suicidal  intention,  the  history  of  severe
    depression at  this  age  after  the  loss  of  her  spouse  carried  a
    significant suicidal risk and that returning to India would  result  in
    another  loss,  prolonging  her  complicated  bereavement.    He   made
    reference at 13.4 to 13.5 to the emotional attachments that she had  to
    her family in the United Kingdom and at  13.6  that  the  relatives  in
    India, even if willing to provide support may not be able to  give  the
    emotional bond that she currently has.  The prognosis at  13.9  was  as
    follows

         "Her  prognosis  of  depression  is  negatively  affected  by   its
         chronicity and comorbid arthritis.  She is likely to continue  with
         the same level of depression for years to come however the severity
         of the depression would be much higher if she had to leave  the  UK
         due to the factors given above ... Her suicidal risk is  higher  if
         there are loneliness and isolation, the  factor  is  likely  to  be
         there more if she had to live in India."

    I have therefore considered the medical evidence as a  whole  and  find
    that the medical position has not improved despite the passage of time.
     Bereavement affects people in different ways.  It is  plain  that  the
    circumstances of the death of her husband has to be viewed in the light
    of the Appellant's social history.  The Appellant was  born  in  Kutch,
    Gujrat in India and left school at the age of 19 at the time  that  she
    was married.  This was an arranged marriage to a man who was five years
    older than her.  The marriage took place in 1970 at  a  time  when  her
    husband was living in Africa (Tanzania).  It is plain from the evidence
    that I have heard from the witnesses that the Appellant has never lived
    on her own but lived primarily with her family until her  marriage  and
    then with her husband thereafter in Tanzania.   The  evidence  strongly
    demonstrates that this was a traditional marriage in the sense that she
    undertook the role of cooking and household chores, was never  involved
    in the management of financial tasks, it was her  husband  who  was  in
    contact and undertook all other duties and that she had never travelled
    on her own.  On 17th April 2012 when sitting on the  balcony  of  their
    home, her husband  became  semi-unconscious  suddenly,  she  found  him
    unresponsive.  He was taken to hospital  and  was  pronounced  dead  on
    arrival.  He did not have any major physical ill health and  his  death
    was sudden and  unexpected.   It  is  plain  from  those  circumstances
    outlined above that she has found his death particularly hard  to  bear
    and no doubt in the knowledge that she may  be  required  to  live  her
    later years alone without the support of her husband who had  been  the
    sole and real source of support in a country in which she has not lived
    for over 40 years.

     It seems to me that it is not simply a case of the Appellant  being  a
    national of India.  Whilst I would  accept  that  she  has  remained  a
    national of that country, in reality it would be quite different to  be
    living there, in circumstances, I am satisfied  would  be,  effectively
    isolation.  It is important in my judgment  to  consider  the  previous
    nature of her life in reaching a conclusion  on  the  circumstances  as
    they will be in India, bearing in mind it is accepted that  it  is  not
    reasonable for her to return to Tanzania.  I have set out  earlier  the
    nature of her marriage and the evidence and support  of  this  being  a
    traditional marriage of its type and  how  this  over  such  a  lengthy
    period serves to increase her vulnerability and ability to function  in
    a country which she has not lived in for over 40 years and has no  real
    links with.  She has never lived alone, prior to her marriage she lived
    with her family and thereafter had lived with her husband for 41 years.



38. I have therefore applied the findings of fact and the circumstances  as
    I find them to be now to the applicable law.  In  this  regard  I  have
    considered the decision of Senanayake v the SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  1530.
    It  had  been  common  ground  before  the  court   that   the   phrase
    "compassionate circumstances" means  circumstances  which  would  evoke
    compassion in the mind of an objective decision  maker  at  [21].   The
    question the court went on to consider was as follows:-

         "What are the words 'most exceptional' intended to qualify  in  the
         context of  Rule  317(i)(f).   Do  those  words  require  that  the
         circumstances are themselves most exceptional; or do  they  require
         that the circumstances  evoke  exceptional,  or  most  exceptional,
         compassion in the mind of the decision maker?  (at [22]).

    The court concluded that:-

         "That question can be answered, as it seems to me,  by  postulating
         circumstances in which, although in  themselves  most  exceptional,
         compassion is evoked only to a degree  which  is  not  exceptional.
         What policy objective could the rule  maker  have  intended  to  be
         serve by permitting the grant of leave to enter in a case  where  a
         low degree of compassion  is  evoked  by  circumstances  which  are
         themselves exceptional; but denying leave to enter in a case  where
         an exceptional degree of  compassion  is  evoked  by  circumstances
         which are not in themselves unusual.  The answer, as  it  seems  to
         me, is that the words 'most exceptional' are used in  that  context
         to describe the degree of compassion which the circumstances  evoke
         in the mind of the decision maker.  It is because the circumstances
         of the applicant  evoke  compassion  to  an  exceptional,  or  most
         exceptional, degree that leave to enter  is  to  be  granted.   The
         degree of compassion compels a decision  that  leave  to  enter  be
         granted."

    And at paragraph [24]:-

         "In each case, as it seems to me, the decision maker is required to
        ask himself whether the circumstances which he has found  to  exist
        should evoke compassion to such an exceptional degree that, in  the
        one case, leave to enter should be granted under the Rules and,  in
        the other case, the benefit of the family reunion policy should  be
        extended for a family member who does not fall within  the  primary
        class."

39. I recognise, as Mr Deller submits, the  test  is  indeed  a  high  one.
    Having considered the most unusual  circumstances  of  this  particular
    Appellant, I am satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  she
    meets the test as set out in paragraph 317(i)(e) and that as  a  parent
    under the age of 65 is living outside the United Kingdom in  the  "most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances".

40. As to the relevance of financial support as noted in  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Mohammed v the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 331, at [6] there may well be cases in which
    notwithstanding the provision of financial support  the  parent  simply
    cannot cope on their own - for example because of dementia or  terminal
    illness, and the most exceptional compassion is  called  for.   I  find
    that that applies to this case that there are particular  circumstances
    relating to this Appellant which demonstrate that she would not be able
    to cope on her own.  While she  does  not  have  dementia  or  terminal
    illness,  there  are  a  combination  of  factors  identified  in   the
    Appellant's circumstances when taken together  would  demonstrate  that
    even with the provision of financial support, which is in doubt for the
    long term based on the evidence before  this  Tribunal,  she  would  be
    living in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.  I  do  not
    consider that when taken together that her circumstances  might  simply
    be  described  as  compassionate  but  ones  that  do  evoke  the  most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances.

41. In this respect I have taken into account that she has family relatives
    but on the findings of fact that I  have  made  they  are  elderly  and
    limited in their capacity to provide material  help  to  alleviate  her
    circumstances in India.  They are scattered  geographically  throughout
    India and a question that Mr Deller posed was  after  41  years  "where
    would she establish her life in India?".  Before  this  Tribunal  there
    has been more detailed evidence as to the circumstances  in  which  she
    would be living which have included  a  greater  consideration  of  her
    physical frailty, the psychological frailty that has not decreased  but
    has in fact worsened and Mr Deller in his submissions  fairly  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had considered the issue of paragraph  317
    on a "flawed basis" and thus it has been right and fair to look at  the
    evidence again.  Notwithstanding the high test and threshold that  must
    be met, each case of course is by its nature fact-specific and must  be
    looked at on its own particular factual matrix and having  done  so  in
    relation to  this  case  I  am  satisfied  by  reason  of  the  factual
    circumstances that I have outlined in the findings of  fact  that  they
    meet cumulatively the test identified.

42. In the light of the findings in that respect, it is not  necessary  for
    me to reach a view on the legal issues identified by both  Counsel  and
    the tension between the  two  decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Edgehill and Haleemudeen (as previously cited).  I would  observe  that
    even if it could be said on behalf of the Respondent that the  decision
    of  Haleemudeen  should  be  preferred  and  that  by  reason  of   the
    chronological dates in this case the application being made on 6th July
    2012 but the decision being made on 16th April 2013 that the new  Rules
    should be taken account of, that this is a  case  in  which  Mr  Deller
    concedes that paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM do  not  deal  with  the
    circumstances of this particular appellant  and therefore  fell  to  be
    decided outside of those Rules (see Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640) and thus
    it would  be  necessary  to  consider  whether  there  are  "compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the  Rules".   In  my
    judgment,  for  the  reasons  that  I  have  already  stated,  if   the
    requirements of the Rules are not  met,  leave  can  be  granted  where
    exceptional  circumstances,  in  the  sense  of  "unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences" for the  individual  would  result  (see  Gulshan  and  R
    (Nagre) v the SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)) and that  those  identified
    in  supporting  the  decision  under  the  Rules,  would   apply   when
    considering her circumstances under Article 8 of the ECHR, even  taking
    account of the great weight to be attached  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    and the executive 's view of the public interest.

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside.  The decision is remade as follows; the appeal
    is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
