

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14805/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|on 20 May 2014                                |On 21st May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                         CAROLA VERONICA CHANG LOPEZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant, a citizen of Peru, appeals against a determination by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn, dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
       notice dated 18 April 2013, headed "refusal to vary leave  to  enter
       or remain and decision  to  remove",  which  was  accompanied  by  a
       "reasons for refusal letter" of the same date.


    2. The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  raise  the  question
       whether the judge found unfairly that the relationship  between  the
       appellant and her  UK  citizen  husband  was  not  genuine,  as  the
       respondent had not raised that in the decision under  appeal  or  in
       submissions, and the judge had not put the appellant  on  notice  of
       her concerns.

    3. Mr Whitwell said that the appellant's application was bound to  fail
       anyway, because she was here as a visitor when it was made; that the
       respondent's decision had therefore not actively considered  whether
       the relationship was genuine;  that  the  refusal  reasons  took  an
       incorrect approach to EX.1  of  the  Rules,  which  is  not  a  free
       standing provision; and that there  was  no  error  in  the  judge's
       adverse credibility findings.  However, I did not understand him  to
       raise any answer to the question whether there was unfairness to the
       appellant by the judge taking a material point against  her  without
       giving her an opportunity to answer it.

    4. Ms Brown was prepared to argue substantively on other points  raised
       in the grounds, but on the view that procedural unfairness  required
       the determination to be set aside and a fresh hearing fixed  in  any
       event, I did not require to hear from her further.

    5. I do not think that the error could be regarded  as  immaterial,  or
       that it can be saved by the alternative finding that  the  appellant
       may reasonably be expected to apply from  Peru.   That  may  yet  be
       found to be so, but as matters stand, the  appellant  would  face  a
       great difficulty with such an application,  because  it  might  very
       well be refused on the basis of a judicial finding that her  marital
       relationship is not genuine.

    6. For avoidance of doubt, I  record  that  it  is  accepted  that  the
       genuineness of the  relationship  is  a  live  issue  of  which  the
       appellant is now on notice.

    7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to  be  set
       aside.  The determination is preserved only so  far  as  it  may  be
       referred to as a record  of  the  evidence  at  the  hearing  on  14
       February  2014.   No  findings  of  the  FtT   can   stand.    Under
       s.12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature
       and extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be
       remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the  FtT.
       The member(s) of the FtT chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to
       include Judge Flynn.  A Spanish interpreter will be required.

                               [pic]
                                20 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


