
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/14913/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2016                          |On 4 March 2016               |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Appellant
                                       And

                           VERAH ADAMU DAVID
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                 Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Waithe, counsel, instructed by Greenland
Lawyers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent, who was born on 4 May 1984, is a national  of  Nigeria.
    She was granted a multi entry visitors visa on 23  September  2004  and
    entered the United Kingdom on 6 October 2004. In 2005 she  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a student but this application was  refused.
    She last entered the United Kingdom on 15 May 2006 and her  multi-entry
    visa expired on 23 September 2006.

2.   She did not depart when her visa expired but  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom, living with her mother, who is a British citizen.  On  24  May
    2011 the Respondent applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration
    Rules  on  the  basis  of  her  relationship  with  her  mother.   This
    application was refused on 23  June  2011  and  she  applied  for  this
    decision to be reconsidered on 6 September 2011 under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

3.   The Respondent was served with an  IS151A  on  18  November  2014.  She
    completed a statement of additional grounds on 8 December 2014.

4.   She married  Thomas  Duckmanton,  who  is  a  British  citizen,  on  14
    February  2015  and  on  24  March  2015  the  Appellant  refused   her
    application for leave to remain and decided  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.
    The Respondent appealed against this decision on 14 April 2015.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith allowed  her  appeal  on  10  September
    2015 and the Respondent appealed against this decision on 18  September
    2015.   Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuel   granted   the
    Respondent permission to appeal on 22 January 2016 and  the  Respondent
    filed a Rule 24 response on 19 February 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

6.    The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  said  that  she  relied  on  the
    Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  requiring   the
    Respondent to return to Nigeria in order to apply for  entry  clearance
    would not amount to a disproportionate disruption of her  family  life.
    She noted that the Foreign and Commonwealth Travel Advice, submitted at
    the appeal hearing had not said that it was unsafe to travel  to  Abuja
    and Lagos and the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not engaged with  this.
    She also noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not  referred  to
    the Visa Processing Times document submitted by the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department at the appeal hearing. This stated that, as  of
    July 2015, 100% of applications for settlement visas made in Ajuba were
    processed within 60 days. Instead, he had stated in paragraph 25 of his
    decision that he was  satisfied  that  requiring  the  [Respondent]  to
    return to Nigeria for an unspecified time was not proportionate.

7.   Counsel for the Respondent then replied. He stated that he was  relying
    on his skeleton argument and submitted  that  there  were  no  material
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.  He  noted
    that it was too dangerous for the Respondent's  husband  to  travel  to
    Nigeria with her and that the Foreign and Commonwealth  Officer  Travel
    Advice referred to kidnappings and threats in Abuja and Lagos.

Error of Law

8.   Counsel for the Respondent  was  correct  to  submit  that  she  had  a
    partner in the United Kingdom for the purposes of GEN.1.2  of  Appendix
    FM to the Immigration Rules, as she had married her British husband  on
    14 February 2015 and she did not have to establish that  she  had  also
    lived with him for at least two years. But it was  not  argued  by  the
    Respondent that she was entitled to leave to remain under Appendix  FM.
    This was because, as an overstayer since 2006, she could not  meet  the
    immigration requirements and also because she had not established  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to her enjoying a family life  with
    her husband in Nigeria.

9.   However, as Appendix FM did not include consideration of  the  question
    whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to  return
    to her home country to make an entry clearance application  to  re-join
    her husband, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  correct  to  consider
    whether requiring her to do so would amount to a breach of Article 8 of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also correctly reminded  himself  of  the
    case of R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home  Department)   (Appendix   FM-Chikwamba-   temporary   separation-
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) in  paragraph  14  of  his
    decision. This case held that there may be cases in which there are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  UK
    but where temporary separation to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance may be disproportionate.   Reading  the
    decision in its entirety it is clear that the Judge then considered the
    appeal in this context.

11.  The Appellant's grounds of appeal were very narrow  and  the  Appellant
    did not seek to amend them at the error of law hearing. In  particular,
    they say that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in fact in  paragraph
    25 of his decision and that this undermined his legal finding  that  he
    could distinguish the case of Chen.

12.  In paragraph 25 of his decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that "should the [Respondent] return to Nigeria her husband will not be
    able to visit her following clear Foreign Office advice".  This Foreign
    Office Advice was at pages 137 - 148 of  the  Bundle  prepared  by  the
    Respondent for her appeal hearing. At page 137 it was said that  "there
    is a high threat from terrorism" and that visitors should "avoid public
    places where crowds gather and areas where there are political or other
    large public gatherings" and that  they  should  "be  vigilant,  remain
    alert and pay attention to [their] surroundings at all  times".   There
    was also mention of an explosion in Lagos which killed five people  and
    a further attack in Abuja which killed 23 people.

13.  In addition, at page 141 of the bundle it stated that  there  had  been
    significant attacks in Abuja and Lagos and at page 144 it was said that
    "violence can erupt quickly  and  without  warning"  and  that  "inter-
    communal violence can occur throughout Nigeria".  At page  146  it  was
    also said that visitors "should ...limit road travel at night as far as
    possible, including in Lagos" and that "where feasible....should  avoid
    going out at night in Lagos and follow the security guidance offered by
    employers or hosts".

14.  Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  started  his  findings  in
    paragraph 25 by stating that "I am satisfied having considered all  the
    evidence in the round that requiring  the  [Respondent]  to  return  to
    Nigeria for an unspecified time is not proportionate".   This indicated
    that he had taken other evidence into account. This would have included
    the Respondent's  husband  witness  statement,  in  which  he  said  at
    paragraph 9 that "the situation within Nigeria is presently  dangerous,
    especially for a white European Christian....For Boko Haram  Christians
    are commonly the target of attacks, as  are  any  individuals  seen  to
    represent Western education. As a white Western educated  Christian,  I
    would be a standout target". At paragraph 20 of his decision the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge also explicitly noted that, when  the  Respondent's
    husband was asked by the Home Office Presenting Officer at  the  appeal
    hearing whether he would travel to Nigeria with the Respondent, he said
    that he would not do so. The first reason he gave for not doing so  was
    the risks he would face in Nigeria,  which  was  partly  based  on  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office's advice.

15.  Therefore, looking at the decision as a whole I  find  that  the  Judge
    did not make an error of fact,  which  undermined  his  legal  decision
    making, in paragraph 25 of his decision. The advice went  further  than
    naming the cities and states to which no travel should be undertaken or
    only essential travel should be undertaken and the Judge  was  entitled
    to take this and the Respondent's husband's evidence into account.  The
    Judge also made clear in paragraph 25 that he had reached his  decision
    after considering all of the evidence  before  him,  which  would  have
    included the Travel Advice in its entirety.

16.  The Appellant's second ground of appeal was that  in  paragraph  24  of
    his decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  speculated  on  the
    outcome of  any  application  for  entry  clearance.  The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge had not  engaged  with  the
    Visa Processing Times document but at paragraph 24 of his decision  the
    Judge  explicitly  noted  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting   Officer
    "presented evidence that that visas are dealt with in a maximum  of  60
    days from receipt".

17.  It was clearly open to the Judge  to  consider  whether,  even  if  the
    application were to be considered within  this  timescale,  it  may  be
    refused and the Respondent may have to  appeal.  This  was  a  relevant
    factor to take into account when considering whether,  in the light  of
    the judgment in Chen and the  reasoned  decision  by  the  Respondent's
    husband not to accompany her  to  Nigeria,  their  temporary  separated
    would be disproportionate.  I find that is was not mere speculation.

18.  The narrow nature of the grounds put forward by the Appellant  indicate
    that she was only concerned about the approach taken by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Travel Advice and
    the Visa Processing Times documents. She did not assert that the  Judge
    had not taken into account all other relevant factors or made any other
    errors of law when reaching  his  decision  and  I  can  only  consider
    whether the Judge made a material error of law in the light of  grounds
    placed before me.


Decision

    1. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.
    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith made no material errors of law  and,
       therefore, I uphold his decision to allow  the  Respondent's  appeal
       against the Secretary of State for the Home Department's decision to
       refuse her leave to  remain  and  to  remove  her  from  the  United
       Kingdom.

Signed                                  Date: 25 February 2016

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



