


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14305/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 2nd November 2016                     |On: 3rd February 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Shafqat Ali
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed by MA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  date  of  birth  14th  October
    1975. He appeals with permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ennals) dated 16th March 2016  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against a decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card
    confirming his right  of  residence  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


 2. The Appellant's case before Judge Ennals was that he was in  a  durable
    relationship with his Romanian partner, Ms Lore Paula Alecu. As such he
    was an 'extended family member' as  defined  in  Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ('the Regs')  and
    he asked Judge Ennals to make a finding to that effect.  The  Appellant
    recognised that such a  finding  would  not  automatically  lead  to  a
    residence card being issued, since in accordance with Regulation  17(4)
    that was a matter for the Secretary of State.

 3. Judge Ennals heard "broadly consistent" evidence from the Appellant and
    Ms Alecu to the effect that they had met in January  2015  and  started
    living together in April of that year.   He was not satisfied that such
    cohabitation - at the date of the hearing a period of only 11 months  -
    was sufficient to establish that this was a "durable relationship".  He
    dismissed the appeal accordingly.

 4. The Appellant sought leave to appeal on the grounds that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed for want of reasoning. Permission
    was granted on the 11th August 2016.   Less  than  a  month  later  the
    Upper Tribunal handed down the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).  The panel of two  deputy  high  court  judges
    (Vice President Mr CMG Ockelton and Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb)  held,
    contrary to received opinion, that in fact there was no statutory right
    of appeal against a decision to refuse to grant confirmation of a right
    of residence under Regulation 8.   The  result  of  that  is  that  the
    decision of Judge Ennals must be set aside because it was an  error  of
    law for him to have proceeded to hear the appeal.  The outcome  of  the
    remaking is that the appeal must be dismissed for want of jurisdiction:
    there    is    no     valid     appeal     before     the     Tribunal.






      Decisions


 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 6. There is no valid appeal before the Tribunal to be remade.


 7. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   27th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on the 11th
August 2016


