
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/14193/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 2 October 2014                             On 27 April 2015

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                Sumit Marken
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Kempton promulgated on 9 May 2014 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the decision of the Respondent dated 10 March 2014 to  curtail
      leave to remain and to remove him from the UK pursuant to  section  47
      of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of India born on 8 January  1987.  He  was
      last granted leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 2  migrant  until  14
      September  2016  in  order  to  undertake  specified  employment  with
      ImpelNeo Technology Ltd. However, in the event the Appellant  did  not
      commence  such  employment.  The  potential  employer   informed   the
      Respondent and in the circumstances a decision was  taken  to  curtail
      the Appellant's leave under paragraph 323A(a)(i)(1) of the Immigration
      Rules, and a decision was also taken to remove the Appellant  pursuant
      to section 47 of the 2006 Act.

   3. The Appellant appealed to the  IAC.  In  his  Grounds  of  Appeal  the
      Appellant sought to explain his failure to take up his  employment  by
      reference to  ill-health;  his  Grounds  additionally,  amongst  other
      things, pleaded  human  rights  grounds,  and  also  referred  to  the
      Appellant being in a relationship with an EEA national. The  Appellant
      indicated that he did not wish  to  attend  an  oral  hearing  of  his
      appeal.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal 'on the
      papers'  (i.e.  without  a  hearing)  for  reasons  set  out  in   his
      determination. The Judge essentially accepted that the  Appellant  had
      had good reason for not taking up his employment, but  concluded  that
      in circumstances where he had  not  obtained  a  further  contract  of
      employment curtailment  of  leave  had  been  appropriate.  The  Judge
      declined to engage with the ground in respect of the relationship with
      an EEA national because that had not been the subject  matter  of  the
      application under appeal (decision at  paragraph  10),  and  concluded
      that it was necessary first for the Appellant to make  an  application
      under the EEA regulations. For similar reasons the Judge also declined
      to entertain the Appellant's pleaded human rights grounds.

   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Reeds on 6  August  2014.  In  granting  permission  to
      appeal Judge Reeds found that there was no arguable  error  under  the
      Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  the  curtailment  decision,   but
      considered that the Judge had arguably erred in  failing  to  consider
      the Article 8 and EEA grounds "when they were grounds of appeal raised
      by the appellant in his Section 120 notice and in  the  'statement  of
      additional grounds' and as Section  86(2)  requires  the  Tribunal  to
      determine any matter raised as a ground of appeal".

   6. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  28  August  2014,
      which states in part:

"Whilst the Judge  should  perhaps  not  have  failed  to  engage  with  the
      appellant's Grounds of appeal under article 8 or the EEA regs,  it  is
      difficult to see how those  grounds  could  be  advanced  at  a  paper
      hearing".

It was also noted in the Rule 24 response that the Appellant has since  made
      an application for a residence card under the EEA  regulations,  which
      was refused on 8 July 2014 and in respect of which there was an appeal
      pending (ref IA/29714/2014).



Consideration

   7. For essentially the reasons identified  by  Judge  Reeds  in  granting
      permission to appeal, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was in
      error in failing to engage with and reach a conclusion in  respect  of
      the human rights grounds and EEA  grounds  raised  by  the  Appellant.
      Nonetheless  I  also  accept  there  is  weight  in  the  Respondent's
      submission to the effect that the  Appellant  could  not  likely  have
      succeeded on such grounds on the basis of a 'paper hearing'.

   8. Further, and in any event, so far as the issues in respect of the  EEA
      regulations were concerned, these were shortly to be  the  subject  of
      their own appeal. It served no real purpose to set aside  the  instant
      decision and remit this appeal for rehearing  in  such  circumstances.
      Similarly, as regards any residual Article 8 issues that might  remain
      outstanding after a consideration of EEA grounds, such  matters  could
      most conveniently be  dealt  with  in  the  forthcoming  appeal  under
      reference IA/29714/2014.

   9. In all such circumstances, notwithstanding the error  of  approach  on
      the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, with reference  to  section
      12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunal's,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  I
      determined that it would not be appropriate to set aside the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

  10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of
      law. However, in the very particular  circumstances  of  this  case  I
      decline to exercise the  discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the
      Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, and do not  set  aside  the
      decision. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

  11. The appeal is dismissed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis
