
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/14545/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke          |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th April 2016                     |    On 6th June 2016                  |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                         jodie-ann patrice o'gilvie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra of Counsel instructed by LAK Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. On 17th February 2016  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Appleyard gave permission to  the  respondent  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S  J  Pacey  in  which  he
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds against the decision of  the
    respondent to  refuse  leave  to  remain  applying  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant is a female citizen of Jamaica born on 22nd May 1990 who came
    to the United Kingdom in 2005 with entry clearance as the dependant  of
    a student.

 2. In the grant of permission Designated Judge Appleyard  noted  that  the
    respondent's grounds of application contended that the judge had  erred
    in his approach to the application of Rule 276ADE  and  his  subsequent
    Article 8 analysis was flawed.  In particular the judge had not applied
    the authority of Bossade  (Sections  117A-D  -  interrelationship  with
    Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC) when considering paragraph 276ADE and  the
    test of "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's  re-integration
    into Jamaica.  Additionally the grounds contended that, in  considering
    Article 8 outside the Rules, the public interest  had  not  been  given
    adequate weight.  Designated Judge Appleyard thought all the grounds to
    be arguable.

Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me  Mr  McVeety  confirmed  that  the  respondent
    relied upon the grounds which,  in  greater  detail  than  the  summary
    above, contend that the judge applied too lax a test in relation to the
    existence of very significant obstacles.

 4. The respondent considered that the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  no
    contact with anyone in Jamaica and there was no evidence of property or
    assets there, ws not enough to meet the test,  particularly  since  the
    appellant had spent the majority of her life in Jamaica and  the  judge
    had not explained why Jamaica and its  culture  and  society  would  be
    alien to the appellant even if she had spent a long period of  time  in
    UK and had been settled here.  Further, in relation to the  application
    of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the
    decision did not show that the judge had attached little weight to  the
    appellant's precarious immigration status.  The appellant's  dependency
    upon her mother and having no say in  where  she  lived,  was  arguably
    inadequate to displace the public interest.  The respondent referred to
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests
    of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) on the basis that  those  who
    had their families with them during a period of  study  in  the  United
    Kingdom must do so in the light of  the  expectation  of  return.   The
    respondent also contended that the judge's  proportionality  assessment
    was inadequate, even if the appellant could speak English and  had  not
    been a burden on public funds since arriving here.

 5. In further submissions,  Mr  McVeety  conceded  that  the  words  "very
    significant obstacles" had not been defined in any case  law  although,
    as I comment later,  the  respondent's  IDIs  have  some  guidance  for
    decision makers.

 6. Mr McVeety also submitted that the judge's conclusions in  relation  to
    the obstacles test, particularly those in paragraph 15 of the decision,
    did not show that it had been met.  As to the  application  of  Section
    117B to human rights issues outside the Rules, the judge also  appeared
    to regard the appellant's English language ability and the  absence  of
    any state assistance as weakening the public interest in  removal  when
    in AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal made  it
    clear that an appellant can obtain no positive  right  to  a  grant  of
    leave to remain if able to meet some or all of the factors set  out  in
    Section 117B.

 7. Ms Malhotra addressed me first as to the test in paragraph  276ADE(vi).
    She argued that it was open to the judge to make the  decision  he  did
    based upon the factors which  he  identified.   The  judge  had  looked
    carefully at the appellant's background bearing in mind  that  she  was
    someone who had arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 15 and  was
    now 26, and whose leave to remain as a dependant  continued  after  the
    age of 18.  The appellant had no choice but to join her mother who  had
    indefinite leave to remain and had formed  a  family  life  with  other
    relatives who were British.

 8. Ms Malhotra considered the section 117B analysis to  be  without  error
    as, although the judge referred to  the  appellant's  English  language
    ability and absence of any reliance upon public funds, the remainder of
    the comments in paragraph 19 of the decision showed  that  the  section
    had been applied correctly in assessing the public interest.

 9. Mr McVeety submitted that none of the factors identified by  the  judge
    were compelling.  The appellant  was  an  adult  and  could  return  to
    Jamaica and there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  she  would  be
    destitute or ill there.

Conclusions

10. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision did not show an error on a point of law and
    now give my reasons for that conclusion.

11. In essence, the respondent disagrees with the decision of the judge  on
    the basis of  an  interpretation  of  the  test  of  "very  significant
    obstacles" which, it is argued, is higher  than  that  applied  by  the
    judge.

    There is some guidance on the meaning of the term in  the  respondent's
    IDIs relating to Appendix FM section 1.0(b) which, at section  8.2.3.4,
    states that a very significant obstacle to integration means:

         "Something which would prevent or seriously inhibit  the  applicant
         from integrating into the country of return.  The decision-maker is
         looking for more than obstacles in looking to see whether there are
         'very significant' obstacles, which  is  a  high  threshold.   Very
         significant obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates
         that they would be unable  to  establish  a  private  life  in  the
         country of return, or where establishing  a  private  life  in  the
         country of return  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
         applicant."

     It is also stated that:

         "The fact the applicant may find life difficult or  challenging  in
         the country of return does not mean that they have established that
         there would be very significant obstacles to integration there."

12. However, whilst the respondent's own  guidance  to  decision-makers  in
    IDIs show that the test is clearly a stringent one, the  factors  which
    the judge applied in this case were plainly relevant to  the  decision-
    making process and cannot be  excluded  simply  because  they  are  not
    considered important enough in the respondent's view.  If the judge had
    failed to identify any  significant  features  inhibiting  return  when
    applying the test, then that would have been an error on a point of law
    but that is not the case here.

13. After properly identifying the relevant background to  the  appellant's
    application which showed that, at all material  times,  she  had  valid
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,  the  judge  then  examines  in
    detail her personal circumstances in relation to the issue of return to
    Jamaica.  The judge was entitled to conclude and  point  out  that  the
    appellant had no meaningful connection with Jamaica where there are  no
    relatives with whom she has contact nor are there any family,  property
    or assets there.  The appellant had spent a very  significant  part  of
    her life  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  mother,  has  undertaken
    secondary education here and higher education.  She has  always  relied
    upon her mother for support in all aspects of her  life  including  the
    maintenance of her welfare and standard of living.  In paragraph 15 the
    judge emphasises, with reason, that the appellant  would  be  alone  in
    Jamaica a country which is now alien  to  her.   Thus,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that there would be very significant obstacles to  the
    appellant's  integration  into  Jamaica.   Whilst  the  respondent  may
    disagree with that conclusion it was one which the judge  was  entitled
    to make having identified factors which would seriously inhibit return.



14. However, the decision shows that the judge did  not  leave  the  matter
    there because he made an alternative  decision  on  Article  8  grounds
    outside the Rules applying the guidance of the Court of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  In this respect I am unable to  view  the
    judge's consideration of the public interest,  as  defined  in  Section
    117B, as containing an  error.   The  judge  correctly  approaches  the
    analysis on the basis of the five stage test set out in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  In referring to the appellant's ability to speak English  and
    absence  of  reliance  upon  public  funds,  the   judge   was   merely
    acknowledging the  existence  of  factors  in  the  Section  which  the
    appellant  ought  to  meet.    That   is   clear   from   the   judge's
    acknowledgement, in the same paragraph, that little  weight  should  be
    given to a private life  established  by  a  person  whose  immigration
    status is precarious,  which  he  acknowledges  is  the  case  for  the
    appellant.   It  is  evident  that  the   judge's   analysis   of   the
    proportionality issue does not show an error, the judge being  entitled
    to rely upon the factors already identified in his analysis of  private
    life under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

15. For the reasons I have given, I conclude that the judge was entitled to
    find that the appellant's right to private life on the basis set out in
    paragraph 276ADE is not flawed by error.  To  that  extent,  therefore,
    the judge's alternative finding on Article  8  outside  the  Rules  was
    unnecessary.  However, that aspect of the decision, also, does not show
    a material error on a point of law.



Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show  an  error  on  a
    point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

17. Anonymity was not requested before the First-tier  Tribunal  nor  do  I
    consider it appropriate.





Signed                              Date 6 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
