





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14729/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                         Decision and      |
|                                  |Reasons Promulgated                        |
|On: 9 April 2015                  |                         On 27 April 2015  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Nana Yaa Adu
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, counsel, instructed by Bhattarai and Co
     Immigration Practice

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.


   2. The secretary of state appeals against the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision dated  23
      January  2014  refusing  her  application  under  the   Human   Rights
      Convention. A decision was also made to remove the claimant under s.10
      of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


   3. Mr Sharma on behalf of the claimant submitted  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that the application to which the  appeal  related  had  been
      made prior to the abolition of paragraph 276B of HC395  (the  14  year
      long residence rule). The contention was that she had  accumulated  14
      years' continuous residence. As at the date of her application she had
      not completed 14 years. However, it was submitted that this was not  a
      bar to the appeal being considered under that paragraph  since  it  is
      the date of the Tribunal's decision which is material.


   4. The First-tier Judge was aware  of  a  similar  argument  successfully
      presented to the Upper Tribunal on 30 July 2014 [3]. He  was  informed
      that the Upper Tribunal has not  promulgated  its  determination.  The
      Judge stated that in that appeal, the appellant had not resided in the
      UK for a continuous period of 14 years at the date of application  but
      had done so by the time the secretary of state served the IS 151A. The
      Judge stated that the '.....Upper Tribunal Judge apparently held  that
      time spent after submission of an application  goes  towards  the  '14
      year' rule and that the clock stops once an enforcement  notice,  such
      as IS.51A, is served' [3].


   5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated that it seemed that the  claimant
      had indeed resided in the UK for a continuous period of 14 years.  She
      completed that after submitting her application and by  the  time  the
      IS.151A was served on her [4].


   6. In the circumstances, he remitted the appeal to the secretary of state
      on the basis that the  claimant  was  entitled  to  a  decision  under
      paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules applicable as at the  date  of
      application.


   7. Mr Clarke submitted on behalf of the secretary of state that the Judge
      erred by finding that paragraph 276B applied to this claimant. That is
      because she did not make an application under  the  Immigration  Rules
      prior to the change on 9 July 2012. She had outstanding  human  rights
      'representations' at that stage but had not made an application  under
      the rules.


   8. Accordingly, the transitional provisions applicable at the  date  that
      the rules were brought into effect on 9 July 2012 did not apply as she
      did not have an outstanding application under the rules.


   9. The second ground contended that the finding that  the  appellant  had
      been residing continuously for 14 years in the UK before  the  IS.151A
      was served was "simply wrong."  Mr Clarke set out the chronology.  The
      appellant entered the UK on 20 July 2000. She was served with  the  IS
      151A on 23 January 2014. Accordingly, she had not resided continuously
      for 14 years before the "clock stopping" decision was served.


  10. Mr Sharma made no submissions  to  the  contrary  in  regard  to  that
      ground.


  11. Finally, Mr Clarke submitted that the reference by  the  Judge  to  an
      unreported case which had not been produced at  the  hearing  was  not
      only "surprising" but had not been promulgated yet. It  is  not  clear
      why this played such a fundamental part in the determination.


  12. Mr Sharma produced a skeleton argument at the hearing. With regard  to
      ground 1, he simply referred to the authority of the Court  of  Appeal
      in Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402. He submitted that in  deciding
      which rule applied  with  reference  to  the  transitional  provisions
      within the statements of changes  to  the  Rules,  this  was  entirely
      consistent with the Court of Appeal's recent decision in Singh v  SSHD
      [2015] EWCA Civ 74.


  13. Apart from those submissions however, Mr Sharma  made  no  submissions
      and did not produce any written arguments against the specific grounds
      of appeal as set out above.


     Assessment


  14. I find that the First-tier Judge wrongly applied paragraph 276B.  That
      is because the claimant had not made an application  under  the  Rules
      prior to the change on 9 July 2012.  She  simply  had  an  outstanding
      human rights submission at that stage.


  15. In any event, she had not been residing in the UK for 14 years  having
      entered the UK on 20 July 2000. She was served with the IS 151A on  23
      January 2014. She was accordingly six  months  short  of  meeting  the
      period. The service of the IS.151A "stopped the clock".


  16. Mr Sharma submitted that if that  were  the  conclusion  reached,  the
      decision should be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
      pursuant to s.12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
      2007.


  17. He submitted that there was a human rights (Article  8)  claim  before
      the First-tier Tribunal which had required adjudication.   The  First-
      tier Tribunal did not engage with that ground at all. Accordingly, the
      claimant was deprived of an opportunity of  having  her  human  rights
      claim considered in addition to her claim under the Immigration Rules.




  18.  Mr  Clarke  on  behalf  of  the  secretary  of  state  supported  the
      application of Mr Sharma that the decision should  be  set  aside  and
      that the case should in the circumstances be remitted  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to decide the claimant's appeal based  on  human  rights
      grounds.


  19. I have had regard to the joint  proposals.  In  the  circumstances,  I
      accept that the claimant has  been  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of
      having her human rights claim considered.


  20. Having regard to the Senior President's guidelines, I find that it  is
      in the interests of justice for the case to be  remitted.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal has not considered that claim at all;  moreover,  I  was
      informed that there is an extensive amount of evidence to be adduced.






           Notice of Decision


           Having  found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
involved the making of            an error on a point of law,  I  set  aside
the decision and allow the secretary of                 state's appeal.


           I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  decision  to
made on the  claimant's                 human  rights  claim.  The  case  is
remitted  to  either  Richmond  or  Hatton  Cross,                 whichever
hearing centre can accommodate the appeal sooner.


           No anonymity direction is made.








         Signed                              Date: 24 April 2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




