
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/14800/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 3 October 2016                   |On: 5 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MRS MABEL [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the  decision,  promulgated  on  9  March
         2016, of First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mark
         Davies on 17 August 2016.




 Background

      3.  The  respondent  to  this  appeal  sought  a  residence  card   as
         confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
         basis of being the unmarried partner of [TB], an EEA national.

      4. In refusing the above-mentioned application, the Secretary of State
         noted that the respondent had previously,  unsuccessfully,  applied
         for a residence card during 2011 as the spouse of [JG]. The tenancy
         agreement provided showing  the  respondent  and  [TB]  as  tenants
         overlapped the earlier application which brought the genuineness of
         the relationship into serious doubt.  No  divorce  certificate  had
         been provided to show the previous relationship  had  broken  down.
         The said tenancy agreement  was  considered  to  be  an  unreliable
         document; no weight was placed upon the birth  certificate  showing
         the respondent and [TB] as parents of a child and the  findings  in
         relation to their interviews, it was not accepted that they were in
         a durable relationship.

      5. At the hearing before Judge  Grant,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
         unrepresented. The respondent and  the  EEA  sponsor  attended  the
         hearing and submitted  DNA  evidence  showing  that  the  child  in
         question was theirs. They had  also  had  another  child  and  both
         children had been issued with Spanish  passports.  The  appeal  was
         allowed; the judge accepting that the respondent was in  a  durable
         relationship with the sponsor.

      6. The grounds of application argued that the judge erred in  allowing
         the appeal of  an  extended  family  member  outright  rather  than
         remitting the matter to the Secretary of State. Reliance was placed
         on Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).

      7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

      8. The respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.

      9. At the hearing before me, Ms Ahmed simply argued that the judge had
         no jurisdiction to consider the appeal in view of  in  Sala  (EFMs:
         Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). She also relied on Virk &
         others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  652  at  [23],  as  follows;  "Statutory
         jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement; or by  the
         failure of the parties or the tribunal to be alive to  the  point."
         She confirmed that the Secretary of State  did  not  challenge  the
         judge's findings of fact and suggested that  it  was  open  to  the
         respondent to supply the judge's decision to the Secretary of State
         in support of a further application for a residence card.

     10. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I  announced  that  I  had  no
         jurisdiction to consider this  appeal  owing  to  Sala,  where  the
         following was decided; "There  is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
         against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  not  to  grant  a
         Residence Card to a  person  claiming  to  be  an  Extended  Family
         Member. "

     11. There is no valid appeal before me.

Conclusions

    I have no jurisdiction to consider this appeal.

    No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason to make  such
    a direction.




    Signed:      Date: 4 October 2016


    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


