
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14337/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2016                      |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE hOME dEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               LOVEPREET SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z. Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Al Arayn, Farani-Javid-Taylor Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 11 July 2016, the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 November 2015 was set aside to be
    remade.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent, and to Mr. Singh as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Submissions were made by the Appellant following the direction given in
    the error of law decision.  I set out below my decision with reasons.

Findings and conclusions

General grounds of refusal

 4. The Appellant's application was refused  under  paragraph  322  of  the
    immigration rules, one of the general grounds of refusal.   The  burden
    of proof rests on the Respondent to show that an application should  be
    refused on one of the general grounds.

UK College of Business and Computing

 5. In the notice of decision  the  Respondent  stated  that  the  academic
    transcript from the UK College of  Business  and  Computing  "has  been
    confirmed as false by the issuing authority".  No further details  were
    given.  The Respondent has  provided  a  Document  Verification  Report
    ("DVR").  This states that checks with the issuing  body  confirm  that
    the documents are false.  Attached to the DVR is an email from the Head
    of Administration at  ukcbc.co.uk.   This  states  that  the  Appellant
    studied at the UK College of Business and Computing.  It states that he
    took the subjects mentioned on the transcript.  However, it states that
    the transcript was never issued  by  the  college  and  is  a  work  of
    forgery.  No details are given as to how  the  Head  of  Administration
    knows that it is a forgery,  given  that  he  has  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant studied at the college, and took the  subjects  mentioned  on
    the transcript.

 6. The Respondent has provided a copy of the email sent to UK  College  of
    Business and Computing on 4 March 2015 requesting information.  In that
    email she asked the college four questions, but the  response  from  UK
    College of Business and Computing does not answer these questions.  For
    example, the reply does  not  address  whether  or  not  the  reference
    number, date  of  course,  college  crest,  authorised  signatures  and
    security features match the records of the UK College of  Business  and
    Computing.  Instead the reply just states that it is a forgery, without
    giving any information as to why.

 7. Further, the Respondent has not provided a copy of the transcript which
    was sent to UK College of Business and Computing.  She  has  not  shown
    which document the UK College of Business and  Computing  assert  is  a
    forgery.  I find that she has failed to satisfy the burden of proof  to
    show that the academic transcript submitted by the Appellant was false.

City and Guilds

 8. In the notice of decision  the  Respondent  states  that  the  English-
    language certificates submitted from City and Guilds have been verified
    online.  "We have confirmed that the tests were not sat by yourself  as
    the passport number and date of birth held on City  &  Guilds'  records
    relate to another individual of the same name."

 9. The Respondent provided a DVR  in  relation  to  the  City  and  Guilds
    certificates.  This states that "Although the  certificates  themselves
    are 'genuine' they have been obtained by  deception.   The  transcripts
    are 'FALSE'.".

10. The Respondent has provided an email from  a  member  of  the  customer
    service team at City and Guilds.  This states that City and Guilds have
    records for the Appellant and it  sets  those  records  out.   It  then
    states "Details of the candidate on the certificate  match  details  we
    hold in our certification system".  However, it states that the date of
    birth does not match their records, although it does not  give  details
    as to the date of birth that  they  hold.   It  then  states  that  the
    details displayed on the certificate issued by City  and  Guilds  match
    details in their certification system, except that the date of birth is
    not what they have on file.

11. This email indicates only that the date of birth is not the same on the
    City and Guilds certificate as in their records.  It states in the  DVR
    summary that the issuing body has  confirmed  that  the  documents  are
    false, but this email does not state that the documents  are  false  at
    all.  It states that the details of the candidate match  the  City  and
    Guild records apart from the date of birth.  It does not at  any  point
    state that the certificates are false.

12. As before, the Respondent has not provided  a  copy  of  the  documents
    which were checked by the City and Guilds.  City and  Guilds  have  not
    stated that the certificates are false.  I find that the Respondent has
    failed to show that the certificates provided  by  the  Appellant  were
    obtained through deception.

13. I find that the Respondent has failed  to  show  that  the  application
    should have been refused by reference to paragraph 322(1A).

No valid CAS

14. The Respondent also refused the Appellant's application because the CAS
    submitted with the application was not valid.  She stated in the notice
    of decision that the Tier 4 Sponsor register was checked  on  20  March
    2015 when UK Business Academy was not listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor as  of
    this date.

15. In the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, it states:

         "The refusal asserts that Appellant's Tier 4 Sponsor was not on the
         list on the date of decision.  The Appellant relies on  the  common
         law duty of the Respondent to issue 60 days to  students  who  find
         themselves in such a position."

16. I have no evidence before me that the UK Business Academy  was  on  the
    Tier 4 Sponsor register when the Appellant made his application  on  23
    May 2014.  The application form before me appears to have  been  signed
    on 9 June 2014 by the Appellant and 10 June 2014 by his representative,
    although the submission date on the application cover sheet is given as
    23 May 2014.  But in any event, I have no evidence of the  validity  of
    the CAS on any of those dates.

17. There is a print out of the CAS details  in  the  Respondent's  bundle.
    This states:

         "The CAS has been marked as CANCELLED.  The details  are  displayed
         below.

         **WARNING - The Sponsor's licence is revoked.**"

18. The printout indicates that the CAS was assigned on 23 May 2014 with an
    expiry date of 24 November 2014.  It states that the current CAS status
    date is 13 August 2014, but there is no indication on  the  CAS  as  to
    when the Sponsor's licence was revoked.

19. I have  carefully  considered  all  of  the  documents  on  file.   The
    Appellant has failed to provide any evidence to show that  his  Tier  4
    Sponsor  was  on  the  approved  Sponsor  register  at  the   date   of
    application, and therefore that his  CAS  was  valid  at  the  date  of
    application.  For example, there is no evidence from the  college.   It
    is in circumstances where the CAS was valid at the date of application,
    but became invalid after the date of application and prior to the  date
    of  decision  due  to  action  taken  by  the  Respondent,   that   the
    Respondent's policy allows for a 60 day letter to be issued.

20. I have no evidence before me that the CAS was  valid  at  the  date  of
    application.  I have no evidence before  me  as  to  when  the  Tier  4
    Sponsor licence was revoked.  The Appellant has not addressed  this  in
    the further submissions.  He  has  only  addressed  the  issue  of  the
    provision of false documents.

21.  I  have  found  that  the  Respondent  should  not  have  refused  the
    application under paragraph 322, but I have no evidence before me  that
    the Appellant provided a valid CAS with his application, and  therefore
    no evidence that the Respondent should have  exercised  her  policy  of
    issuing a 60 day letter.  Without  a  valid  CAS  he  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.



Notice of Decision

22. The appeal under the immigration rules is dismissed.


Signed   Date 29 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
