
                      [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14401/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th October 2013                           |On 21st October 2013         |
|Extempore                                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL



                                   Between

                            ALI SABAH ABDULSATTAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Duthie, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe promulgated  on  9th  July  2013  in
    which she dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    to refuse to issue him with a residence card  as  confirmation  of  his
    right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that he and his wife were married in Iraq on  1
    April 2011 and that, as she is  working  here,  he  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card as confirmation f his right of  residence  here  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national who is,  in  the  terms  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA  regulations")  a
    qualified person.  The respondent refused his application on the  basis
    the he was not lawfully married to his wife and that if he were, it was
    a marriage of convenience and so  he  was  not,  for  the  purposes  of
    regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations a family member of an EEA national

 3. The circumstances in which the appellant and his spouse arrived in  the
    United Kingdom are  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter.   There  is  no
    substantive challenge to the facts as set  out  there,  nor  is  it  in
    dispute the appellant's wife is a qualified person, being a citizen  of
    Germany who works part-time

 4. When the matter came  before  the  judge  she  heard  evidence  from  a
    substantial number of witnesses who had been  present  at  the  wedding
    ceremony between the appellant and his wife.  It was  conceded  at  the
    hearing by the Secretary of State that the marriage had taken place but
    the respondent continued to argue that as a result of what had happened
    subsequent to that, in particular the appellant's illegal entry to  the
    United Kingdom, that this marriage was one of convenience and therefore
    they were not married for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.

 5. The  judge refers in her determination to having  heard  the  witnesses
    who gave evidence.  They had been  present at the ceremony on 1st April
    2011 and she accepted that the  appellant  had  been  married  on  that
    occasion.   She  did  however  go  on  to  conclude,  setting  out   in
    considerable detail her reasons for doing so, that this was a  marriage
    of convenience.

 6. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision,
    contending that the judge had misunderstood the evidence and had failed
    to consider the fact that given that a substantial number of people had
    attended a large wedding involving a number of people, several of  whom
    had travelled from across Europe to attend, or that this was occurred a
    substantial time before the appellant had sought to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom, factors which  should  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing
    whether this was  a  marriage  of  convenience  or  not.   It  is  also
    considered in the second grounds of appeal that  the  judge  failed  to
    note oral evidence given by the appellant,  his  wife  and  father  and
    brother-in-law.

 7. Permission to appeal  against  that  decision  was  granted  by  Senior
    Immigration Judge Storey on 23rd August who  stated  "It  was  arguable
    that the judge's findings that the marriage was one of  convenience  is
    difficult to square with his findings at paragraph 26 which  appear  to
    accept a marriage in Iraq in 2011".

 8. When the matter came before me  I  heard  submissions  from  both  Miss
    Asanovic who appeared before the appellant and Mr  Duffy  who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State.  Mr Duffy quite properly conceded that to a
    considerable extent he was in difficulty  given  the  judge's  findings
    regarding the witnesses and the nature of the wedding and when  it  had
    taken place.

 9. I am satisfied that for the reasons set out in the  grounds  of  appeal
    the decision of Judge O'Keeffe did involve the making of  an  error  of
    law in that she failed to take into account all  relevant  evidence  in
    concluding  that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience,   attaching
    impermissible weight to the appellant's illegal entry.

10. For that reason I am satisfied  that  this  was  a  material  error.  I
    therefore proceed remake the decision.

11. Having considered all  the  evidence  before  me  and  considering  the
    evidence which had been accepted by Judge O'Keeffe, which goes  to  the
    fact that there was a large wedding which  took  place  a  considerable
    period before the appellant  attempted  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
    albeit illegally, that in light of that and all  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses  which has not been the subject of any challenge  before  me,
    that I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the  marriage
    is a proper marriage and was not one of convenience.

12. Accordingly and given it is accepted that the appellant's spouse is  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights here and  therefore  a  qualified
    person, I allow the appeal.  I also direct that  in  the  circumstances
    the Secretary of State should issue to the appellant a  residence  card
    as confirmation of his right of residence in this country as the spouse
    of an EEA member exercising treaty rights pursuant to Regulations 7 and
    17 of the EEA Regulations.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the  determination  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations

 3. I direct that the respondent issue the appellant with a residence  card
    confirming his right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national  who
    is a qualified person.



Signed                                  Date:  9 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


