
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14647/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 8th March 2016                               |On 9th May 2016            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                         GUGULETHU STHEMBISO DIAMINI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. On 16th December 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Keane  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal A J Parker in which he allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    leave to remain applying the provisions of Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant is a  male  citizen  of
    South Africa born on 11th June 1984.

 3.  In  granting  permission  Judge  Keane  noted  that  the  grounds   of
    application contended that the judge's human  rights  conclusions  were
    inadequately reasoned being, apparently, limited to  the  statement  in
    paragraph 41  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  remove  the
    appellant was not compatible with the Human Rights Act and "the  appeal
    is proportionate".

 4. Judge Keane granted permission because it was arguably  incumbent  upon
    the judge to arrive at a reasoned  decision  applying  the  five  stage
    tests set out in Razgar [2004] INLR 349 HL.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr  McVeety  emphasised  that  the  judge  had
    quoted relevant case law but the decision did  not  show  that  he  had
    applied any of the principles to findings in the appeal.  Further,  the
    judge had not applied the compelling circumstances test referred to  in
    recent Article 8 jurisprudence such as  that  set  out  in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  Further, whilst the judge had referred to Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended),
    there had been no finding made upon it.   Indeed,  the  judge  did  not
    appear to have identified the limb of Article 8 which was relevant.

 6. As the appellant was unrepresented I explained to him the nature of the
    proceedings and, in particular, the need for me to consider whether  or
    not the judge had, actually, made an error on a point  of  law  in  the
    decision.  The appellant indicated that he understood the arguments but
    emphasised that he was in agreement with the findings of the judge  and
    he had noted that the decision had made reference to the application of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act in paragraphs 34 and 35.

Conclusions

 7. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision showed an error  on  a  point  of  law  and
    should be set aside.  My reasons for that conclusion follow.

 8. Although the decision of the judge makes copious reference to  relevant
    case law, it is not clear that the judge applied the principles to  any
    findings of fact in this case.  The decision refers to the evidence  of
    the appellant and his wife, both written  and  oral,  even  classifying
    some of it as "vague" (paragraph 23) yet both were found to be credible
    witnesses.  However, the judge does not make any initial decision about
    whether or not the Rules in Appendix FM can apply to the  circumstances
    of the parties as he found them to be, particularly bearing in mind the
    existence  of  British  citizen  children.   Further,   no   compelling
    circumstances are identified to establish that Article 8 issues can  be
    considered outside the Rules applying the five stage  Razgar  approach.
    Whilst Section 117B is referred to in terms of its effect and the judge
    identifies two qualifying children for the  purpose  of  that  section,
    there is no consideration of the  requirement  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect a child to leave the United  Kingdom.   All  these
    matters amount to significant errors on points of  law  requiring  that
    the decision should be set aside.

 9. Having regard to the need for the appeal to be heard  again  and  fresh
    findings of fact to be made, I am satisfied that it is  appropriate  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. In doing so find that such
    remittal comes within the  terms  of  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals of 25th September 2012.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows errors on points of  law.
    I set that decision aside  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Anonymity

11. Anonymity was not requested before the First-tier  Tribunal  which  did
    not make a direction.  I do not consider that an anonymity direction is
    appropriate in this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    at the Stoke Hearing Centre.

13. The fresh hearing should not be before Judge A J Parker.

14. No interpreter will be required for  the  hearing  unless  the  parties
    otherwise indicate.

15. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

