
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14826/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd August 2016                     |On 16th August 2016                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Sheraz Ahmed Saleem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ilahi (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal and so Mr Saleem is the appellant and  the  Secretary  of
    State the respondent.  The appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   His
    appeal against a decision to refuse to vary his leave and to remove him
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Graham ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  25th
    January 2016.

2.   The Secretary of State's notice of  decision,  dated  1st  April  2015,
    identified the reason for the adverse decisions as the absence  of  any
    Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  ("CAS")  assigned  to   the
    appellant.  In the absence of a CAS, the appellant failed to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 245ZX(c) of  the  rules.   The  Secretary  of
    State went on to find that she was unable to assess the level of  funds
    the appellant was required to show  and  so  he  could  also  not  meet
    paragraph 245ZX(d).

3.   The reason given by the  judge  for  allowing  the  appeal  related  to
    revocation of the appellant's educational sponsor's  licence,  on  20th
    December 2013.  Having  taken  into  account  the  appellant's  witness
    statement, in which he asserted that he was not told by his college  or
    the Secretary of State about any change in his CAS status and  did  not
    receive a "60 day letter", the judge concluded that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not acted in accordance with her own guidance,  published  in
    the light of Patel (revocation of sponsor  licence  -  fairness)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  The judge  described  this  as  a  procedural
    defect which rendered the decisions under appeal unlawful.  The  appeal
    was allowed "to the limited extent that the matter is referred back  to
    the Home Office for a lawful decision" (paragraph 11 of the decision).

4.   In the Secretary of State's application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the basis of the adverse decisions was withdrawal of
    the appellant's CAS by his sponsor and not any suspension or revocation
    of  the  sponsor's  licence.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on
    precisely this basis, the judge granting permission suggesting that the
    evidence may have been misunderstood.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Ahmad said that  the  judge  may  have  failed  to  appreciate  that
    following revocation of his sponsor's licence in  2013,  the  appellant
    made another application for leave, at a time when his course  provider
    had a fully active licence.  As a matter of  fact,  the  appellant  was
    given a period of  at  least  60  days  in  which  to  make  a  further
    application, following revocation of his sponsor's  licence.   This  he
    did in May 2014 and it was refusal of his application on 1st April 2015
    that gave rise to the present appeal.  As the appellant's  sponsor  had
    withdrawn the CAS from him, his application was bound to fail.

6.   Mr Ilahi accepted that the evidence before the judge, contained in  the
    respondent's bundle, did indeed show that the CAS was withdrawn by  the
    appellant's sponsor and that the earlier revocation  of  the  sponsor's
    licence did  not  relate  directly  to  the  application  made  by  the
    appellant in May 2014 or to refusal of that application in April  2015.
     He accepted that the judge had erred in law in allowing the appeal for
    the reasons given in the decision.

7.   Nonetheless, the appellant was entitled  to  further  time  to  arrange
    another CAS and if the decision were set aside, and if  he  were  given
    further time, he would make another application for leave to remain  as
    a student.  As things currently stood, no college  or  course  provider
    would issue another CAS but if the decision  were  set  aside  and  the
    matter returned to  the  Home  Office,  the  appellant  would  rely  on
    relevant guidance published by the Secretary of State.

8.   There then followed a short discussion on the  appropriate  next  step,
    in light of the agreement between  the  two  representatives  that  the
    decision contained an error of law.  Having looked at the  respondent's
    bundle, it is clear that revocation of the sponsor's  licence  occurred
    in December 2013, several months before the appellant  made  a  further
    application for student leave.  At the time he did so, in May 2014, his
    course provider had a fully active licence.  His CAS was then withdrawn
    by the Bedfordian Business School and that inevitably led to failure in
    his application and the decisions to refuse to vary leave and to remove
    him.

9.   The judge based her decision on a factor which did not  relate  to  the
    decisions giving rise to the appeal and so there was no engagement with
    the  Secretary  of  State's  case.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, containing a material error of law, is set aside and must  be
    remade.

Remaking the Decision

10.  Ms Ahmad handed up a copy of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  EK
    (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.  She said that the  Upper  Tribunal
    could proceed to remake the decision.  It  was  clear  from  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) that the Secretary of State was not under any  duty  to  provide
    another opportunity to the appellant to obtain a CAS.  As he failed  to
    meet the requirements of the rules because he had no  CAS,  his  appeal
    should be dismissed.

11.  Mr Ilahi replied that EK (Ivory  Coast)  related  only  to  common  law
    fairness.  The appellant was able to rely on published guidance on  the
    points-based system, relevant in his case.  Mr Ilahi handed up  a  copy
    of the Tier 4 guidance, the version published in July  2016.   He  said
    that reliance was placed on two parts  of  this  guidance.   First,  at
    paragraph 37, the guidance showed that a  CAS  might  be  withdrawn  or
    cancelled at any time by a person's sponsor  or  by  the  Home  Office.
    Where a CAS was withdrawn or cancelled, the same procedures applied  as
    where a CAS became invalid and these were explained in detail in  Annex
    1 of the guidance.  Turning then to Annex 1, page 78 of  the  guidance,
    Mr Ilahi drew attention to the penultimate paragraph on that page.  The
    appellant relied on this paragraph, which read as follows:

         "If you have applied for leave to remain and the  only  ground  for
         refusing your application is  that  your  CAS  has  become  invalid
         following the revocation of your Tier 4  sponsor's  licence,  where
         your revoked sponsor is an  HEI,  overseas  HEI,  embedded  college
         offering pathway courses or an  independent  school,  you  will  be
         given 60 days to regularise your stay or leave the UK."

12.  Mr Ilahi said  that  there  was  no  information  or  evidence  showing
    whether, as at the date of decision, the appellant's Tier  4  sponsor's
    licence had been revoked, although the sponsor clearly  had  an  active
    licence when he applied for leave in May 2014.

Conclusions

13.  I am grateful to the representatives for  the  succinct  way  in  which
    they put their cases.  As noted above, the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be remade as  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  was  not
    engaged with.  A  decision  letter  dated  1st  April  2015  identifies
    withdrawal of the CAS by the appellant's sponsor as the reason why  the
    application for further leave failed.  The evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and before me, explains the decision very clearly.   The
    document setting out details of the appellant's  student  circumstances
    and those of his sponsor shows beyond  doubt  that  when  he  made  his
    application for leave, his course provider had a fully active  licence.
    The CAS status is clearly described as "withdrawn",  as  at  10th  July
    2014, following assignment of that CAS  some  months  earlier  on  10th
    February that year.  At the head of page 17 of the  document,  in  bold
    type, there are the words "The CAS has been marked as withdrawn."

14.  With great respect to Mr Ilahi, the parts of the Secretary  of  State's
    Tier 4 guidance the appellant relies  upon  do  not  show  that  he  is
    entitled to any further period in which to seek another CAS.  If a  CAS
    is withdrawn, the same procedures apply as where a CAS becomes invalid.
     As Appendix 1 to the guidance  makes  clear,  a  further  60  days  to
    regularise a person's stay will be given where  "the  only  ground  for
    refusing your application is that your CAS has become invalid following
    the revocation of your Tier 4 sponsor's licence".  Appendix 1  contains
    nothing suggesting that 60 days to regularise a person's position  will
    be given where a CAS is withdrawn by his sponsor.

15.  As the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules,
    precisely because his CAS was withdrawn by his sponsor, his application
    for leave was bound to fail.  There is nothing in the rules or the Tier
    4 policy guidance showing that he is entitled to any further period  of
    time in which to seek another CAS.  The appellant's case was put on the
    narrow basis that he could benefit from the Tier 4 policy  guidance  in
    his particular circumstances (and was not put on any other  basis)  but
    that case has not been made out.  It follows that the  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, it is  remade
as follows: appeal dismissed.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed, I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 16/08/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
