
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14794/2013
     IA/16152/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd April 2014                               |On 10th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                             mrs catherine roach
                      Ms brittany shenise tipper roach
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jafar (instructed Liyon Legal Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, mother and daughter, appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with
    permission, against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Andonian) promulgated on 19th November 2013. In that determination  the
    Judge dismissed their appeals against the Secretary of State's decision
    to refuse them leave to remain in the UK outside the Immigration  Rules
    and remove them pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration,  Nationality
    and Asylum Act 2006.

 2. My first task is to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law in its determination and if  so  whether  and  to
    what extent the determination should be set aside.

 3. The grounds upon which permission was  granted  argue  that  the  Judge
    erred  in  his  consideration  of  Article  8  and  in  particular  his
    consideration of the best interests of the second Appellant, who  is  a
    child. It is further asserted that the judge made a material  error  of
    law in his assessment of the  Sponsor's  monthly  income  in  that  his
    findings do not follow the evidence.

 4. I have no hesitation in setting aside  the  determination.  It  was  an
    application to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  The  determination
    comprises two pages. Despite being an oral hearing  with  both  parties
    represented the judge does not  engage  with  the  claim  made  by  the
    Appellants, does not engage with  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  or
    appendix FM. It is not clear who the judge  heard  evidence  from.  The
    determination is unsustainable and it is set aside in its entirety.

 5. Given the serious flaws in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  I
    proceeded to rehear the evidence. There was no  application  by  either
    party to submit additional evidence and they therefore relied upon  the
    original Respondent's and Appellant's bundles provided for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.

 6. The circumstances of this appeal are that the  Appellants,  mother  and
    daughter, are citizens of Antigua and Barbuda. The first Appellant  was
    born on 13th March 1972 and the second Appellant on 14th November 1998.



 7. The first Appellant married Joseph Samuel Roach  in  Antigua  in  1993,
    where they were both resident. The second Appellant was born there. The
    couple also have  an  older  son,  also  born  in  Antigua.  The  first
    Appellant claims that the family lived in accommodation  provided  free
    of charge by the local  church.  Her  husband  is  a  British  citizen,
    obtaining his British citizenship in 2004. He travelled to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010. All three of his siblings live in the  UK  with  their
    families. His claim is that he came to the UK  so  as  to  be  able  to
    better provide for his family and he has been working in the  UK  since
    he arrived.

 8. In July 2012 the Appellants, together with the older son,  entered  the
    UK as visitors. In December 2012 all three applied for  settlement.  On
    11th April 2013 the Appellants' applications were refused and  on  19th
    September 2013 the son's application  was  refused  with  no  right  of
    appeal. He has not challenged that decision by way of judicial  review.
    He is therefore in the UK without leave and thus liable to removal.

 9. The application and appeals are argued on Article 8 grounds alone.

10. I heard evidence from  the  first  Appellant.  She  was  asked  by  her
    representative what the effect of refusal would be on her daughter, the
    second Appellant. She said that since her daughter had been a baby  her
    father had put her to bed. When he left for  the  UK  she  cried  every
    night and her school grades  went down. She had no appetite. When asked
    why, if the effect upon her daughter was so  catastrophic  her  husband
    did not return, she said it was because he wanted a better life.

11. She said that when she came to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  with  her  two
    children she had paid return fares for all three of them but was unable
    to provide evidence of that.

12. Her evidence as to when the decision was made to stay  in  the  UK  was
    vague. She said that initially they had  intended  to  stay  for  three
    months. When she was asked if she had intended to return to,  what  was
    now suggested were impoverished circumstances in Antigua, she said that
    the circumstances in Antigua were not impoverished. She said that  when
    her husband came to the UK in 2010 when her daughter was 12, she  cried
    every day and she realised, when the family was  reunited  in  the  UK,
    that separation would be hard.

13. She said that her daughter had started school in the  UK  in  September
    2012 while still here on a visit visa.  She was vague  about  who,  how
    and when the school was organised but did say that t  was  her  husband
    who arranged it with the school.

14. She said that her husband had been a carpenter in Antigua and she  said
    that her daughter had no medical or developmental difficulties.

15. I then heard from the first Appellant's husband.

16. He was asked what he would do if the appeal is rejected. He said it was
    hard because there was no property in Antigua as the family  had  lived
    in a church building and that he was living in the UK now. When pressed
    he confirmed that he would stay in the UK if his family were  returned.
    He was asked how that would affect his daughter and  he  said  that  he
    knew for a fact that it would affect her a lot.

17. He was asked about the accommodation  in  Antigua  and  its  not  being
    available any longer and he claimed that someone else is  living  there
    now. He said he could not remember what his wife had put  in  her  visa
    application form with regard to her accommodation and settled status in
    Antigua.

18. He said that his daughter had started school in the UK in September  of
    2012. He confirmed that he and his wife had both  been  to  visit  Wood
    Green Council about his daughter enrolling in  school.  They  did  that
    shortly after they had arrived.

19. He said that the family had intended to spend six months in the UK.  He
    was unable to offer a credible explanation for why, if his daughter was
    here on holiday, he enrolled her in school.  He later  admitted  having
    done so to increase her chances of remaining.

20. In his submissions Mr Jafar argued that this was a genuine  application
    and a genuine family. They had lived together  in  Antigua  until  2010
    when Mr Roach came to the UK. For the first 12 years of  her  life  the
    second Appellant had had her father with her. The situation in  Antigua
    was such that he decided to come to the UK for the sake of his  family;
    to make a better life for them and to provide for them. They no  longer
    have access to accommodation in Antigua. I was asked to take note  that
    this was a close-knit family that was deeply affected by his  departure
    from  Antigua.  He  argued  that  there  were  exceptional   compelling
    circumstances that should lead me to  allow  this  appeal.  The  father
    cannot provide for his family in Antigua but he does  support  them  in
    the UK. At this juncture I asked about the accommodation the UK and was
    told that the family of four lives in one room rented  from  a  private
    landlord.

21. The Appellants fall a long way short of meeting the Immigration  Rules,
    not just because they came as visitors. They also fail the  maintenance
    requirements because the sponsoring husband/father  is  in  receipt  of
    benefits. They also fail on the basis  of  accommodation  in  that  the
    entire family (mother, father,  adult  son  and  15-year-old  daughter)
    share one room.

22. So far as the exceptions contained in Ex.1 are concerned  they  do  not
    assist.

23. It was accepted by Mr Jafar that the family  do  not  come  within  the
    Immigration Rules.

24. In so far as considering the appeal under the ECHR is concerned I  bear
    in mind Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  I  am  also  of  course
    aware of the duty to consider the best interests  of  any  child  as  a
    primary consideration.

25. Contrary to the submissions by Mr Jafar I find  no  compelling  reasons
    why this appeal should be allowed on Article  8  grounds.  This  family
    have quite clearly sought  to  circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules  for
    settlement in the UK. Having  managed  to  obtain  entry  clearance  as
    visitors  they  then  sought  to  remain  outside  the  Rules.  It   is
    significant that in  granting  the  visit  visas  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer must have been  satisfied  that  the  two  Appellants  and  the
    son/brother were settled and secure in Antigua with a  home  to  return
    to; otherwise he  would  not  have  granted  them  visas.  They  either
    deceived the Entry Clearance Officer as to the circumstances in Antigua
    or they are trying to deceive me.

26. It is quite clear that it was always the family's intention  that  they
    should remain in  the  UK.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  contradictory
    evidence about the proposed length of stay (three months  according  to
    the first Appellant; six months according to her husband). It  is  also
    evidenced by the fact that almost immediately  upon  arrival  enquiries
    were made to enrol the second Appellant in school.

27. It is clear that the reason the family have sought  to  circumvent  the
    Immigration Rules in this case is because they are well aware that they
    fall a long way short of meeting the requirements for settlement  as  a
    wife and child.

28. The best interests of the child in this case are, I find to be returned
    to the country of her nationality where she has lived for the first  13
    years of her life with her mother. Her older brother also has to either
    leave or be removed to Antigua and  she  will  therefore  be  with  the
    family that she has grown up with.

29. I attach no weight to the claims of the catastrophic effects  upon  the
    daughter of separation from her father. Her  father  made  a  conscious
    decision to leave Antigua and his family to settle  in  the  UK  for  a
    better life. Despite what they describe as the  dreadful  effects  upon
    the daughter he chose not to return and indeed  confirmed  to  me  that
    notwithstanding the effect upon his daughter he would remain in the  UK
    if they are to leave. It is strange that the Tribunal  is  required  to
    consider the best interests of the child  as  a  primary  consideration
    when the child's parent does not. Any harm done to the  child  in  this
    case is a direct result of the actions of her family  and  not  by  the
    actions of the Secretary of State. This is a  thoroughly  unmeritorious
    application.

30. The appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 9th April 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
