
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14179/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2016                             |On 6 October 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  GRACE [K]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ansah, Hammond Lloyd Legal


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on 7  July  1991,  as  the
      appellant herein. She applied for a residence card as confirmation  of
      the right of residence as the family member of an  EEA  national.  Her
      claimed spouse is Belgian.

   2. The parties went through a proxy marriage and the Secretary  of  State
      did  not  consider  that  the  marriage  by  proxy  was  conducted  in
      accordance with the laws of Ghana. She  further  considered  that  the
      parties had not established they were in a  durable  relationship  and
      refused the application on 24 March 2015.

   3. The appellant appealed and her appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on 6 April 2016. Having helpfully set out regulations 7 and 8  of  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  and  directed
      himself by reference to TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]
      UKUT 00316 (IAC) and Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT
      00024 (IAC) he records that the Presenting Officer conceded  that  the
      appellant's  partner  was  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom. For her part, the appellant's  representative  conceded  that
      regulation 7 could not be satisfied  as  she  could  not  provide  any
      details regarding whether proxy marriages were recognised in  Belgium.
      It was accordingly agreed that the appeal would proceed  by  reference
      to the appellant's claim as an extended family member under regulation
      8.

   4. The judge having had the benefit of hearing  oral  evidence  from  the
      couple considered their testimony to be credible and  noted  that  the
      appellant was expecting a child, the estimated day of  delivery  being
      31 May 2016. The judge allowed the appeal.

   5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal and permission
      was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on  7  September  2016  on  the
      basis that the judge had erred in allowing the appeal outright in  the
      light of Ihemedu (OFMS - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT.  The  Secretary
      of State argued that the matter should have been left to the Secretary
      of State to exercise discretion under regulation 17(4).

   6. At the hearing reference was made to a recent decision of the Tribunal
      chaired by the Vice President - Sala (EFMs: Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]
      UKUT 00411 (IAC) - in which the Tribunal had decided that there was no
      right of appeal against the decision to refuse a residence card as  an
      extended family member.

   7. Mr Bramble argued that the judge had been in  error  in  allowing  the
      appeal outright and in the light of Sala there was no right of  appeal
      against the respondent's decision. Among the appellant's options would
      be to make a fresh application.

   8. Mr Ansah agreed with Mr Bramble's submissions.  The  judge's  findings
      had however been open to him and it was clear in the light of the fact
      that the couple had a child that  the  relationship  was  durable.  He
      accepted that there was no jurisdiction,  however,  in  the  light  of
      Sala.

   9. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  It  does
      appear that the decision in Sala establishes that the Tribunal had  no
      jurisdiction to entertain this purported appeal. I heard  no  argument
      that Salah should not be followed and I apply it. As  Mr  Ansah  notes
      favourable findings were  made  in  respect  of  the  couple  and  the
      respondent had not sought to go behind these in the grounds of appeal.
      Moreover the couple had a child who they brought to the hearing before
      me. Mr Bramble suggested one option was to make  a  fresh  application
      and that it of course a matter for the representatives to  explore  no
      doubt among other options.




      Decision

      The First-tier Judge had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal  in  this
      case.

      Accordingly I re-make the decision:

           Appeal dismissed for want of jurisdiction.




      Anonymity Direction.

      The First-tier Judge made no Anonymity Order and I make none.




      Fee Award

      The judge made no fee award and I make none.




Signed

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal                      5 October 2016







