

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14515/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th March 2014                            |On 21st March 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           GILLIAN AKUFFO KISSIEDU
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms P Soranki, counsel, instructed by the Sethi
Partnership

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) appeals a decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal which allowed an appeal on Article 8 grounds  against  a
      decision by the respondent (hereafter the claimant) refusing to  grant
      her indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a person  present  and
      settled in the UK.


   2. It was accepted by both parties that when she  applied,  the  claimant
      could not meet the requirements of the Rules;  further,  she  had  not
      taken and passed the English Language test requirement by the date  of
      the decision or the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal
      had been allowed on Article 8 grounds. Permission to appeal  had  been
      granted on the basis that it was arguable that the  claimant  had  not
      demonstrated any  insurmountable  obstacles  that  would  prevent  her
      continuing her family  life  outside  the  UK  and  that  the  judge's
      reliance on Razgar and Huang was an  error  of  law;  that  the  judge
      should have referred to Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and  Nagre
      [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

   3. It is a little difficult to understand the basis on  which  permission
      to appeal was granted: the grounds did not submit that it was an error
      of law for the First-tier Tribunal to rely upon Razgar and  Huang  and
      nor did they seek to argue that the claimant had not demonstrated  any
      insurmountable obstacles. The grounds take issue with  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on the basis that the Immigration Rules  provide  a  complete
      code that forms the starting point for any Article  8  assessment  and
      that in effect any specifically separate Article 8  assessment  should
      only be carried  out  when  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
      recognised by the Rules. Furthermore that the judge had not identified
      exceptional circumstances within the  meaning  of  Gulshan  and  Nagre
      namely those where  refusal  would  lead  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
      outcome. The SSHD submits that it would not be unreasonably  harsh  to
      require  the  couple  to  sell  their  home   and   seek   alternative
      accommodation whilst the claimant awaits entry clearance.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge clearly set out the evidence before  him
      with regard to the previous grant of entry clearance as a spouse,  the
      change in  Immigration  Rules  between  date  of  entry  and  date  of
      application for variation and that the only reason that  the  claimant
      did not succeed in her application under the Rules was because of  the
      failure to meet the language test. He accepted

   a.  the claimant's account that she had not been aware  of  the  language
      test requirement until shortly before she submitted her application;
   b. that she had submitted her passport to the SSHD with  her  application
      as required;
   c. she  had  explained  the  position  to  the  SSHD  in  her  letter  of
      application;
   d. she had requested the return of her passport to enable her to register
      and take the language test;
   e. that the respondent had failed to return the passport as requested and
      had then sent a copy of her husband's passport;
   f. that she has commenced a nursing course which includes work;
   g. that she and her husband have bought a house together;
   h. that if she were required to return to Ghana they would have  to  sell
      the house because her husband's sole income would be  insufficient  to
      meet the mortgage repayments;
   i. that it would be unreasonable to require her husband to  re-settle  in
      Ghana as a 56 year old man who has lived in the UK for some 25 years;
   j. that the couple have worked for their home together  since  they  were
      living together and married;
   k. that their marriage is genuine and subsisting.


   5. The judge  found  that  the  claimant  would  "undoubtedly"  pass  the
      language test and that the "whole situation could have been avoided by
      the [SSHD] permitting the [claimant] to  undertake  her  test  shortly
      after her application...". He carefully set out the  factors  for  and
      against the claimant. He carefully  weighed  the  public  interest  in
      requiring the claimant to leave the UK to apply for entry clearance to
      return as a spouse.


   6. Mr Walker acknowledged the strength and force of the  claimant's  case
      and referred to the length of time the claimant and her  husband  have
      been in the UK, that she has been lawfully in the  UK  throughout  her
      stay; that she was granted entry as a spouse; that there is employment
      and that there has been error by the SSHD in  failing  to  return  the
      passport as requested on a number of occasions. He stated  that  other
      than relying upon the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  he  had
      nothing further to add.

   7. We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge carefully analysed
      the evidence before him and reached a decision that  was  well  within
      the range of permissible decisions. He did not approach this appeal as
      a "near miss" but considered the evidence as  a  whole  and  concluded
      that although the claimant did not meet the requirements of the  rules
      the decision to refuse  leave  to  remain  was  disproportionate  when
      considered in the context of the public interest.

   8. We have no hesitation in finding that there is no error of law in  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision and dismiss the appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     We do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands namely  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision of the SSHD to refuse her leave  to  remain
    is allowed.



                                    Date 18th March 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
