

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14160/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2016                            |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         NIKHILKUMAR ASHOKBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Lourdes, Counsel.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of India born on 17 March 1980,  as  the
      appellant herein. On 13 March 2015 the Secretary of State  refused  to
      grant the appellant further leave to remain. The decision was based on
      the Secretary of State's contention that the appellant  did  not  meet
      the suitability requirements  under  Appendix  FM-LTR.2.2.(a)  in  the
      light of confirmation by Educational Testing Services (ETS)  that  the
      appellant's test scores in an English language test undertaken  on  16
      May 2012 had been obtained through deception on the basis that a proxy
      test taker had been used. The scores were accordingly cancelled.   The
      finding that  the  appellant  had  practised  deception  coloured  the
      respondent's decision  throughout  including  the  assessment  of  the
      appellant's case  outside  the  rules  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
      circumstances.

   2. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on 15 February 2016 when the appellant was represented as he is before
      me by Mr Lourdes  but  there  was  no  appearance  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State.

   3. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his wife  and  it
      was submitted that the parties satisfied the relevant requirements  of
      the immigration rules. The appellant's wife was pregnant.

   4. The judge was referred to Shahbaz Ali v The Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2014] EWHC 3967 (Admin) and in  particular  what  was
      set out at paragraph 21 of  the  judgement  on  the  question  of  the
      respondent's guidance. The judge noted that Immigration officers had a
      discretion in the use of enforcement powers and  where  a  person  was
      said to have obtained leave by  deception  the  guidance  provided  at
      paragraph 50.12:

           "... The evidence of deception should be clear  and  unambiguous
           in order to initiate action under section  10.  Where  possible,
           original  documentary  evidence,  admissions  under  caution  or
           statements from two or more witnesses should be  obtained  which
           substantiate that an offence has been committed before authority
           is given to initiate action under section 10 of  the  1999  Act.
           The deception must be material - in other words, had the officer
           known the truth, the  leave  would  not  have  been  given.  The
           evidence must always prove to a high degree of probability  that
           deception had been used to gain the leave,  whether  or  not  an
           admission of deception is made. The onus - as  always  in  these
           situations - is on the officer making the assertion to prove his
           case"

   5. The judge noted that the appellant's test score  had  previously  been
      accepted by the respondent and he had passed a subsequent test  on  26
      June 2014. She considered that the issue was  important  as  it  would
      potentially  jeopardise  future  applications.  There   would   be   a
      "draconian" effect on his family life. The judge noted that there  was
      a letter from the college to confirm that the appellant had undertaken
      the test on 16 May 2012 although there was no explanation  as  to  why
      the college should have issued such a letter.

   6. However the judge concluded that there was no Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer present at the hearing and there was no  evidence  before  her
      other than that which had been served on the appellant in  the  bundle
      prepared for the appeal. She found the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
      discharged the evidential burden on her and  that  the  allegation  of
      deception had not been made out.

   7. Accordingly the judge allowed the appeal.

   8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal and permission
      was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 22 August 2016 on the  basis
      that it was the Secretary of State's contention that the relevant  ETS
      evidence had been served on the First-tier Tribunal by fax.

   9. At the hearing before me, however, Mr Bramble very  properly  conceded
      that he could not provide a copy of the fax that  had  allegedly  been
      sent according to the CID notes. The grounds had  been  founded  on  a
      claimed procedural error. If there was nothing on the  file  he  could
      not take the point further.

  10. I gave Mr Bramble the opportunity to examine the file without success.
      In the premises he accepted that the First-tier Judge was entitled  to
      conclude that the Secretary of State was unable to prove her case. The
      grounds were not made out and the appeal should accordingly  stand  as
      allowed.

  11. The approach of Mr Bramble was characteristically fair and correct.  I
      did not need to trouble counsel in the premises.

  12. The First-tier Judge was properly entitled to find that deception  had
      not been established on the material before her. Her decision to allow
      the appeal was accordingly open to her.

      Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Judge was not materially flawed in law.


      The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


      The decision of the First-tier Judge to allow the appeal stands.

      Anonymity Direction.

      The First-tier Judge made no Anonymity Order and I make none.


      Fee Award


      The judge made a fee award in the full sum which stands.


Signed                                       Date: 5 October 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

