

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14460/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27 July 2016                               |On 28 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                          LILIAN VARGAS K DE PAULA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Hassan, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The  appellant  appealed,  alongside  her  husband  and  young  child,
    against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue a  residence  card
    recognising a right of residence as dependent family members of an  EEA
    national.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  J.  Robertson  ("the  judge")  allowed  the
    appeals in a decision promulgated on 21 December 2015. The judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant's mother-in-law and her partner as well  as
    the appellant and her husband. Although the judge recognised  that  the
    requirements to show dependency were  not  entirely  made  out  on  the
    documentary  evidence  produced  in  support  of  the  appeal  she  was
    satisfied that the witnesses were largely credible and that  she  could
    rely on their  evidence.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    husband and child satisfied the requirements of regulation  7(1)(b)  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations 2006")  as  dependent  direct  descendants.  She  was  also
    satisfied that the appellant had been dependent  on  the  EEA  national
    sponsor while she was living in Brazil and continued  to  be  dependent
    upon her in the UK as well as being a member of her household.

4.    The respondent appealed against the decision on the  ground  that  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for her findings in view  of  the
    lack of documentary evidence  to  support  the  appellants'  claims  of
    dependency.

5.    In granting permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicholson considered that it was arguable that the judge
    may not have given adequate reasons for finding that the appellant  was
    dependent on the EEA national sponsor to meet her essential needs while
    living in Brazil. He refused permission in relation to the  application
    to appeal in the cases of her husband and child.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

7.    At the hearing Mr Tufan confirmed that  the  appellant's  husband  and
    child would now be issued with residence cards and that the only  issue
    was whether the Secretary of State should exercise discretion.

8.    I am satisfied that  the  decision  does  not  disclose  any  material
    errors of law. The judge heard evidence from a number of witnesses  and
    will have formed a good picture of the family circumstances  from  that
    evidence. The evidence was that the appellant's husband came to the  UK
    in 2013 leaving his wife in Brazil with their young child. During  that
    period she was not working and was reliant on remittances from the  EEA
    national sponsor in the UK. The judge's finding at paragraph 17 of  the
    decision makes clear that she took the correct legal  approach  to  the
    assessment relating to extended family members under  regulation  8.  I
    conclude that it was open to the judge who heard the evidence  to  find
    that the requirements were satisfied.

9.    There is nothing in the decision to suggest that the judge  sought  to
    fetter the discretion of the respondent to issue a residence card to an
    extended family member under regulation  17.  The  appeal  was  allowed
    without any direction for a residence card to be issued.

10.   I conclude that the decision does not involve the making of  an  error
    on a point of law. Whether the respondent will exercise  discretion  to
    issue a residence card to the appellant alongside her husband and young
    child is a matter for her to decide.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law


Signed   [pic]   Date  27 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








