
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14880/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                ARNEX IMOEBE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms D. Revill, Counsel instructed by Anthony
Oguwfeibo & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1984. He is appealing
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, promulgated  on  27  April
         2015, to dismiss his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
         refuse him leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.

      2. The appellant first entered the UK on 14 October 2009 as a  Tier  4
         General Migrant with leave until 24 January 2011. Thereafter  leave
         to remain was granted until 2 November 2011 and, as  a  Post  Study
         migrant, until 29 November 2013. On 30 October 2013 he applied  for
         further leave as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur. This  was  refused  by  the
         respondent on 12 March 2014 on the basis that the appellant did not
         satisfy the requirements in Paragraph 245DD(h) of  the  Immigration
         Rules when assessed  in  accordance  with  the  factors  listed  in
         paragraph 245DD(i).

      3. The appellant appealed and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge M. Eldridge ("the judge"). The judge concluded  that
         he  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
         Paragraph 245DD. In so doing, he made the following findings:

          a. He was not satisfied that  the  funds  said  to  be  available
             belonged to the appellant.

          b. He did not find the appellant to be realistic or credible with
             respect to his business plan.

          c. The judge considered the appellant's research, both in respect
             of the market and potential customer base, to not be viable or
             meaningful.

      4. At the hearing, additional evidence was handed to the judge but  he
         declined to consider it on the basis that new evidence may  not  be
         adduced before the  Tribunal  in  respect  of  non  points  scoring
         aspects as well as for the acquisition of points under section  85A
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  ("the  2002  Act").
         The judge referred  to  and  relied  on  Ahmed  and  Another  (PBS:
         admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC).

      5. The grounds of appeal submit that:

          a. The judge erred by not admitting new evidence produced at  the
             Hearing, as under subsection 85A(4)(c) of the  2002  Act,  the
             restriction on new evidence  does  not  apply  where  the  new
             evidence is adduced to show that  a  document  is  genuine  or
             valid.

          b. The judge erred by failing to have regard to material evidence
             in the form two invoices and a contract which were relevant to
             the genuineness of the business.

          c. The judge conflated the question of the appellant's intentions
             with that of whether the business would be successful.

      6. I heard submissions from Ms  Revill  and  Mr  Tufan  on  the  three
         grounds and I now consider each in turn.

    Ground 1: applicability of subsection 85A(4)(c) of the 2002 Act

      7. Section 85A of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         (1)  This section sets out  the  exceptions  mentioned  in  section
         85(5).

         (2)  Exception 1 is that in relation to  an  appeal  under  section
         82(1) against an  immigration  decision  of  a  kind  specified  in
         section  82(2)(b)  or  (c)  the  Tribunal  may  consider  only  the
         circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.

         (3)  Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-

             (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of  a  kind
             specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),

             (b)  the immigration decision concerned an  application  of  a
             kind identified  in  immigration  rules  as  requiring  to  be
             considered under a "Points Based System", and

             (c)  the appeal relies wholly or partly on  grounds  specified
             in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

         (4)  Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
         adduced by the appellant only if it-

             (a)  was submitted in support of, and at the time  of  making,
             the application to which the immigration decision related,

             (b)  relates to the appeal in so far as it relies  on  grounds
             other than those specified in subsection (3)(c),

             (c)  is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or  valid,
             or

             (d)  is adduced in connection with the  Secretary  of  State's
             reliance  on  a  discretion  under   immigration   rules,   or
             compliance with a requirement of immigration rules, to  refuse
             an application on grounds not related to  the  acquisition  of
             "points" under the "Points Based System

      8. The new evidence adduced by the  appellant,  and  which  the  judge
         declined to consider on the basis of Section 85A,  comprised  of  a
         report from Companies  House,  advertising  material  and  evidence
         pertaining to a business in Nigeria. Ms Revill argued that this new
         evidence fell  within  the  exception  at  sub-paragraph  85A(4)(c)
         because it was adduced to  proved  that  documents  were  valid  or
         genuine. She submitted that the judge erred because  he  failed  to
         recognise this.

      9. Mr Tufan, in response, referred to the Court of Appeal judgement in
         Olatunde [2015] EWCA Civ 670. Olatunde,  which,  like  the  present
         case, concerned an application under Rule 245DD for leave to remain
         as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur, made clear  that  the  Tribunal  was  not
         entitled  to  take  into  account  documents  which  had  not  been
         submitted at the time the application was made. A similar point  is
         made in Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible  evidence)  [2014]  UKUT
         00365 (IAC). Mr Tufan argued that these cases are determinative  of
         the issue. Ms Revill countered that  Olatunde  and  Ahmed  are  not
         relevant as they do not address  the  exception  in  sub  paragraph
         4(c).

     10. The judge stated  that  he  could  not  consider  post  application
         evidence under 85A(4)(c) for the reasons given in  Ahmed.  I  agree
         with Ms Revill  that  this  is  misconceived.  Ahmed  and  Olatunde
         concerned the prohibition on admission of new evidence under 85A(4)
         but not the applicability of subsection 4(c),  which  arises  where
         new evidence is adduced for  the  specific  purpose  of  proving  a
         document is genuine or valid. The judge, therefore,  has  erred  by
         failing to acknowledge that if the  new  evidence  was  adduced  to
         prove that  one  or  more  of  the  documents  submitted  with  the
         application were genuine, it should be admitted.

     11. However, having considered the new evidence, I do  not  accept  the
         contention that it  was  adduced  to  prove  other  documents  were
         genuine. The new evidence stands alone as evidence  in  support  of
         the appellant's case and only on the most artificial and  stretched
         of interpretations can it be characterised otherwise.  Accordingly,
         although the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  properly  address  the
         appellant's argument about sub-paragraph 4(c), the  error  was  not
         material as the documents in question could not  in  any  event  be
         said to be fall within the exception under that sub-paragraph.

    Ground 2: failure to have regard to material evidence in the form of  a
    contract and invoices

     12. Ms Revill argued that the judge omitted to give  consideration  to,
         and weigh in the balance when assessing the appellant's appeal, key
         evidence supportive of the appellant's case.   She  submitted  that
         the judge's failure to even make  a  finding  in  respect  to  this
         evidence indicates that no regard was paid to it and the judge  had
         failed to resolve  a  conflict  in  the  evidence  as  required  by
         Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC).

     13. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge's  findings  were  based  on  the
         evidence and,  having  given  consideration  to  the  relevant  and
         material evidence before him, the judge reached a decision that was
         consistent with the evidence.

     14. I do not accept Ms Revill's argument  that  material  evidence  has
         been overlooked. The relevant question for the  judge  was  whether
         the appellant satisfied Rule  245DD(h),  taking  into  account  the
         factors listed in Rule 245DD(i).  It  is  clear  from  the  judge's
         decision that he has considered the evidence, as a whole, with  the
         requirements of these provisions in mind. Although  the  judge  did
         not  refer  specifically  to  certain  evidence,  specifically  the
         contract and invoices, that does not mean they were overlooked. The
         judge stated at paragraph [9] that he had "taken full  account"  of
         the documents provided and I am satisfied, based on a consideration
         of the decision as a whole, that this is what he did.

    Ground 3: conflating intentions with likelihood of success

     15. Ms Revill submitted that the judge improperly  considered  evidence
         from the perspective of how the appellant will succeed in running a
         business rather than limiting himself to the  question  of  whether
         the appellant's intentions  were  genuine.  Mr  Tufan  argued  that
         intention and ability go hand in hand and the judge's findings were
         open to him. This issues was addressed in Olatunde, which states at
         paragraph [24]:

             "Although paragraph 245DD(h) requires an applicant to  satisfy
             the Secretary of State only that he genuinely intends  and  is
             able to establish the relevant business, the factors which the
             Secretary of State is  entitled  to  take  into  account  when
             deciding whether that requirement is met are set out  in  sub-
             paragraph (i). They include the viability of  the  applicant's
             business plans, presumably because it is thought that  if  the
             plans are not viable, it is less  likely  that  the  applicant
             really intends to put them into effect. In the light  of  this
             provision, it is clear that viability is one of  a  number  of
             factors that may be  relevant  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision."

     16. The judge has addressed the issues required by Rule  245DD(h)  and,
         as part of the consideration, formed a view on the viability of the
         appellant's business. That  approach  is  in  accordance  with  the
         requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  is  consistent  with
         Olatunde.  This  ground  of  appeal  amounts  to  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the judge's findings and I am satisfied  that  it
         does not identify an error of law.

Notice of Decision

     17. The appeal is dismissed.

     18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.

     19. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date: 9 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
