
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14940/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2016                 |On 6th January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                Shakirat [I]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Armstrong, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  remain
    on 24th March 2015.  She is a citizen of Nigeria who was born  on  16th
    November 1964.  She was required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands  ("the
    Judge") following a hearing on 14th March 2016. The basis of her  claim
    was that she had two British children living here namely Temitope,  who
    at the date of hearing was nearly 22 having been  born  on  24th  April
    1994, and Arike, who at the date of the hearing was  nearly  15  having
    been born on 17th April 2001.

The Grant of Permission

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted permission to appeal  (20th
    September 2016).  He said that it is arguable that the  Judge  made  no
    specific finding as to whether the Appellant enjoyed a family life with
    Arike, or that if there was a family life, whether  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    were met.

 3. He did not refuse permission on the other  grounds,  which  in  essence
    were that there was no finding as to why removal of the Appellant would
    not engage the Article 8 rights Temitope, the elder daughter, had.  The
    Judge wrongly determined the best interests' assessment of Arike.   The
    Judge  did  not  determine  correctly  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    Appellant's partner given his health problems and lack of accommodation
    in Nigeria, and the insurmountable obstacles that would flow  from  her
    being required to leave in relation to that relationship.

Respondent's Position

 4. In the Rule 24 notice (6th November 2016) the Respondent asserted  that
    the Judge directed himself appropriately.  It was for the Appellant  to
    demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that she had a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship  with  Arike  but  the  Judge  clearly
    rejects the evidence of there being a close relationship as  Arike  had
    been abandoned by her.  In addition, it was submitted that Temitope  is
    22 and living independently, the relationship is not one  that  engages
    Article 8,  and  no  consequences  of  gravity  would  flow  from  that
    decision.  The best interests' assessment was  properly  considered  as
    the Judge specifically said that it was in the best interests of  Arike
    to remain here with or without her  mother.   In  addition,  the  judge
    correctly applied the insurmountable obstacle test as identified in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387and  Agyarko  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440.   In
    addition, it was orally submitted that the Judge was entitled  to  find
    that the Appellant had effectively abandoned her  maternal  role.   The
    Judge considered all the evidence having  gone  through  the  oral  and
    written statements, and there was nothing exceptional about this case.

Appellant's Position

 5. Mr  Murphy  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  not  properly  considered
    Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016]  UKUT  138  (IAC)  which  states
    that:

         "1.  That 'precariousness' is a criterion of  relevance  to  family
             life as well as private life cases is an established  part  of
             Article 8 jurisprudence.

         2.   The 'little weight' provisions of Section 117B(4)(a)  and  (5)
             of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  are
             confined to 'private life' established by a person at  a  time
             when their  immigration  status  is  unlawful  or  precarious.
             However, this does not mean that when  answering  the  'public
             interest question' posed by Section 117A(2) - (3) a  court  or
             Tribunal should disregard 'precarious  family  life'  criteria
             set out in established Article 8  jurisprudence.   Given  that
             Section 117A - D considerations are not exhaustive, in certain
             cases it may be an error of law for a  court  or  Tribunal  to
             disregard relevant public interest considerations."

 6. In  essence  the  Judge  made  no  finding  as  to  what  the  parental
    relationship was.  The  findings  were  incomplete  and  unclear.   The
    evidence regarding the family life in 2006 ([23] of determination) does
    not equate to the position when the Judge heard the  appeal,  and  does
    not enable the question of whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    child to leave the United Kingdom as required in Section 117B(6)(b)  to
    be answered.

Judge's Determination

 7. It was found in the determination that:

         "[21]    Clearly there is no  issue  that  her  two  daughters  are
             living in the UK.  The eldest Temitope is now 22 years of age,
             she has not lived with her mother nor is there  seemingly  any
             intention of her to do  so.   She  is  effectively  living  an
             independent life even though she lives with her uncle.  I note
             that back in 2013 she had started at University  and  assuming
             that she has remained there she could either still be there or
             just have left with her degree.

         [22] I have noted the findings of the Judge at her appeal in  2013.
             In particular it was noted that 'she has effectively abandoned
             her maternal role'  when  referring  to  the  Appellant.   The
             Appellant and her daughter maintain that since then there  has
             been some contact between them.  I note that it is  still  the
             case that there can be family life between adult children  and
             parents and I accept that there is some  family  life  between
             mother and daughter in this case however, I do not accept that
             it is such that removal of the Appellant would  have  such  an
             effect as to engage Article 8.

         [23] As to the situation with the youngest daughter  Arike  I  have
             noted that she has applied for leave to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom in her own right.  She is nearly 15 years of  age  and
             had been in the United  Kingdom  for  nearly  10  years.   Her
             application, submitted on 4th March 2006 states that she lives
             with her grandmother during term  time  and  only  visits  her
             mother at weekends and school holidays.  This  contrasts  with
             her mother's claim that she is 'used to seeing her  every  day
             around her'.  The Appellant claims  to  be  in  a  very  close
             relationship  with  her  daughter  and  fully   supports   her
             emotionally.  I am not satisfied that  I  am  being  told  the
             truth by the Appellant.

         [24] Sadly I  believe  she  is  using  her  relationship  with  her
             daughters to try and remain here.  Although she claims a close
             relationship her daughter she effectively abandoned  her  with
             her grandmother at a young age, I note I have not received any
             kind  of  statement  from  the  girl  herself  nor  from   the
             grandmother to  confirm  the  connection  between  mother  and
             daughter and I am not satisfied that the  relationship  is  as
             close as claimed.  Certainly  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             daughter would be at all likely to leave  the  United  Kingdom
             with her mother.

         [26] The best interests of Arike lie in  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom with or without her mother.  I  do  not  believe  that
             removal of her mother will affect that.  I  am  not  satisfied
             the relationship is  such  that  her  daughter's  interest  is
             dependent on her remaining in the United Kingdom.

         [27]  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy   the
             immigration  rules  so  far  as  her  relationship  with   her
             daughters is concerned.  She has one adult  daughter  and  she
             cannot show that she has sole responsibility for  her  younger
             daughter.  Having considered  all  the  circumstances  or  the
             relationship between them I am not satisfied  that  there  are
             any exceptional  circumstances  that  need  to  be  considered
             outside the immigration rules.

         [28] I then move to consider the question of her relationship  with
             her mother and brother.   Clearly  both  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom long before she did and even after she came  here  she
             had very little to do with them for a long  time.   I  am  not
             satisfied that their relationship is such  that  would  engage
             Article 8 either within the immigration rules or without.

         [29] I move then to consider her relationship with Larry  Giwa  and
             whether, because of  it,  she  should  not  be  removed.   The
             Respondent concedes that there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship between them and that means that the  eligibility
             requirements for leave to remain as a partner  are  met.   The
             next question is whether there are insurmountable obstacle  to
             family life with him should they both have  to  return  or  at
             least she has to return to Nigeria.  I am not  satisfied  that
             such obstacles exist.

         [30] Her partner is Nigerian and has spent most of his life  there.
             He would have no language difficulties.  According to  her  he
             has known from the beginning that she had no status  and  must
             have entered into the relationship knowing that  there  was  a
             real risk that she may be  returned.   He  had  no  legitimate
             expectation that she would be allowed to stay.

         [31] ... he told me ... that his parents and  his  sister  were  in
             Nigeria.  ...  It seems to me that the  only  real  reason  he
             cannot go with her is financial in that he would lose his job.
              He has raised medical issues  but  provided  no  evidence  to
             confirm he has glaucoma or high blood pressure.  He is only 47
             years of age.  I can see no obstacles to all  of  them  living
             together in Nigeria let alone insurmountable ones."

Discussion

 8. I am not satisfied that the Judge has adequately considered whether  or
    not at the date of hearing the Appellant had  a  parental  relationship
    with Arike.  The evidence from 2006 is of such age as to be  of  little
    value 10 years later.  It is entirely conceivable that  when  Arike  in
    2006 was 4 or 5 years old she had a very  different  relationship  with
    her mother than she does in 2016 at the age of almost 15.  There was no
    assessment of the current relationship between them in accordance  with
    Section 117B(6). Without that assessment, the best interest  assessment
    was inadequate.

 9. I am not satisfied that any of the other grounds were in fact made  out
    as, in relation to Larry Giwa  and  Temitope,  there  was  an  adequate
    assessment of the relationships and difficulties that could  be  caused
    by the Appellant being required to leave the United  Kingdom  and  make
    any relevant application for entry clearance or otherwise as  the  case
    may be.

10. I agree with both representatives that given the finding I have made in
    relation to the lack of proper assessment  and  an  inadequate  finding
    regarding the parental relationship between the  Appellant  and  Arike,
    the matter would need to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Judge Rowlands.  For the avoidance of any doubt I  set  aside  all
    findings in relation to Arike but preserve the ones relating  to  Larry
    Giwa and Temitope.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I set aside the decision.

13. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge Rowlands.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 23 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer

