
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14602/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016                  |On 21 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                 mr bin wang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewole, instructed by Liberty & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of China born on 19 July  1968.
    The appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  that
    he is the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK and  it  was
    not disputed that his wife, previously a citizen of  China,  is  now  a
    British citizen having been granted citizenship on  20  November  2015.
    The respondent refused the appellant's application on 9 March 2015.  It
    was raised and it was noted in the refusal letter  that  the  appellant
    could  not  benefit  from  paragraph  319E  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (indefinite leave to remain as a dependant of a points  based  migrant)
    as the appellant did not have leave as a Tier 1 dependant at  the  time
    he submitted the application and his spouse was not granted  indefinite
    leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Migrant.   However  the  appellant's
    application was considered under the marriage Rules.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 3  March  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thanki dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The appellant appealed with permission from the Upper Tribunal  on  the
    basis that the judge arguably erred in  law  in  his  approach  to  and
    findings in respect of Article 8.  At  paragraph  [50]  the  judge  had
    found that the appellant's removal would breach Article 8 as  it  would
    be a disproportionate  interference  with  his  family  life  with  his
    British citizen wife if he returned to China including doing so only to
    obtain entry clearance.  However, at paragraph [55]  having  considered
    Section 117B, the judge then made  an  opposite  finding,  namely  that
    removal would be proportionate and that finding appeared to be  on  the
    basis that "the requirements of Section 117B" were not met.   Both  the
    inconsistency in these findings and the judge's  seeming  consideration
    of Section 117B in isolation were arguable errors of law.

Error of law consideration

 4. Mr Adewole relied on the grounds of permission.  He relied on the  fact
    that the judge had found that the appellant had established family life
    and that it would not be proportionate for the appellant to  return  to
    China and continue his family life with his British citizen wife.   The
    judge also found that it would not be proportionate for  the  appellant
    to have to make an application to return to the  UK.   It  was  further
    submitted that it was wrong for the judge to refuse the appeal  on  the
    basis that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Mr Adewole also made submissions including that  it
    was not in the public interest to require  the  appellant  to  make  an
    application from abroad.

 5. In his submissions Mr Avery conceded  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    slightly baffling including his positive  findings  at  paragraph  [50]
    followed by his dismissal of the  appeal.   The  judge's  findings  had
    started off by looking at the Immigration Rules but, as I indicated  at
    the hearing, he had failed to make any specific findings in the body of
    his determination under  the  Immigration  Rules.   His  findings  then
    morphed into an Article 8  consideration  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 6. I am satisfied that the judge's findings disclose a material  error  of
    law such that the  opposing  conclusions  he  reached  in  relation  to
    Article 8 were irrational.  I therefore set aside his decision  in  its
    entirety.

Re-making the Decision

 7. I indicated at the hearing that  I  would  re-make  the  decision.   Mr
    Adewole confirmed that there were no changes of circumstances  in  this
    case and both parties indicated that they were happy to proceed on  the
    day.  Mr Adewole also confirmed that no oral evidence would be required
    and that he was relying on the papers already before the court.

 8. The appellant had provided a bundle including his witness statement,  a
    skeleton  argument,  the  sponsor's  witness  statement   and   further
    documents in support which were  not  indexed  but  included,  but  not
    limited to, the decision by  the  respondent  and  the  refusal  letter
    together with a copy of the sponsor's British passport details, a  copy
    of what would appear to be the couple's marriage certificate,  although
    I note that  this  was  not  translated,  and  some  further  documents
    including the appellant's P60 and a  contract  of  employment  for  the
    sponsor.

 9. It was not disputed  that  the  evidence  recorded  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal included the appellant  adopting  his  witness  statement  and
    confirming under cross-examination that he could not live in  China  as
    his wife now had British citizenship and had lived in the UK  for  over
    ten years.  The appellant and his wife had married  in  China  and  had
    lived there for two years before the appellant's wife came to  the  UK.
    The appellant confirmed that he had worked previously part-time in  the
    UK in a restaurant but was not currently in employment.  The  appellant
    confirmed  in  oral  evidence  that  he  had  worked  in  China.    The
    appellant's evidence was also recorded that he did not wish  to  return
    to China with his wife as this would take time for his application  for
    settlement to be considered and he could not return on his  own  as  he
    did not wish to be separated from his wife.   The  appellant  confirmed
    that he had last visited China in June 2012 and had occasional  contact
    with his family as did his wife.

10. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal also records oral  evidence
    from the appellant's wife, the sponsor, Ms Lachao Wang who adopted  her
    witness statement and gave evidence in English.   (The  appellant  gave
    evidence with the assistance of a Mandarin interpreter).

11. Ms Wang confirmed that she did  not  wish  to  be  separated  from  her
    husband and  did  not  wish  to  return  to  China  so  an  appropriate
    application could be made there.  Under Cross-examination she said  she
    was now a British citizen and had demonstrated evidence of her  British
    passport.  It was confirmed that the couple did not have children.  The
    sponsor gave evidence about visiting her mother in China  in  2012  and
    also visiting the appellant's family.  It was confirmed that the couple
    did not have any family in the UK.  She also confirmed that her husband
    had previously worked but had  stopped  in  April  2015.   The  sponsor
    stated that ever since she had come to the UK her husband had been  her
    dependant and she had applied for indefinite leave to remain which  was
    granted and then they had been advised they could apply for  indefinite
    leave to remain for the appellant.   The  sponsor  said  that  she  had
    received university degrees in the UK and obtained citizenship and that
    the couple had never lived  apart.   It  was  also  recorded  that  the
    sponsor became very distressed at the prospect of being separated  from
    her husband when it was suggested that the appellant  could  return  to
    make an application.

12. I have taken into consideration all the evidence including the evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal and the  written  evidence  and
    the submissions which were also  recorded  in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Thanki.

Findings and Reasons

13. The appellant is a citizen of China and has  been  in  the  UK  as  his
    wife's dependant since 2009.  It was recorded and not  disputed  before
    me that the appellant's wife  the  sponsor  had  been  in  the  UK  for
    thirteen years, whereas the appellant has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years.   The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  under
    Appendix FM as the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a partner.   It  was  also  not  disputed
    before me that the appellant could not meet the requirements for  leave
    to remain as a partner under Appendix FM.

14. It was Mr Avery's submission that under Appendix FM EX.1(b)  there  are
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
    outside the UK.

         "EX.1:

         ...

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

         EX.2:

         For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1(b)  'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means that very significant difficulties which would  be  faced  by
         the applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
         together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be  overcome  would
         entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

15. The respondent also considered that under paragraph 276ADE in  relation
    to private life the appellant had lived some twenty years in the UK and
    it was found that he had ties including social, cultural or family with
    China.  Therefore the respondent was satisfied that the appellant could
    relocate to China having lived there for the majority of his life.

16. I am not satisfied  that  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  there  are
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life between the appellant and his
    partner continuing outside of the UK.  I have taken into  consideration
    all of the evidence including that the appellant has been in the UK for
    approximately seven years.  I note that his wife has been in the UK for
    thirteen.  The appellant's application indicates that the appellant and
    the sponsor met on 15 September 2007 in Shenyang  China  and  that  the
    couple began living together on 5 March 2008 which is also cited as the
    date of the couple's marriage in China. The appellant did not enter the
    UK as his wife's dependant until  22  March  2009.   The  couple  would
    appear therefore to have lived apart at some point in the early part of
    their relationship.  Even  if  they  had  not  there  was  no  adequate
    evidence before me as to what  the  insurmountable  obstacles  were  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.

17. Although I accept that the sponsor has lived in the UK  for  some  time
    and that she is now a British citizen, it is not disputed that she  was
    born a citizen of China and lived there for a large part  of  her  life
    (and I note that the  appellant's  application  refers  to  the  couple
    living together in a relationship from 5  March  2008  when  they  were
    married in China).

18. The sponsor is  therefore  culturally  familiar  with  China.   I  have
    considered that the couple do not have any children.  Although I accept
    that they both may have developed ties in the UK and that it may  cause
    some inconvenience including for the sponsor to relocate her life,  and
    I note that there was evidence of her employment in the UK (and it  was
    submitted she only gets 28 days leave), I am not  satisfied  that  that
    would constitute very significant difficulties even if the  appellant's
    wife had to leave her employment and seek new employment in China  (and
    I take into consideration that she will have added to her skills whilst
    in the UK).  I note that the evidence confirmed that both the appellant
    and the sponsor are still in contact with their families in  China  and
    there was no adequate evidence to indicate that  those  families  could
    not assist the appellant and the sponsor in  re-establishing  in  China
    either temporarily whilst the appellant makes an application to  return
    or permanently if that is what they decide to do.

19. I am not satisfied in all the  circumstances  that  the  appellant  has
    discharged the burden of proof on him to  demonstrate  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  with  his  partner
    outside of the UK.

20. In the circumstances I am further not satisfied, applying the  relevant
    case law including SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  Agyarko  and
    Others [2015] EWcA civ 449 that any circumstances have been  identified
    that might be considered compelling enough to require a grant of  leave
    to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.  The facts, including  that
    the couple might not want to be separated, even  temporarily  and  that
    the sponsor has built a life in the UK and is now  a  British  Citizen,
    are insufficient in my findings to  constitute  compelling  reasons.  A
    failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules is a relevant
    factor to take into consideration.  I am not satisfied that  there  has
    been any gap identified between section EX.1 and  the  requirements  of
    Article 8.  I am therefore not satisfied that consideration outside  of
    the Immigration Rules is required.

21. I am satisfied that the assessment under the Immigration Rules provides
    a complete answer.  The Court of Appeal in Sunassee  [2015]  EWHC  1604
    confirmed:

         'The law is that there is always a  second  stage,  but  where  all
         relevant considerations have been weighed under the rules and there
         are no compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
         the rules it will be enough for the decision maker  to  simply  say
         that...The failure to qualify under the rules will tend to  suggest
         that the public interest requires refusal of leave to  vary  unless
         some countervailing factors are present which are not already taken
         into account under the rules.'

22. I am satisfied therefore that the  appellant's  appeal  cannot  succeed
    either under the Immigration Rules or otherwise.

Summary of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of
    law such that the decision falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  re-make  the
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction was sought or is appropriate in this case.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appellant's appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

