
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14230/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              MR FODIL GUERNAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, Counsel
      (instructed by Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted on 28 May 2015 by
         Upper Tribunal  McWilliam  against  the  dismissal  of  his  appeal
         seeking the issue of a permanent residence  card  under  regulation
         10(5) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
         (as amended) ("the EEA Regulations") by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Raymond in a determination promulgated on 25  November  2014.   The
         Appellant is a national of Algeria, born on 27 December  1975.   He
         had claimed that his marriage had lasted over three years of  which
         at least one year had been in the United Kingdom.

    2.     Judge Raymond found that that the Appellant had not  shown  that
         his former spouse had been a qualified person within  regulation  6
         of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as  at
         the date of the decree absolute pronounced on 8 July 2013.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McWilliam because  she
         considered it arguable that the judge had taken irrelevant  matters
         into account when reaching his decision.

    4.     By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
         in the form of a letter dated 11 June  2015,  the  Respondent  (the
         Secretary of State) indicated that she opposed the application  for
         permission to appeal.

    5.     Ms Qureshi for the Appellant submitted that the judge had  erred
         in his credibility findings, on which his decision under regulation
         6 turned.  There had been unchallenged evidence  before  the  judge
         that the former wife had been working, specifically her P60 for the
         year ended 5  April  2013.   That  had  been  consistent  with  her
         employment history.  The Appellant had no contact with  his  former
         wife and the judge should have taken a more  generous  approach  to
         the evidence in those circumstances.  The judge had  made  comments
         about the former spouse's earnings  which  suggested  that  he  had
         misunderstood what was required to show compliance with  regulation
         6. The  judge  had  taken  into  account  irrelevant  matters.  The
         determination should be set aside and the judge's  decision  should
         be reversed.

    6.     Ms Fijwala for the Respondent (the Secretary of State) relied on
         the rule 24 notice.  The determination contained no material  error
         of law.

    7.     At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal  stated  it  found
         that there was no material error  of  law  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Raymond in  his  determination.  The  tribunal  reserved  its
         decision which now follows

    8.     It seems to the tribunal that the judge's decision was the  only
         one properly open to him on the evidence.  There  was  in  fact  no
         evidence that the former wife was even in the United Kingdom at the
         date of the decree absolute.  The latest evidence that she had been
         working in the United Kingdom was her P60 dated 5 April 2013, which
         was obviously some three months prior to the decree absolute.   The
         Appellant had elected to proceed by way of submissions only and was
         not called.  The judge explained why he found much of the  evidence
         placed before him to  be  unsatisfactory,  for  example,  that  the
         Appellant had not said when  he  actually  lost  contact  with  his
         former wife: see [34] of the determination.  In such circumstances,
         it would not have been possible for the judge to have inferred that
         it was more likely than not that she  was  still  working  in  July
         2013.  The comments the judge  made  at  [36]  are  simply  further
         remarks about the poor  quality  of  the  evidence,  which  he  had
         earlier analysed in detail.  In brief,  the  Appellant  had  by  no
         means  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  on  him.   The   judge's
         conclusions are properly reasoned and are sustainable.

    9.     The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
         the determination. The Appellant's onwards appeal fails.

    DECISION

    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, which stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


