
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14548/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10th October 2016                         |On 25th October 2016           |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 harjit kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mold, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Conrath) which in a decision  promulgated  on  6th  May
    2016 allowed the appeal of Harjit Kaur against the Secretary of State's
    refusal to grant her leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Article 8 ECHR family/private life rights.

 2. For the sake of clarity, throughout this decision I shall refer to  the
    Secretary of  State  as  "the  Respondent"  and  Harjit  Kaur  as  "the
    Appellant" which reflects their respective positions before the FtT.

Background

 3. On 27th January 2015 the Appellant made a discretionary leave and human
    rights application for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  her
    family life with  her  daughter,  son-in-law  and  granddaughter.   The
    Respondent considered the matter and on 10th  April  2015  refused  the
    application.  The Respondent's decision informed the Appellant that she
    had a right of appeal against the refusal but that her right to  appeal
    was limited in effect  to  whether  the  "decision  is  unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998." The  Appellant  exercised  her
    right to appeal.

FtT Hearing

 4. When the appeal came before the FtT it considered documentary  evidence
    and heard oral evidence from the Appellant, her daughter and her son-in-
    law.  The judge  then  set  out  that  the  Respondent  had  previously
    exercised her discretion in favour of the Appellant  in  2012  and  had
    granted her leave to remain in exercise of that discretion, until  15th
    February 2012.  The judge concluded therefore that  because  the  "same
    circumstances" as those  which  resulted  in  the  discretionary  leave
    granted up 2015 prevailed, the Respondent should have followed her  own
    guidelines and granted a further period of  discretionary  leave  [20].
    He placed reliance upon a policy document referring to the Respondent's
    transitional arrangements relating to discretionary leave and then said
    in one sentence that he found  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  be  both
    unlawful both because of a failure to follow  her  own  guidelines  and
    because "any requirement  for  this  Appellant  to  return  to,  or  be
    returned, to India would be a breach of  her  rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR."

 5. The judge then followed this up at [21] by saying that he accepted that
    the Appellant could  not  bring  herself  within  the  requirements  of
    Appendix  FM  and/or  paragraph  276  ADE  in  relation  to  the  Rules
    concerning her private life but said in one paragraph at [22] that  any
    removal of this Appellant would be  a  serious  interference  with  her
    right to family life, such as to engage Article 8 and  any  attempt  at
    removal would be disproportionate in the circumstances. He allowed  the
    appeal.

Onward Appeal

 6. The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds seeking permission were two-fold:

      a) The  FtT  misdirected  itself  in  that  the  judge  exercised  the
         discretion that was the Secretary  of  State's  to  exercise.   The
         decision to extend discretionary leave or not  is  a  discretionary
         decision taken entirely outside the  Rules  and  is  therefore  not
         reviewable by operation of statute.

      b) In any event the judge's Article 8 reasoning  was  defective.   The
         judge seemingly accepted that the Appellant  did  not  qualify  for
         leave to remain under pursuant to Article 8  under  the  Rules  but
         made no reference to the public interest  considerations,  now  set
         out in the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  when
         deciding it would be disproportionate to require this Appellant  to
         leave the UK.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

             "referring to paragraphs 6 and 7 of the grounds on  which  the
             respondent seeks permission to appeal, these paragraphs  refer
             to the judge's article 8 reasoning.  I would suggest that  the
             respondent's case is quite strong  here.  The  judge  accepted
             that this appellant  did  not  qualify  for  leave  to  remain
             pursuant to the "article 8 immigration rules"  (his  paragraph
             21) but made no reference to  the  "exceptional  circumstances
             test" explained (for instance) in SS (Congo) &  Others  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 387, 23 April 2015. And I consider  it  arguable  (as
             per the grounds) that the judge has not sufficiently  factored
             in the public interest considerations that are set out in Part
             5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

             in my assessment the  position  as  regards  the  respondent's
             current  paragraphs  3  to  5  is  more  nuanced.   Here   the
             respondent refers to Virk [2013] EWCA Civ 652,  12  June  2013
             and argues, in effect, that in allowing this appeal the  judge
             exercised a discretion that was the Secretary  of  State's  to
             exercise.  It seems to me that that strand of reasoning is  at
             least arguable.  That is, there is sufficient in  the  grounds
             to make a grant of permission appropriate."

    Thus the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  initially  whether  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of law requiring
    the decision to be set aside.

Error of Law Hearing

 8. Before me Mrs Pettersen appeared on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    and Mr Mold on behalf of Mrs Kaur.  Mrs Pettersen's  submission  relied
    upon the grounds seeking  permission.   She  submitted  that  the  only
    appeal route available to the Appellant was an appeal under Article  8.
    The FtT's jurisdiction in effect was limited to the extent set  out  in
    statute. It was delineated by the 2014 Immigration Act.  Therefore  the
    FtT could only consider that one matter. It was not open to the FtT  to
    widen the terms of its jurisdiction by finding as it had  done  in  the
    present case that the Secretary of State's decision  was  unlawful  per
    se.  She submitted further that it was incumbent  upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to fully engage with the factual evidence before it  and  make
    full reasoned findings.  This had  to  be  done  by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules and to the considerations set out in Part 5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Whilst she accepted that
    the judge  mentioned  Article  8,  the  decision  lacked  a  considered
    reasoning of the evidence and of the considerations set out in  Section
    117. This had resulted in an unbalanced decision and one which was  not
    sustainable.

 9. Mr Mold on behalf of the Appellant submitted a Rule  24  Response.   In
    that Response he sought to reargue that the  Appellant's  circumstances
    had not changed since the time she was last granted discretionary leave
    in 2012 and therefore this meant that any Article 8 claim  fell  to  be
    considered  against  the  transitional  provisions  set  out   in   the
    Respondent's guidance rather that the Rules.  The judge was entitled to
    assess the Appellant's claim, based on her Article  8  rights,  against
    that guidance and to find that a grant of leave should have  been  made
    based on the fact that the  same  circumstances  were  continuing.  The
    judges finding on the evidence in that regard was  sufficient  to  show
    that the Appellant's Article 8 claim  should  be  allowed  outwith  the
    Rules.

Consideration

10. I find that there is force in Mrs Pettersen's submissions.  I find that
    what was before the FtT was an appeal only  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Respondent's decision was unlawful under the Human Rights Act.  It  was
    unlawful under the Human Rights Act because it failed  to  respect  the
    Appellant's right to a family/private life. In  deciding  whether  that
    ground was made out, the FtT needed to focus on the  underlying  merits
    based  on  evidence  on  whether  the  Respondent's  decision   was   a
    disproportionate one. It was not for the FtT to step outside that  task
    by declaring the  Respondent's  decision  unlawful.  It  was  incumbent
    therefore, for the FtT to explain in the present appeal, what were  the
    exceptional  circumstances  pertaining   to   the   Appellant's   case,
    sufficient to bring her outwith the Immigration Rules.   This  exercise
    is especially important when the judge has made a  finding  as  he  did
    that the Appellant did not qualify for leave to remain pursuant to  the
    Article 8 Immigration Rules [21].

11. In addition, new considerations were brought into force  on  6th  April
    2015 by  the  insertion  of  Section  117  into  the  2002  Act.  Those
    considerations deal with the public interest element in  an  Article  8
    consideration  and  need  to  be  factored   into   a   proportionality
    assessment.  I find that the FtT's decision discloses no real reasoning
    to show that it has kept the public  interest  considerations  in  mind
    when reaching conclusions. There is a failure to mention S. 117 at all.
     I see no analysis or  reasoning  to  show  why  the  FtT  reached  the
    conclusions it did in [22] and [23]. I find it has erred by not  giving
    full reasons with reference to  the  "exceptional  circumstances  test"
    explained in, for example, SS Congo and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387. For
    these reasons I set aside the decision of the FtT.

12. Following discussion with the representatives, both were  of  the  view
    that should I find an error of  law  in  the  Appellant's  decision  on
    account of a lack of reasoned findings,  then  the  appropriate  course
    would be to remit this matter to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  and  for
    that Tribunal to re-make the decision.  That is a course with  which  I
    agree.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT dated 6th May 2016 allowing the  Appellant's  appeal
is hereby set aside.  The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
a fresh rehearing and for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     22 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

