

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14577/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 January 2017                         |On 27 June 2017                |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              MD MUSTAFA HASAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Mr Z Simret, instructed by Simon Nobel Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, whom we shall call "the claimant",  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.  He entered the United Kingdom on 2 February  2011  with  a
    student visa, which was subsequently extended and was due to expire  on
    20 September 2015.  Because of difficulties with the college  his  visa
    was curtailed to 18 February 2015.  Two days before that he applied for
    further leave to remain, using the form FLR(O).   His  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of  State  on  26  March  2015.   He  appealed
    against the refusal.

 2. Because of the dates of the Secretary of State's decision in this case,
    the claimants' appeals were and are governed by the appeals' provisions
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  before  amendment
    by the Immigration Act 2014.  The relevant provisions are  as  follows.
    Section 82 allows a person to appeal against a  decision  for  such  as
    that in the present case.  Section 84 sets out permissible  grounds  of
    appeal, including the following:

             "(1)....
        a) that the decision is not in accordance with immigration rules;
                     ...
                     (e) that the decision is otherwise not  in  accordance
        with the law;
                     ...
                     (g) that removal of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                     Kingdom in consequence  of  the  immigration  decision
                     would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
                     the Refugee Convention...."



    Section 86(2) requires the Tribunal to determine "any matter raised  as
    a ground of appeal".

 3. The basis upon which the claimant made his application, and on which he
    put his case to the First-tier Tribunal by way of appeal, was that as a
    homosexual he would be subject in Bangladesh  to  restrictions  on  his
    activities, which would amount to an infringement of his  rights  under
    article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and meant that  he
    could not be expected to live in Bangladesh.  The  Secretary  of  State
    was aware of those submissions but rejected them.  She added that if he
    wanted to make an asylum claim, he should do so.  The claimant repeated
    his submissions in a letter attached to his notice  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He elected to have his appeal determined  without
    a hearing.  It was allocated to Judge Dennis, who gave his decision  on
    12 August 2015.  After setting out the facts,  Judge  Dennis  wrote  as
    follows:

             "9. The Respondent has rejected the application in terms  of  a
               letter of 26 March 2015.   The  application  was  considered
               only with reference to Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE(1)
               of the Immigration Rules.  The applicant  and  Appellant  of
               course, has made no claim of family  life  as  might  engage
               Appendix  FM.   Instead,  the  focus  was  solely   on   the
               provisions of Rule 276ADE(1).  Unsurprisingly the Respondent
               concluded the Appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of
               twenty years of residence, etc., under the Rule.  The  focus
               was, rather, on Subsection (vi) which provides that where  a
               person is over the age of eighteen and has lived in  the  UK
               for less than twenty years leave to remain might be  granted
               where "there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
               applicant's integration into the country into which he would
               have to  go  if  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom".
               Despite the very explicit and lengthy  setting  out  of  his
               situation and his fears on return,  supported  by  objective
               information, the Respondent has somewhat surprisingly simply
               stated: "It  is  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
               significant obstacles to your integration  into  Bangladesh,
               if you were required to leave the UK because you have  spend
               the vast majority of your life in Bangladesh and you will be
               fully accustomed to the custom and traditions there".

           10. I find this wholly inadequate.  It in no way  addresses  any
               of the specific concerns of the Appellant,  concerns  which,
               if made out, most certainly would engage Subsection (vi)  as
               constituting "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant's
               re-integration into Bangladesh.  It is  not  sufficient  for
               the Respondent simply, categorically and without explanation
               or justification, to state that it is  "not  accepted"  such
               circumstances  exist  as  would  engage  Subsection  (vi)  -
               notwithstanding the very clear indication such could be  the
               case.


           11. On this basis, alone, the decision must be seen  as  not  in
               accordance with the law.   I  note,  however,  further  that
               although the Appellant is clearly setting  out  a  potential
               claim to be recognised  as  a  refugee  the  Respondent  has
               disingenuously stated his representations "would  constitute
               an asylum application under ECHR Article 3  and  also  under
               the terms of paragraph 327 (b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules"
               [sic].  The applicant is then  informed  he  should  make  a
               claim at an ASU,  and  no  further  consideration  of  these
               patent issues is undertaken by  the  Respondent.   In  this,
               too, I find that the decision is inadequate on its face.

           12. For these reasons, therefore, I have elected  to  allow  the
               appeal only insofar as to remit it to the  Respondent  or  a
               full and complete consideration both under Paragraph  276ADE
               (1) (vi) and, necessarily, as a fully  stateable  claim  for
               recognition as a refugee under the 1951  UN  Convention  and
               also that the persecution alleged may engage Articles 2 &  3
               of the ECHR."

 4. In the closing paragraphs of his  determination,  the  judge  indicated
    that the appellant might need to do more than he already  has  done  in
    order to substantiate his claim.  The notice of his decision  reads  as
    follows:

               "The appeal is allowed under the Immigration  Rules  insofar
               as  to  remit  it  to  the  Respondent  for  a  sufficiently
               comprehensive review and determination."

 5. The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal on  the
    ground that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusion that the Secretary of State's consideration of the case  was
    unlawful.  Mr Wilding expanded briefly on those grounds at the hearing.
     Mr Simret sought to defend the judge's determination,  essentially  on
    the grounds that the Secretary of State ought to  have  either  granted
    leave under the Rules or done so on the basis of article 8 outside  the
    Rules.
 6. The problem in this case, as it appears to us, is that  the  judge  did
    not consider the substantive matters before him.  He clearly classified
    the issues that the applicant raised as, first, an issue as to  whether
    the immigration rules had been correctly applied to him and,  secondly,
    a  question  as  to  whether  his  removal  would  breach  the  Refugee
    Convention.  If that was the case (and we do not say that  the  judge's
    classification was incorrect) the judge was obliged to determine  those
    matters.  If he thought that, as a result, the appeal was not  suitable
    for determination without a hearing, he should have adjourned it  to  a
    hearing.  It does not appear to us that he was entitled to do  what  he
    did do.  A judge's function is to decide cases, not to  refer  them  to
    somebody else to decide; and s 86(2) makes that clear.  It follows that
    in dealing with the appeal in the way he did, the judge erred in law.

 7. The claimant's appeal needs to be determined.  We  direct  that  it  be
    determined at a hearing, and that the matters that  he  has  raised  be
    considered substantively at that hearing.  The Secretary of  State  now
    has had a full  opportunity  to  consider  the  matters  raised,  under
    paragraph 276ADE at least, and no doubt by  the  time  of  the  further
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, will have reached a  clear  and
    informed view on that particular aspect of the case.











                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 23 June 2017
