







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14451/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                   Decision & Reasons    |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 9 April 2015                  |                         On 20 April 2015|

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Miss Faryia Memon
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mills, counsel (instructed by CW Law
Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary  of  state"  and  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, born on 2 September 1989.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the secretary of state  dated  3  March
      2014 refusing to issue her a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 was  allowed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Kainth in a determination promulgated  on  13  November
      2014.


   3. The secretary of state appeals with leave against that determination.


   4. The Judge found that the issue in the appeal was very narrow, relating
      to the first birth certificate produced which the secretary  of  state
      had not accepted on the basis of its quality. The certificate was  not
      very clear and they could not make out the majority of the writing  on
      it. Nor did the certificate contain  any  details  of  the  claimant's
      mother. Whilst it was accepted that this may be the original document,
      the contents could not be ascertained and the document  was  thus  not
      accepted as evidence of her relationship.


   5. The Judge stated  at  the  outset  that  he  has  had  regard  to  the
      respective bundles  produced.  The  claimant's  bundle  contained  two
      covering letters dated 17 March 2014 and 28 April 2014.  There  was  a
      signed copy of the claimant's and  her  sponsor's  witness  statements
      together with an updated birth certificate issued on 16 April 2014.


   6. The claimant's father, her sponsor,  attended  the  hearing  and  gave
      evidence. He confirmed that  his  wife  (the  claimant's  mother)  was
      sitting at the back of the  Court  and  was  in  a  position  to  give
      evidence should she be required to do so.


   7. He explained that the original birth certificate was obtained  on  the
      basis that it was required with respect to the  claimant's  schooling.
      It was unclear as to why there were grammatical mistakes.  The  reason
      why the claimant's mother's name did not feature  on  the  certificate
      was because there was no specific column and at the date of  issue  it
      was not the norm in Pakistan for a  child's  mother's  details  to  be
      endorsed.


   8. The sponsor came to the UK in October 2008, having lived  before  that
      in the Republic of Ireland. The claimant had been at school there  and
      had come to the UK for the purpose of education.


   9. With regard to the re-issued birth certificate, the sponsor asked  his
      brother to obtain the appropriate form from Pakistan, which  was  sent
      to him in the UK, which he then completed. He paid the  necessary  fee
      and a certificate was issued for the claimant and her brother.


  10. Judge Kainth had no difficulty accepting the sponsor's  evidence  that
      at the time the birth certificate was issued, namely on 19  May  1993,
      the competent authority in  Pakistan  did  not  have  the  benefit  of
      computerisation and birth certificates were then written in manuscript
      on proforma. The certificate identified  the  father  as  the  sponsor
      together with the claimant's name and date of birth. It had  not  been
      contended by the secretary of state that the first  birth  certificate
      was a forgery.


  11. He also accepted the sponsor's evidence that it was not the "norm"  in
      1993 that the mother's name be endorsed on such a certificate. In  any
      event, the claimant's mother was present at the hearing had this  been
      a "live issue", and she could have been called to give evidence. This,
      the Judge found, was peripheral in his judgement and  has  no  bearing
      with regard to the substance of the appeal [10].


  12. The updated certificate issued on 16 April 2014 (paragraph 11  of  the
      determination) has the  incorrect  date.  It  made  reference  to  the
      claimant's date of birth and details  of  both  her  parents.  It  was
      submitted  that  the  secretary  of  state  received  the   claimant's
      brother's email birth certificate issued on the same date  as  opposed
      to the claimant's. That, the sponsor claimed, was an error  and  there
      had been no intention to deceive. The Judge accepted  that  it  was  a
      genuine mistake. The secretary of state has had the  opportunity,  had
      they chosen to do so, to undertake  any  verification  checks  on  the
      emailed birth certificate.


  13. The Judge concluded [12] that there is "no doubt" that the parents are
      those as claimed by the claimant. The sponsor was not challenged  with
      respect to his clear evidence that he was the  claimant's  father  and
      that her mother was sitting at the back of the Court.


  14. I was informed that the witness was not cross examined at all.


  15. In the event, the Judge found that the claimant had provided more than
      sufficient evidence challenging the secretary of state's  "assertions,
      analyses and conclusions" in the refusal letter. Those assertions  are
      no longer valid or tenable [13].


  16. Mr Clarke submitted that at paragraphs 9-10 of the determination,  the
      Judge had not explained why he accepted the sponsor's evidence. It was
      not explained why he accepted evidence as to  how  birth  certificates
      were presented in Pakistan with regard to a  computerised  system  and
      therefore this explains why the  birth  certificate  was  produced  in
      manuscript. Nor did the Judge explain why he  accepted  evidence  from
      the sponsor on what is the norm  in  Pakistan  regarding  endorsements
      upon birth certificates.


  17. Mr Clarke also referred to paragraph 10 where the  Judge  stated  that
      the issue of the authority of the birth certificate  was  not  a  live
      issue. However, the acceptance or otherwise of the  authority  of  the
      birth certificate was central to the secretary of state's refusal. The
      refusal letter  stated  that  the  certificate  may  be  an  original,
      therefore a matter to be decided at the hearing.  The  Judge  has  not
      dealt with this aspect in the determination.


  18.  It  is  also  asserted  [ground  3]  that  the  Judge   impermissibly
      transferred the burden to the secretary of state. The refusal did  not
      accept  the  birth  certificate  as   evidence   of   the   claimant's
      relationship. The birth certificate in question was  provided  to  the
      presenting officer on the date of hearing. The  Judge  suggested  that
      the secretary of state  could  have  made  verification  checks.  This
      however "is unrealistic."


  19. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Mills relied on the skeleton argument.


  20. He accepted that the  secretary  of  state  was  concerned  about  the
      quality of  the  1993  certificate,  as  a  result  of  which  a  new,
      electronic copy of her birth certificate  from  Pakistan  was  sought.
      That in fact was obtained in April 2014.


  21. Unfortunately the wrong birth certificate was sent "by mistake" to the
      secretary of state. That  was  realised  the  day  before  the  appeal
      hearing and on the morning of the appeal, the secretary of  state  was
      given an original copy of the 2014 certificate, which  was  handed  to
      the Home Office Presenting Officer.


  22. The Home Office Presenting Officer then took instructions on  the  new
      birth certificate, after which he  informed  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge that the secretary of state still intended to resist the  appeal
      on the basis of the quality of the 1993 certificate.


  23. No application for an adjournment was made.


  24. Mr Mills submitted that the identification of the issue,  namely  that
      it  related  to  who  the  parents  of  the  claimant  were,  was  not
      challenged. That was correct, because that was the only basis for  the
      secretary of state's refusal to grant the application.


  25. Accordingly the appeal required a  determination  as  to  whether  the
      claimant is indeed a direct descendant of the sponsor.


  26. At the date of the secretary of state's decision, the May  1993  birth
      certificate was the  only  evidence  before  the  secretary  of  state
      regarding that relationship. Matters had however moved  on  since  the
      date of decision so that at the date  of  the  hearing,  the  claimant
      produced two additional pieces of evidence proving her relationship to
      the sponsor. The first "piece of evidence" constituted the  live  oral
      evidence from her sponsor as to the relationship.  There  was  also  a
      "new re-issued, computerised birth certificate from April 2014."


  27. At  the  hearing,  the  veracity  of  the  2014  certificate  was  not
      challenged. No adjournment was sought to enable checks to  be  carried
      out.


  28. Most  significantly,  however,  the  claimant  and  her  sponsor  gave
      evidence that they were father and daughter, which was not  challenged
      in cross examination.


  29. In the event, the Judge had uncontested evidence before him as to that
      relationship. That evidence he found to be  decisive  and  he  made  a
      clear finding of fact that the sponsor was the claimant's father [12].


  30. Mr Mills made further submissions regarding the individual  ground  of
      appeal before the Upper Tribunal.


  31. With regard to ground 1, there was no challenge to  the  finding  that
      the sponsor is the claimant's father [12]. Accordingly, the challenges
      as to the  adequacy  of  the  reasoning  in  paragraphs  9-11  of  the
      determination "are academic." The Judge was bound to make the decision
      he did on the basis of the finding of fact he made  at  paragraph  12,
      made because of the sponsor's live and unchallenged evidence.


  32. The  Judge  downplayed  the  significance  of  the  1993  certificate,
      referring to an issue of the content of that certificate as  being  of
      "peripheral relevance".


  33. In the event, any errors of law in the paragraphs relating to the 1993
      certificate played no material part in  the  overall  decision,  which
      cannot be impugned and quashed.


  34. With regard to the second ground, he submitted  that  the  reasons  in
      paragraphs 9 and 10 are adequate. That has to be read in  the  context
      of the decision as a whole. In particular they should be read  in  the
      light of the Judge's conclusion on parenthood, which  meant  that  the
      issue of the quality of the 1993 certificate was of  little  relevance
      to the substance of the appeal.


  35. In the event, the Judge was under no obligation to provide  more  than
      the very briefest of reasons for preferring the claimant's evidence on
      the quality of the 1993 certificate.


  36. The reasons in any event at paragraphs 9 and 10 make it clear why  the
      Judge accepted the genuineness of the 1993  certificate.  Accordingly,
      there is no doubt as to why the Judge found that the 1993  certificate
      was genuine: there had been no computerisation in 1993.


  37. Accordingly, the secretary of state cannot  contend  that  she  really
      cannot understand the Judge's thought process, even assuming that  the
      quality of the 1993 certificate was material.


  38. Mr Mills submitted that what in effect is being required is  that  the
      Judge was required "to give further reasons for his reasons."


  39. However, the sponsor's evidence on computerisation, which was  in  his
      witness statement, was not challenged by the secretary of state at the
      hearing, and no positive evidence was put forward by the secretary  of
      state to demonstrate that the 1993 certificate was not genuine.


  40. The Judge  did  not  state  that  the  authority  of  the  1993  birth
      certificate was not a "live issue" as contended in ground 2. He simply
      recorded that the secretary of state had the opportunity to  challenge
      the relationship between the claimant and her mother, but chose not to
      take it [10]. There was a recognition that the  1993  certificate  was
      only one way of proving that the respondent is the daughter of an  EEA
      national. The Judge's decision,  however,  on  the  core  question  of
      parenthood, is clear and unchallenged.


  41. With regard to the secretary  of  state's  assertion  that  the  Judge
      transferred the burden to the secretary of state, it is  evident  from
      the determination [13] that the Judge  clearly  understood  where  the
      burden of proof lay. There he stated that the  claimant  has  provided
      more than sufficient evidence for challenging the  assertions  in  the
      respondent's refusal letter.


  42. There is nothing  in  paragraph  11  suggesting  otherwise,  merely  a
      reflection that the secretary of state could  have  sought  to  adduce
      further evidence by way  of  verification  checks,  with  the  aim  of
      reducing the weight to be given to the claimant's evidence (the  birth
      certificate) but decided not to seek an adjournment to do so.


     Assessment


  43. I have had regard to the witness statements from both the claimant and
      her sponsor. That was part  of  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. That evidence was confirmed to be true and  correct  by  the
      sponsor when he gave evidence.


  44. In his  statement,  Mr  Memon  confirmed  that  the  claimant  is  his
      daughter. They lived together at  the  same  address  in  Walthamstow,
      London.


  45. In his statement he referred to the secretary of state  "surprisingly"
      refusing her application on the basis of  the  quality  of  the  birth
      certificate, including the fact that it does not contain  the  details
      of his wife. She did however accept that the  certificate  may  be  an
      original.


  46. He stated in his evidence that the birth  certificate  was  issued  in
      1993 when there was no facility  in  Pakistan  to  issue  computerised
      birth certificates. The relevant certificate was issued manually. That
      confirms his details.  Moreover,  the  claimant's  passport  that  was
      produced before the  Judge  also  confirms  the  details.  Both  these
      "evidences" are sufficient to prove that he is the father.  Copies  of
      those documents had been provided with her grounds of appeal.


  47. I have had regard to the birth certificate dated 19 May  1993,  signed
      by the Registrar of Births and Deaths. The certificate is a  statement
      from the Birth Register Municipal Corporation, Hyderabad.  It  relates
      to "Fariya", daughter of Muhammad Ifshad.  The  date  of  birth  is  2
      September 1989. There are other manuscript additions relating  to  the
      number of the ward and the name of the reporter, which are not  easily
      legible.


  48. I have also had regard to the later birth certificate produced at  the
      hearing.  This  sets  out  in  computerised  form,  the  date  of  the
      claimant's birth (2 September 1989) and also identifies  the  father's
      name and the NIC number. It also identifies the mother's name and  her
      NIC number.


  49. I have had regard to the claimant's passport in  which  her  name  and
      date of birth are identified. Moreover, her father's name is also  set
      out as  Muhammad  Arshad  Memon.  Again,  there  is  no  reference  or
      requirement that her mother's name be given in the passport.


  50. I accept that after the secretary of state  expressed  concerns  about
      the quality of the 1993 certificate, a further electronic copy of  her
      birth certificate was obtained in April 2014. However, the wrong birth
      certificate was sent to the secretary of state, namely  her  brother's
      certificate. That was realised shortly  before  the  hearing  and  the
      original copy of the claimant's 2014 certificate  was  handed  to  the
      Presenting Officer.


  51. I have had regard to the well known decision in R (Iran) v SSHD [2005]
      EWCA Civ 986, where the Court  of  Appeal  set  out  the  adequacy  of
      reasons for decisions by adjudicators.   An  adjudicator  should  give
      his reasons in sufficient detail to show the appeal tribunal that  the
      principles on which he has acted and the reasons that have led him  to
      his decision. They need not be elaborate.  There  is  no  duty  on  an
      adjudicator in giving reasons, to deal with every  argument  presented
      in support of the case.


  52. It is sufficient if what he says shows the parties and if need be, the
      IAC, the basis upon which he has acted and if the adjudicator has  not
      dealt with some particular argument, but it can be  shown  that  there
      are grounds on which he would have been entitled to reject it, the IAC
      should assume that he acted on those grounds unless the appellant  can
      point to convincing reasons leading to a contrary conclusion.


  53. In English v Emery Reinhold Strict  Ltd  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  605,  Lord
      Phillips, MR, stated [19] that if the appellate  process  is  to  work
      satisfactorily, the judgement must enable the [IAT] to understand  why
      the [adjudicator] reached his decision. It does not  mean  that  every
      factor which weighed with the adjudicator  in  his  appraisal  of  the
      evidence should be identified  and  explained.  But  the  issues,  the
      resolution of which were  vital  to  the  adjudicator's  consideration
      should be  identified  and  the  manner  in  which  he  resolved  them
      explained. It need not be a lengthy judgment. It does require that the
      adjudicator  identify  and  and  recalled  those  matters  which  were
      critical to his decision.


  54. Brookes LJ in R (Iran) [15] continued  after  quoting  Lord  Phillips,
      that he used the words "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the  word
      "material" that they  had  used  above.  The  whole  of  Lord  Philips
      judgement warrants attention, because it reveals  the  anxiety  of  an
      appellate court not to overturn a judgement at first  instance  unless
      it really cannot understand the original judge's thought process  when
      he/she was making the material findings.


  55. At paragraph 16 he stated that what has been said does not absolve  an
      adjudicator of his/her duty of devoting the intense  scrutiny  to  the
      appellant's case that is required of a decision  of  such  importance.
      What they wished to make  clear  however,  is  that  the  practice  of
      bringing appeals because the adjudicator or immigration judge has  not
      made reasoned findings on matters of peripheral importance  'must  now
      come to an end'.


  56. I have also had regard to MacDonald's Immigration  Law  and  Practice,
      referred to in Mr Mills' skeleton at page 18. The duty to give reasons
      does not require the Judge to deal expressly with  every  point.  When
      assessing the adequacy of the Tribunal's  reasons,  the  determination
      should be read as a whole and in a common sense way.


  57. I note that the 2014 certificate was not challenged before the  First-
      tier Tribunal. No adjournment  was  sought  to  enable  checks  to  be
      carried out.


  58.  More  significantly,  the  sponsor  gave   evidence   as   to   their
      relationship. There were  also  witness  statements  setting  out  the
      relationship.


  59. There was no cross examination at all of the  evidence  given  by  the
      claimant and the sponsor to that effect. The Judge set out in full [5]
      how the original birth certificate was obtained. The sponsor could not
      explain why there were grammatical mistakes. He also gave unchallenged
      evidence as to why the claimant's mother's name did not feature on the
      certificate. The claimant had been attending school in the Republic of
      Ireland prior to coming to the UK for the purpose of education.


  60. It appears that the sponsor's cross examination  was  limited  to  the
      matters  contained  in  paragraph  5.  However,  there  was  no  cross
      examination of the claimant's evidence, particularly  with  regard  to
      the relationship between her and the sponsor.


  61. There  was  thus  uncontested  evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the
      claimant's sponsor was her father. This is clearly stated at paragraph
      12 of the determination.


  62. I also find that the  Judge's  reasons  for  accepting  the  sponsor's
      evidence with regard to the certificate issued in 1993,  namely,  that
      the competent authority in  Pakistan  did  not  have  the  benefit  of
      computerisation was adequate and appropriate. The Judge noted that  it
      was not the secretary of state's case that the first birth certificate
      was a forgery. It did identify the father as  sponsor,  together  with
      the claimant's name.


  63. The Judge also had regard to the updated certificate, making reference
      to the claimant's date of  birth  as  well  as  details  of  both  her
      parents.


  64. The aside by the Judge at paragraph 11 that the secretary of state had
      the opportunity to undertake any verification checks  on  the  emailed
      birth certificate had they chosen to do so, did not have the effect of
      transferring the burden of proof. An  opportunity  was  given  to  the
      secretary of state to contest the veracity of  the  certificate.  That
      however was declined. There had been no suggestion that the 2014 birth
      certificate was not admissible in evidence.


  65. There was no doubt in  the  Judge's  mind  that  the  parents  of  the
      claimant were those as claimed  by  her.  The  sponsor  had  not  been
      challenged with respect to his clear evidence that he was the  father.
      Moreover, the mother was sitting at the back of the hearing room.  The
      secretary of state had the opportunity to challenge  the  relationship
      between the claimant and her mother but chose not to take it.


  66. I find, having regard to the evidence as a whole,  that  there  was  a
      proper evidential basis for the First-tier Tribunal Judge's subsequent
      finding and conclusion  that  the  claimant's  parents  are  those  as
      claimed by her.


  67. It cannot be said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's thought process
      with regard to  the  making  of  these  material  findings  cannot  be
      understood. The  findings  that  the  Judge  has  made  were  properly
      reasoned on a sustainable basis.


              Notice of Decision


              The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error              on any point  of  law.  The  decision  shall
accordingly stand.


               The  appeal  of  the  secretary  of  state   is   accordingly
dismissed.


              No anonymity direction is made.





              Signed                             Date 18/4/2015


              Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

