
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14455/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th May 2015                     |On 11th June 2015                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    D O B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding, instructed by J. McCarthy Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. We shall  refer  to  the
       respondent as the claimant. This is our joint decision: both  members
       of the panel have contributed to the writing of this decision.

The Issues

    2. The claimant faces administrative removal. The Secretary of State has
       accepted that the claimant, a national of Jamaica who has been in the
       UK since 2001 without leave to remain but for an initial six  months,
       is entitled to leave to remain under  paragraph  276ADE  (v)  of  the
       Immigration Rules (as he has lived in the UK for half  of  his  life)
       but for the fact that it is  said  he  cannot  meet  the  suitability
       requirements at paragraphs S-LTR 1.5 and S-LTR  1.6  of  Appendix  FM
       because of his criminal behaviour and associations.

    3. The Secretary of State contends that the claimant cannot  meet  these
       suitability requirements because he falls to be refused  under  S-LRT
       1.5 as a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard to  the
       law and because under S-LRT  1.6,  the  claimant's  presence  is  not
       conducive to the public good because of his  conduct,  character  and
       associations.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal (FtT) allowed the claimant's  appeal  on  the
       basis that the claimant's offending had not caused serious  harm  and
       because he was not a persistent offender who had shown  a  particular
       disregard for the law and so did not fall to be refused  under  S-LTR
       1.5. Further, he did not fall to be refused under S-LTR  1.6  because
       there were no reasons rendering it undesirable for him to be  allowed
       to remain in the UK when  his  convictions,  conduct,  character  and
       associations were considered. As such he fulfilled  the  requirements
       of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

    5. The Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  the  FtT  erred  in  law  in
       determining this appeal by failing to apply the  correct  legal  test
       encapsulated in these two provisions of S-LRT.

Background

    6. The claimant was born in September 1994. He arrived in the UK on 13th
       July 2001 with his mother, Ms A N,  also  a  citizen  of  Jamaica  as
       family visitors. She made further applications for him to  remain  as
       her dependent but these were refused by the Secretary  of  State  and
       all appeals were dismissed by 21st April 2004. The claimant  came  to
       the attention of the police and local authorities thereafter, however
       it was first on 14th September  2012  that  he  was  encountered  and
       detained as an overstayer by the Immigration Service, who served  him
       with notice of removal.

    7. On 19th September 2012 the claimant made an application for leave  to
       remain. By this time his relevant  family  members  were  his  foster
       carer/de facto mother Ms M L, M  L's  two  children,  his  biological
       brother CAP and his  friend  Ms  KC.  He  has  no  contact  with  his
       biological mother, or knowledge of her whereabouts.

    8.  Initially  this  application  was  certified  under  s.94   of   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but  this  decision  was
       reversed following judicial review proceedings;  and  on  24th  April
       2013 the Secretary of State made the decision to refuse the  claimant
       leave to remain. This decision is the subject of this appeal.

    9. As outlined above the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
       refuse leave to remain under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
       Rules was allowed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Blandy  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 29th August 2014.

   10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       JM Holmes on 19th September 2014 on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law.

Evidence & Proceedings before the FtT

   11. The Secretary of State relied upon evidence  in  the  form  of  three
       statements from  Mr  Geoffrey  Worsdell  (formerly  DC  Worsdell),  a
       witness statement from Police Intelligence  Officer  Eleanor  Daniels
       and a witness statement from Police Constable Suaznabar who  produced
       three DVDs of clips from YouTube. In  addition  there  were  a  large
       number of reports about the claimant from the Police Crime  Reporting
       Information System (CRIS), a custody record relating to the claimant,
       a Police National Computer Record relating to  his  brother  C  P,  a
       report produced by the Youth Offending Team on  the  claimant  by  Ms
       Nancy Stewart dated 16th May 2012, two CRIS reports on the claimant's
       mother Ms A N, and a map of the area where the claimant lived.

   12. For his part, the claimant produced an  independent  risk  assessment
       report from Ms Denise E Marshall, a copy  of  his  original  Jamaican
       passport showing his entry stamp, a medical card and  documents  from
       Lambeth College.

   13. The hearing before the FtT took place over three days, (10th and 11th
       June and 19th August 2014). Mr Worsdell gave evidence for almost  the
       entire first day; the second day and part of the third day were taken
       up by the evidence of the claimant; and evidence was heard from Ms  M
       L on the third day when submissions were also made.

Conclusions of the FtT

   14. It is accepted by all parties and the FtT that the claimant  has  the
       following criminal record and or has accepted he  had  committed  the
       following criminal acts:

         . 7/5/2007 theft of trainers for which he received a reprimand

         . 2/4/2010 theft of a bike for which he was cautioned

         . 7/2010 possession of an offensive weapon for which he received a
           warning

         . 19/7/2010 attempted theft of a computer for which he received  a
           warning

         . 6/5/2011 robbery of a bus pass for which he received a  6  month
           referral order

         . 13/6/2011 criminal damage of a car for which  he  received  a  3
           month referral order

         . 18/1/2012 violent disorder (throwing a bottle)  in  a  riot  for
           which he received 4 months detention and training

         . 23/5/2012 smoked cannabis - admitted offence no police action

         . 23/6/2012 obstructing a police officer for which he  received  a
           three year conditional discharge

   15. It is uncontroversial that whilst all  the  above  acts  (except  the
       smoking of cannabis) form the claimant's criminal  record,  only  the
       referral orders, the detention and training and conditional discharge
       are criminal convictions as these penalties were decided  upon  by  a
       court after a finding of guilt.

   16. It was argued before the FtT that the claimant had  "led  a  criminal
       lifestyle since arriving in the United Kingdom" and  that  there  had
       been an escalation  in  his  offending  behaviour  in  the  sense  of
       frequency and gravity of the offences and that  the  claimant  was  a
       member of a criminal gang, called the "Notre Dame Gang".

   17. It was also argued that the appellant's true identity  was  MAC,  and
       not DOB, on the basis of information provided  to  the  Secretary  of
       State by the Jamaican High Commission.

   18. At paragraphs [18] to [20] of its decision the  FtT  found  that  the
       claimant had not been dishonest about his identity,  and  that  there
       was no evidence before it that the Jamaican High Commission had found
       his identity to be  MAC.  This  finding  is  not  challenged  by  the
       Secretary of State in this appeal.

   19. The FtT analysed the fifty five encounters between the  claimant  and
       the police set  out  in  the  respondent's  evidence  and  considered
       whether the evidence regarding each encounter was  an  indication  of
       criminal activity or gang association. The FtT analysed these matters
       at [21] of its decision over 55 subparagraphs. The DVDs, the evidence
       of all the witnesses and the reports  of  Ms  Nancy  Stewart  and  Ms
       Denise Marshall were considered at [22] to [31] of the decision.  The
       FtT found no evidence of criminal activity  on  the  claimant's  part
       except for as set out at paragraph 15 above.

   20. The FtT said regarding S-LTR 1.5  as follows:

           "36. I do not consider that  the  consequences  of  any  of  the
           offences, or even all of them taken in aggregate can be said  to
           amount to "serious harm".  It  is  then  necessary  to  consider
           whether, in the alternative,  the  appellant  is  a  "persistent
           offender who shows a particular disregard for the law". I do not
           consider that these offences, committed over a number  of  years
           whilst the appellant was still a child render  the  appellant  a
           persistent offender and I do not find that they demonstrate that
           he shows a particular disregard  for  the  law.  I  do  find  it
           interesting that he has always pleaded guilty to the offences of
           which he has been convicted, and has never, so far as I can see,
           been convicted of an offence to which he pleaded not  guilty.  I
           consider that this does demonstrate a respect for the law. It is
           difficult to  know  precisely  what  the  phrase  "a  particular
           disregard for the law" is intended to mean but it seems to imply
           that the individual concerned must have a disregard for the  law
           that is  over  and  above  that  demonstrated  by  a  persistent
           offender. I find on looking at all the evidence as a whole  that
           the appellant is neither a persistent offender nor has he  shown
           a particular disregard for the law. For  these  reasons  I  find
           that the appellant's application for leave to  remain  does  not
           fall for refusal by virtue of the provisions of S-LTR 1.5."

   21. As to S-LTR 1.6 the FtT concluded at [37] to  [44]  of  the  decision
       that the evidence showed that the claimant was only on the  periphery
       of any gang and had no involvement in any criminal  enterprise  as  a
       gang member. The FtT  found  the  other  evidence  amounted  only  to
       suspicion; and that there was a lack of  real  evidence  linking  the
       claimant to any crime except that set out  at  paragraph  15  of  our
       decision above. In the words of  the  FtT:  "Heaping  suspicion  upon
       suspicion does not add up to any more than mere suspicion", and there
       was a: "lack of any real evidence against the appellant  in  relation
       to many of the instances  when  he  was  apparently  suspected  of  a
       crime."  The FtT concluded that merely associating  with  people  who
       have  criminal  records  was  not  sufficient  to  say  that  it  was
       undesirable for the claimant to remain  in  the  UK.  Whilst  it  was
       clearly the case that the claimant  had  on  a  number  of  occasions
       behaved badly and committed criminal offences  these  were  generally
       relatively trivial, and that in the context of his  family  and  home
       background his record was perhaps surprisingly minimal. The FtT noted
       that the reports of Ms  Marshall  and  Ms  Stewart  showed  that  the
       claimant had the potential to lead a "good and honest and  productive
       life as an adult" and concluded that:

           "... neither the appellant's conduct, even taking  into  account
           his convictions, nor his character or his associations render it
           undesirable for him to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom, nor  do  I  find  that  there  are  any  other  reasons
           rendering it undesirable for him to be allowed to remain in  the
           United Kingdom."

The Grounds of Challenge

   22. The Secretary of State's written grounds of appeal can be  summarised
       as follows:

         . The finding that the appellant was  not  a  persistent  offender
           under S-LTR 1.5 at [36] was contrary to the evidence.

         . It was not open to the Tribunal to find the appellant was not  a
           "persistent offender" given the finding  at  [35]  that  he  had
           eight incidents of criminal behaviour over six years.

         . The Tribunal had misinterpreted the  meaning  of  "a  particular
           disregard for the law" at S-LTR 1.5. The interpretation was  too
           generous at [36]. Pleading guilty when the appellant had  broken
           the law did not show respect for it.

         . It was not open to the  Tribunal  to  look  at  the  appellant's
           likely future conduct in relation to S-LTR 1.6  as  is  done  at
           [43]. The assessment should have only been of past behaviour.

         . It was wrong for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to have  referred
           to his having friends who had criminal records at  [42]  of  the
           decision, and to have set out terms for  bail  at  [47]  of  the
           decision.



The Immigration Rules

   23. The relevant parts of paragraph 276ADE read as follows:

       276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
       remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
       of application, the applicant:

           (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
           Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
           and

           (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and

           ...

           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
           at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment);

   24. The relevant parts of Appendix FM S-LTR read as follows:

       S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
       to the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State,
       their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
       offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.

       S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is  not  conducive
       to the public good because their conduct (including convictions which
       do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to  1.5.),  character,
       associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them  to
       remain in the UK.

Submissions on Error of Law

   25. Mr Norton contended that the FtT had erred in law as it  had  applied
       an impermissible legal interpretation of S-LTR 1.5  with  regards  to
       the meaning of "persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard
       for the law". He explained that there was no irrationality  challenge
       to the tribunal's conclusions on the facts and it was  accepted  that
       all the evidence had been considered.  As noted above  there  was  no
       challenge to the finding that the claimant  had  not  caused  serious
       harm through his offending, and thus did not fall to be refused under
       the first limb of S-LTR  1.5.  Mr  Norton  accepted  that  no  policy
       guidance from the  Secretary  of  State  had  been  put  to  the  FtT
       regarding the definition of the meaning of "persistent offender  with
       a particular disregard for the law".

   26. He argued that in accordance with Bah (EO  (Turkey)  -  liability  to
       deport) [2012] UKUT  00196  and  Farquaharson  (removal  -  proof  of
       conduct) [2013] UKUT 000146 that the FtT had not  applied  the  right
       standard of proof to the evidence and therefore had not seen that  on
       the balance of  probabilities  it  showed  persistent  offending.  He
       argued  that  offending  included  all  the  incidents  described  in
       evidence by the Secretary of State. Even if this were  not  the  case
       the accepted criminal convictions and admission of guilt to crime set
       out at paragraph 15 of this  decision  sufficed  to  show  persistent
       offending  as  more  than  two  convictions  amounted  to  persistent
       offending. Mr Norton argued that "particular disregard for  the  law"
       added nothing as all people with  two  convictions  or  more  had  by
       definition shown a particular disregard for the law.

   27. As set out in the grounds Mr Norton contended that the FtT had  erred
       in law in the application of S-LTR 1.6 because  they  had  looked  in
       part at least at the likely future behaviour of the claimant and  not
       just at past behaviour as would be correct. Mr Norton  accepted  that
       this challenge was not the strongest part of his case however.

   28. Mr Norton did not pursue the ground relating to the  bail  conditions
       or reference to the criminal record of the Judge's friends.

   29. Mr Harding argued that absent a rationality challenge, the grounds of
       appeal were in reality simply a disagreement with the  result.  There
       had been an extremely thorough exploration of the issues by  the  FtT
       over a three day hearing which resulted in a thorough decision, which
       looked at every single allegation made by the Secretary of  State  in
       turn. It was open to the FtT to find that the  evidence  put  by  the
       Secretary of State did not, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  show
       that the claimant fell to be refused under  S-LTR  1.5  or  1.6.  The
       challenge had to fail as the  Judge  looked  at  the  evidence,  gave
       proper reasons for his conclusions and clearly  applied  the  correct
       provisions of the Immigration Rules.

   30. It was submitted by Mr Harding that the FtT had correctly interpreted
       S-LTR 1.5 as being concerned solely  with  criminal  convictions  and
       admissions of guilty to crime. This was supported by the wording at S-
       LTR 1.6 which referred to criminal convictions  in  conjunction  with
       1.5, and also fitted with the  use  of  this  word  in  the  criminal
       juvenile justice context. On  a  plain  reading  S-LTR  1.5  was  the
       provision which dealt with criminal convictions/ criminal record  and
       S-LTR 1.6 dealt matters which did  not  amount  to  convictions.  The
       Tribunal in Farquaharson did not refer to the appellant in that  case
       being an offender at any point in their decision:  but  the  evidence
       before the Tribunal showed to the civil standard  of  proof  that  Mr
       Farquaharson's conduct meant it was not conducive to the public  good
       to allow him to remain.

   31. Mr Harding argued that in terms of the accepted  criminal  record  of
       the claimant it was rightly found by  the  FtT  that  he  was  not  a
       "persistent offender, and further it had been correct  to  factor  in
       the appellant's difficult home and family situation in coming to this
       conclusion.

   32. A "particular disregard  for  the  law"  was  not  obviously  just  a
       tautology: it was open the tribunal to give it  the  meaning  of  not
       including someone who behaved in a straight forward  fashion  towards
       the criminal justice system. Those who  had  a  particular  disregard
       might be  those  who  did  not  attend  court  or  who  flouted  bail
       conditions. It was also appropriate to consider the less grave nature
       of the offences showed less of a particular disregard for the law.

   33. In relation to S-LTR 1.6 Mr Harding submitted that the FtT had looked
       at all the evidence carefully and come to  reasoned  conclusions.  It
       had not simply focused on the future.

   34. We invited Mr Harding and Mr Norton to comment on the  definition  of
       "persistent offender" used by the CPS in their legal guidance relying
       upon  the  Sentencing  Guidelines  Council  Definitive  Guideline  as
       follows:

           "In determining whether an offender is a persistent offender for
           these purposes, a court should consider the simple test of
           whether the young person is one who persists in offending:

           ...

           iii) in most circumstances, the normal expectation is that the
           offender will have had some contact with authority in which the
           offending conduct was challenged before being classified as
           persistent; a finding of persistence in offending may also arise
           from orders which require an admission or finding of guilt these
           include reprimands, final warnings, restorative justice
           disposals and conditional cautions. Since they do not require
           such an admission, penalty notices for disorder are unlikely to
           be sufficiently reliable;

           iv) a young offender is certainly likely to be found to be
           persistent (and, in relation to a custodial sentence, the test
           of being a measure of last resort is most likely to be
           satisfied) where the offender has been convicted of, or made
           subject to a pre court disposal that involves an admission or
           finding of guilt in relation to, imprisonable offences on at
           least three occasions in the past 12 months."

   35. Both parties submitted that they found it to be of limited assistance
       as it was obviously guidance for criminal sentencing. Mr Norton  said
       that it would be overly restrictive to apply  this  definition  in  a
       civil immigration context; where as Mr Harding commented that it  had
       not been before the FtT.

Discussion

  S-LTR 1.5

   36. This claimant is subject to administrative  removal  proceedings  and
       not deportation action but it is notable that  identical  wording  to
       that at S-LTR 1.5 appears at paragraph 398C of the Immigration  Rules
       allowing for the deportation conducive to the public  good  of  those
       whose offending has caused serious harm or those who  are  persistent
       offenders who show a particular disregard for the law.

   37. We look first to the  plain  meaning  of  the  words  in  the  second
       provision of S-LTR 1.5. The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary  (sixth
       edition) definition of "persistent"  provides  two  main  options  of
       "continuing firmly or obstinately in a course  of  action  especially
       against opposition" or of  "continuing  to  exist  or  occur  over  a
       prolonged period, enduring". "Offender" is defined in  current  usage
       as: "a person who (or occasionally a thing which) offends;  a  person
       who breaks a law,  rule  or  regulation;  a  person  who  commits  an
       offence;  a  person  who  gives  offence,   displeases   or   excites
       resentment."

   38. We note the guidance in Mahad (Ethiopia) v  Entre  Clearance  Officer
       [2009] UKSC 16 at paragraph 10 of that  judgement.  Lord  Brown,  who
       gave the lead judgement, placed reliance on Lord  Hoffman's  analysis
       in Odeola  v  SSHD  [2009]  UKSC  25  that  the  construction  of  an
       Immigration Rule relies upon  the  language  of  the  rule  construed
       against the relevant background, and concludes that: "The  Rules  are
       not to be  construed  with  all  the  strictness  applicable  to  the
       construction of a statute or a  statutory  instrument  but,  instead,
       sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meanings of the  words
       used,".

   39. Applying these principles we find, the natural and  ordinary  meaning
       of the words "persistent offender" in the context  of  S-LTR  1.5  is
       someone who breaks laws over a prolonged period.

   40. We further find that persistent offender under S-LTR 1.5 is  confined
       to  those  whose  law  breaking  is  established  by  conviction   or
       admission, and thus likely to be reflected in the criminal record  of
       an appellant. Mere suspicion is not enough to establish the  breaking
       of a law. It is important that deference is  given  to  the  cardinal
       principle  of  presumption  of  innocence.  "Offender"   has   strong
       connotations of those  convicted  or  recorded  within  the  criminal
       justice system as having committed criminal offences, as indicated by
       the ordinary meaning of the words and the CPS guidance.

   41. The cases of Bah and Farquharsan do not suggest that this approach is
       not correct.  They  are  authority  that  the  acts  behind  criminal
       proceedings that do not result in  conviction  of  an  appellant  can
       still be established on the civil standard of proof before a Tribunal
       as evidence of "conduct" that makes it  not  conducive  to  allow  an
       appellant to remain in both  the  deportation  and  removal  context.
       Clearly these principles therefore allow the Secretary of State and a
       tribunal to rely upon such material in their consideration  of  S-LTR
       1.6.  The  cases  are  not  authority  that  "offender"   should   be
       interpreted to include those who are alleged by the criminal  justice
       system to have committed crimes but where  there  is  no  clear  (and
       usually formal) admission of guilt by the appellant or conviction  by
       a court.

   42. Further, the wording  of  S-LTR  1.6  indicates  that  there  may  be
       convictions that do  not  fall  within  S-LTR  1.5,  suggesting  that
       criminal convictions should be the primary focus of S-LTR 1.5. It  is
       clear that a wide range of matters can be brought into play under  S-
       LTR 1.6; and thus this approach adds clarity whilst not excluding any
       relevant  material  from  the   consideration   of   an   appellant's
       suitability, and his or her ability  to  meet  the  criteria  of  the
       Immigration Rules on this basis.

   43. Mr Norton's proposition that "a particular disregard for the law"  is
       meaningless or adds nothing cannot be correct. It is plain  that  the
       drafters of the rule believed that it added a  qualification  to  the
       group of "persistent offenders" who were to be found unsuitable under
       this clause of S-LTR 1.5. "Particular"  indicates  a  requirement  to
       show a greater or more intense disregard for the law over  and  above
       the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  already  been  shown  to  be  a
       "persistent offender".

   44. We find that "a particular disregard for the law" might be shown in a
       number of different ways. It might  be  that  a  persistent  offender
       shows a particular disregard for the criminal justice process by, for
       instance:  obstructing  the  trial   process;   committing   perjury;
       prolonging  trials  unnecessarily  by  pointless  pleading;   or   by
       committing offences  on  bail  or  licence.  It  might  be  that  the
       particular disregard for the law is shown because the offences are by
       their very nature, or the way in which they  were  executed,  at  the
       more serious end of the spectrum of offending (although we appreciate
       that this sub category of S-LTR 1.5 is already  narrowed  to  matters
       which do not cause serious harm). It also connotes a  greater  degree
       of responsibility for the wrong doing than would be found in a  child
       or juvenile offender (or perhaps other more vulnerable offender  such
       as those with mental health problems or a low IQ)  who  simply  lacks
       impulse control or who is lead or intimidated by others into criminal
       behaviour.

   45. S-LTR 1.5 uses the present tense. It is necessary to  show  that  the
       appellant is a persistent offender who shows a  particular  disregard
       for the law. It is therefore clear that events  reasonably  proximate
       to the decision or hearing are likely to have greater relevance to an
       appellant falling to be refused in this way than historic matters.

  The Test

   46. Whether someone is "a persistent offender with a particular disregard
       for the law" is not simply a matter of crude  arithmetic  or  totting
       up. There may be some cases where the number  and  frequency  of  the
       offences contained within a person's criminal record is such that  it
       brings him or her within  the  definition  however  most  cases  will
       require an evaluative analysis of all of the offences  in  play,  and
       the motive or drive behind their commission.

  S-LTR 1.6

   47. We are satisfied that  it  is  permissible  to  look  at  the  future
       prospects of someone when examining this  provision  as  it  requires
       consideration of whether there is "other reasons" why it would not be
       conducive to the public good not to  allow  someone  to  remain,  and
       material going to future likely developments in a person's life could
       be relevant to this consideration.

  Conclusions in this Case

   48. Applying the analysis we have outlined above we find that it was open
       to the FtT to have allowed the claimant's appeal for the reasons  set
       out by the tribunal.  Whilst  the  FtT  considered  certain  evidence
       showed the  claimant  was  not  a  "persistent  offender",  the  same
       material in  our  view  was  more  relevant  to  showing  he  had  no
       "particular disregard for the law" in the discussion  of  S-LTR  1.5.
       We also consider that some further factors noted  in  the  discussion
       with  regarding  S-LTR  1.6  were  more  relevant  to  "a  particular
       disregard for the law". But when considered as a  whole  we  find  no
       material error of law in the reasoning by the FtT, nor any  error  as
       to the test it was required to apply.

   49. It is particularly notable at [21] over  55  subparagraphs  that  the
       tribunal clearly acknowledged all  of  the  allegations  of  criminal
       behaviour made against the claimant by the Secretary  of  State,  and
       made a careful and sustainable evaluation of each  incident  and  its
       impact on others. At [22] to [31] there is also a  detailed  analysis
       of the other evidence before the FtT in the  form  of  DVDs,  witness
       evidence and expert reports.

   50. It was rationally open to the FtT at [36] to find that nine  admitted
       criminal  acts  over  a  period  of  six  years  did  not  amount  to
       "persistent offending". We are certainly not persuaded by Mr Norton's
       submission that two criminal convictions  would  always  be  seen  as
       persistent offending. In accordance with our analysis each case  must
       be viewed on its individual facts. We find it unlikely  however  that
       an offender is a persistent offender without his or her having had at
       least  three  convictions  in  the  past  year   at   the   time   of
       decision/hearing. This claimant  had  just  one  criminal  conviction
       (obstructing  a  police  officer)  and  one  admission  of   criminal
       behaviour (smoking cannabis) in the year prior to  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision giving rise to this  appeal.  The  claimant  had  no
       criminal offences  committed  in  the  year  prior  to  the  Tribunal
       hearing. In this context we have given consideration to the fact that
       he had been detained for almost two years at the date of hearing but,
       on the evidence before the FtT, he had  no  "adjudications"  for  any
       untoward behaviour on his part whilst in detention either.

   51. We agree that, in addition, it was rationally open to the FtT to find
       that this claimant had not shown "a particular disregard for the law"
       as is done at [36]. The tribunal noted the  evidence  indicated  when
       the claimant was guilty he had pleaded to the offence  and  otherwise
       cooperated with the  criminal  justice  system.  We  find  the  FtT's
       conclusion is supported by the fact that the claimant's offences were
       found by the FtT at [43] to be mostly at the more trivial end of  the
       spectrum and that they were committed by him as  a  child  living  in
       very difficult social and family circumstances.

   52. The consideration of S-LTR 1.6 by the FtT likewise discloses no error
       of law.  There is detailed consideration at [38-40]  of  whether  the
       evidence indicates that the claimant is a member of  a  gang,  and  a
       placing of the evidence personal to the claimant in  the  context  of
       that relating to other gang members  provided  by  the  Secretary  of
       State. The FtT concluded at [41] that the claimant is not a member of
       a gang. The remaining  evidence  regarding  the  claimant's  friends,
       accepted criminal record and behaviour is then considered at [42] and
       [43]. The FtT thoroughly considered all of the evidence going to  the
       claimant's  conduct,  character  and  associations  and   also   gave
       consideration to any other reasons, in terms  of  his  likely  future
       behaviour, as to why it might not be conducive to the public good  or
       undesirable to allow him to remain.

Decision:

  The making of the decision of the FtT did not involve the  making  of  an
  error on a point of  law.  The  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
  dismissed.

       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) we continue the anonymity order made by the First-
       tier  Tribunal.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court   directs
       otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of  publication
       thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original appellant.
       This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure
       to comply with this direction could give rise to  contempt  of  court
       proceedings. We do so as there are sensitive  issues  concerning  the
       appellant's childhood.



Signed:

      Date: 9th June 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

