

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14746/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 6 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    OLUFEYISAYOMI INIOLUWA PEACE OKETIKUN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb instructed by Graceland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  23  February
      1998.   On  23  December  2013,  together  with  her   two   siblings,
      applications were made for residence  cards  as  confirmation  of  the
      appellant's right of residence as a "family member" of an EEA national
      exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations  2006  (SI  2006/1003  as  amended).   The  basis  of  the
      application  was  that  the  appellant  and  her  siblings  were   the
      stepchildren of Aneta Malgorzata Pilch (the sponsor), a Polish citizen
      working in the UK and married to the appellant's father.

   2. On 6 March 2014, the Secretary of State refused to grant  a  residence
      card to the appellant and her siblings principally on the  basis  that
      the evidence did not establish that the sponsor was exercising  treaty
      rights as a worker in the UK.

   3. Thereafter, the appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   For
      reasons which have not been made clear to me, the appellant's siblings
      did  not  appeal  albeit  that  their  claims  would  appear   to   be
      indistinguishable from that of the appellant.

   4. The appellant did not request an oral hearing and on 21 May 2014,  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pirotta) dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
      under the EEA Regulations and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The Judge
      was not satisfied that the sponsor was exercising treaty tights  as  a
      worker.

   5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      principally on the ground that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  a
      number of payslips relating to Ms Pilch which had  been  sent  to  the
      Tribunal  and  had  subsequently  been  returned  to  the  appellant's
      representatives under cover of a letter dated 21 May 2014.

   6. On 4 July 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes) granted the
      appellant permission to appeal on that ground namely:

           "The grounds  assert  that  the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with
           evidence that had been submitted to the Tribunal, and  that  was
           returned to her after the decision upon the appeal was  reached.
           The Tribunal file does record that some  unidentified  documents
           were returned to her on 21 May 2014, but it is  not  clear  what
           those documents were, or why they  did  not  form  part  of  the
           bundles of evidence that are on  the  Tribunal  file  and  which
           appear  to  have  been  considered  by  the   Judge.    In   the
           circumstances, I grant permission so that  the  appellant  might
           have the opportunity to establish that she did  submit  relevant
           evidence to the Tribunal that was overlooked by the Judge."

   7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

   8. Before me, Ms Grubb, who represented the  appellant,  sought  to  make
      good the ground upon which permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   She
      accepted that there was no direct evidence that the payslips had  been
      submitted but her instructions were that had been the case and it  was
      a reasonable inference from the Tribunal's letter dated  21  May  2014
      which returned "nine" wage slips and  "four"  other  or  miscellaneous
      original documents to the appellant's previous representatives.

   9. While there is much to be said for the merit of Ms Grubb's submission,
      it is not necessary to determine the  factual  issue  of  whether  the
      payslips were submitted and, as a consequence,  were  not  taken  into
      account by the judge.  I say that because of the judge's reasoning  at
      para 19 of her determination where she considered a number of payslips
      that were undoubtedly submitted with the application and available  to
      the Judge on the appeal.  The judge said this:

         "19.     The Sponsor submitted no cogent evidence  of  her  claimed
             work as the documents submitted in  the  application  did  not
             refer to a period close to the  application  but  for  only  4
             months in 2009 and 2010.  Some of the pay slips  submitted  in
             the appeal refer to her or to  a  person  whose  name  is  not
             intelligible, because the photocopy is so poor.  The  employer
             is said to be 'Two sisters Food Group' or  '(illegible)  ...DS
             Brookes AV' not 'Premier Foods' who the Sponsor claimed to  be
             her employers.  There is no cogent evidence that  the  Sponsor
             is exercising Treaty Rights or that she  was  employed  during
             any relevant period."

  10. Clearly there the judge considered  that  the  two  sets  of  payslips
      before her - one relating to "Two Sisters Food Group" and the other to
      "Premier Foods" did not both relate to employment by  the  sponsor  as
      she only claimed to work for "Premier Foods".  That is contrary to the
      sponsor's evidence in her witness statement dated 2 May 2014 at  pages
      2-4 of the appeal bundle.  At para 3, she states:

         "As at the time the application was submitted, I was employed by  2
         Sisters Food Group as a cake decorator and I continued to work  for
         the same company.  My employers  were  formerly  known  as  Premier
         Foods.  My Employee number  (0002793)  with  Premier  Foods  and  2
         Sisters Food Group is the same as evidenced in my payslips."

  11. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  accepted  that  the
      judge had been in error when  he  considered  that  the  two  sets  of
      payslips (which were undoubtedly before the judge) did not both relate
      to the sponsor.  He accepted that  as  a  result  of  that  error  the
      judge's findings in relation to the sponsor's employment  and  whether
      she was, at the relevant time, exercising treaty rights as a worker in
      the UK were flawed.

  12. In my judgment, that error, in itself,  justifies  setting  aside  the
      judge's decision.  In addition, I have considerable concern as to  the
      evidence that was in fact before the judge  and  whether  it  was  all
      taken into account in any event. However, given the judge's  reasoning
      in  para  19  of  her  determination,  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations involved the making of an
      error of law.  The decision is set aside.

  13. One final point.  Neither party addressed me on the Judge's finding in
      paras 22 and 23 that the appellant and  sponsor  had  not  established
      they were married as claimed.  That finding  was  based  upon  on  the
      absence of supporting evidence.  However, this was not a  point  taken
      by the Respondent in her decision letter of 6 March  2014.   It  would
      appear, therefore, that she was satisfied the sponsor and  appellant's
      father were married.  The appeal was determined on the papers and  the
      appellant had no notice that the Judge might take this  point  on  the
      evidence available at the hearing.  To take the point in this way  was
      undoubtedly unfair and  may  well  be  contrary  to  the  Respondent's
      position in the light of the evidence submitted with the  application.
      It is a point which could only  fairly  be  taken  on  notice  to  the
      appellant.  For this reason, that adverse finding also  cannot  stand.
      It may be a matter relevant at a re-hearing of this appeal.

Disposal

  14. Both representatives indicated that the more appropriate course was to
      remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing of
      the appeal.

  15. Given that it may be said that  the  appellant  has  not  had  a  fair
      hearing on all the evidence and given the factual issues  that  remain
      to be decided, I agree  having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statement that the appeal should be  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before a judge other than  Judge
      Pirotta.

  16. Ms Grubb indicated that it was likely that the appellant would wish to
      have an oral  hearing,  not  least  so  that  the  evidential  matters
      concerning the sponsor's  employment  could  be  satisfactorily  dealt
      with.


Signed


A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
14 October 2014
