
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14366/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st August 2014                             |On 29th August 2014        |
|Prepared: 21st August 2014                      |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          MRS MAGARET ABEKE OLANIYI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  6th  June  1943.   She
    appealed against decisions of the Respondent dated 16th March  2014  to
    cancel her leave to enter the United Kingdom and to remove  her.  These
    were taken on the grounds that the Respondent was satisfied that  false
    representations were employed or material facts were not disclosed  for
    the purpose of obtaining leave and/or that there had been such a change
    of circumstances in her case since the leave was granted that it should
    be cancelled pursuant to paragraph 321(A) of the Immigration  Rules  HC
    395.

2.   The Appellant was granted leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  on  13th
    July 2011 valid until 13th July 2013.  She  first  visited  the  United
    Kingdom as long ago as 1978 and between 1982 and 1986 she  had  studied
    at University College in Cardiff.  Her daughter, son-in-law and her two
    grandchildren reside in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant travelled to
    the United Kingdom on 27th October 2010 and returned  to  Nigeria  just
    under six months later on 10th April 2011 ("the  first  period").   She
    then returned to the United Kingdom later that year on  27th  September
    2011 returning to Nigeria 25th March 2012 ("the second  period").   She
    came to the United Kingdom for a third time  on  27th  April  2012  and
    returned to Nigeria on 26th October 2012 ("the third period").

3.   However the passport stamps indicated a different sequence  of  travel.
    Her passport contained Nigerian re-entry stamps purporting to show that
    she returned back to Nigeria on 10th January  2011  (during  the  first
    period), on 10th January 2012 (during the second period) and  7th  July
    2012 (the third period).   These  stamps  were  false  given  that  the
    Appellant had remained in the United Kingdom at  those  times.   On  or
    about 16th March 2014  she  was  stopped  by  Immigration  Officers  at
    Heathrow Airport attempting to enter the United Kingdom. The  Appellant
    was interviewed about these stamps  and  told  the  Respondent  that  a
    neighbour  Mr  Oloko  who  worked  at  Lagos  Airport  would  take  the
    Appellant's passport away, put the fraudulent stamps in and then return
    the passport to the Appellant at her home. She was  initially  detained
    on the grounds that she had failed to  give  satisfactory  or  reliable
    answers to an Immigration Officer. A decision was made to refuse  leave
    to enter which has given rise to the present proceedings.

Immigration Law and Rules Relevant to the Appellant

4.   Paragraph 321(A) sets out the  grounds  on  which  leave  to  enter  or
    remain which is in force is to be cancelled at port or while the holder
    is outside the United Kingdom.  The  paragraph  is  mandatory  and  the
    following grounds apply:

    (1)  that there has been such a change in  the  circumstances  of  that
         person's  case  since  the  leave  was  given  that  it  should  be
         cancelled;

    (2)  false representations were made or false documents were  submitted
         whether or not material to the application and whether  or  not  to
         the holder's knowledge or material  facts  were  not  disclosed  in
         relation to the  application  for  leave  or  in  order  to  obtain
         documents from the Respondent or a third party required in  support
         of the application.

5.   The making of false representations involves an element  of  dishonesty
    and the burden of establishing that  rests  upon  the  Respondent.  The
    dishonesty complained of does not have to be by the  Appellant  herself
    but can be by a third party.





The Proceedings at First Instance

6.   The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decisions arguing  that
    she had adhered to Immigration Rules and not  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom for longer than 180 days for each of her  visits  between  2011
    and 2012.  Cancelling her visa would deny her the opportunity of seeing
    her youngest daughter and watching her grandchildren grow up.

7.   The Appellant indicated at Section K on her notice of appeal form IAFT-
    1 that she wished to have the matter decided at  a  paper  hearing  and
    thus the matter came on the papers for Judge Doyle sitting  at  Glasgow
    on 8th May 2014.  He noted the Appellant's claim that  the  stamps  had
    been placed in her passport by Nigerian Immigration Officers over  whom
    she had no control but wrote:

         "(d) The  difficulty  for  the  Appellant  is  that  she  does  not
             challenge anything that is  said  by  the  Respondent  in  the
             decision notice and concedes that the Nigerian re-entry stamps
             bear no relation to her movements between the UK and  Nigeria.
             The Appellant does not deny that she made certain admission at
             interview.

          (e) Even though a record of the interview  between  the  Appellant
             and the Respondent's employees is not  placed  before  me  the
             Appellant does  not  challenge  the  narrative  given  by  the
             Respondent in the decision notice.  In the notice  of  appeal,
             the Appellant makes it clear that she knew that  the  Nigerian
             re-entry stamps were inaccurate.

          (f) What the Appellant cannot escape  is  that  she  tendered  her
             Nigerian passport and placed reliance on her Nigerian passport
             knowing that it  contained  dishonest  entries  and  that  the
             effect of dishonest entries concealed the true length  of  the
             Appellant's stay in the UK.

          (g) The Respondent had adequate grounds to cancel the  Appellant's
             leave to enter because the Respondent places his reliance on a
             misrepresentation."

     He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  it  was
    inaccurate to say that her neighbour  had  placed  the  stamps  in  the
    passport, the Nigerian Immigration Officers had put the wrong dates  in
    the passport without  her  knowledge.   The  stamps  were  correct  and
    genuine.  It was unfair to punish her for mistakes made by the Nigerian
    Immigration Officers.  As she had never overstayed she had no reason to
    backdate her arrival dates.  Nigerian immigration  officials  did  this
    routinely for those overstaying and they must erroneously have  thought
    that the Appellant was one of those who had overstayed.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  on  26th  June  2014.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that the grounds as drafted  amounted  to
    no more than a disagreement with the findings and would not be adequate
    to justify granting permission.  He continued:

         "However I have read the determination and there  is  no  reference
         anywhere to the shifting of the burden of proof to the Secretary of
         State where forgery or false documentation  is  alleged.   On  that
         basis permission to appeal is granted, I do not limit the grounds".

10.  The Respondent filed a response to the grant of permission on 7th  July
    2014 accepting that the First-tier  Judge  had  not  made  any  express
    reference to the burden upon the Respondent.  However it was clear that
    the Judge was aware of it and that it had been discharged.  There was a
    provision of false information and dishonesty  by  the  Appellant.   No
    issue was taken by the Appellant with the key points identified by  the
    Respondent and there was no material error of law in the determination.

The Hearing Before Me

11.  In consequence the matter came before me  to  determine  whether  there
    was a material error of law in the Judge's determination such  that  it
    fell to be set aside.  If so I would proceed to  remake  the  decision.
    If there was no material error of law then the  decision  would  stand.
    The Appellant attended in person and indicated she was content for  the
    case to proceed without a representative.  She said she had consulted a
    solicitor who had told her that there was no need for him  to  come  as
    she had set matters out fully in her grounds of appeal.

12.  She denied that she had given her passport to be used  by  anyone  else
    travelling to and from Nigeria, the stamps had been put in the passport
    by Immigration Officers in Nigeria.  The stamps were of no  benefit  to
    her as she had never overstayed.

13.  For the Respondent it was  argued  that  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal had given the Appellant an opportunity to  explain  matters  but
    they still had not been explained.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Judge had misunderstood the legal requirement.  The case law  indicated
    that the standard of proof was the balance of probabilities.  There was
    no explanation why the Nigerian authorities would put false  stamps  in
    her passport.

14.  Finally in closing the Appellant indicated  that  if  she  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom it would deny her the opportunity of seeing her
    children who are living in the United  Kingdom  and  she  asked  for  a
    reversal of the First-tier decision.





Findings

15.  The Appellant's explanation why inaccurate stamps were  placed  in  her
    passport was because Nigerian officials were  seeking  to  mislead  the
    British authorities by showing that the Appellant  had  not  overstayed
    her visa but had returned to Nigeria rather earlier than  in  fact  she
    had returned.  The Appellant said that that was misguided  because  she
    did not need that kind of assistance from the Nigerian officials as she
    had not overstayed the implication being that  the  Nigerian  officials
    should therefore have simply correctly stamped her passport.

16.  Even if one takes the Appellant's case at  its  highest  and  discounts
    any possibility that the Appellant might have  given  her  passport  to
    someone else to use to travel between Nigeria and the UK, the  fact  is
    that false passport stamps were  placed  in  the  Appellant's  passport
    knowingly by those  placing  the  stamps  there.   There  is  no  doubt
    therefore that the placing  of  those  stamps  was  dishonest  and  was
    capable of forming conduct that came within paragraph 321(A).   It  was
    not necessary for the Respondent to show that the dishonesty was on the
    part of the Appellant merely that  someone  had  been  dishonest.   The
    Appellant's account is that  the  Nigerian  Immigration  Officers  were
    dishonest.  The Respondent's case was that the  Appellant  by  offering
    her passport with dishonest stamps in them was also being dishonest.

17.   I  have  quoted  what  the  Judge  said  at  paragraph  12(f)  of  his
    determination that the Appellant had tendered her Nigerian passport and
    placed reliance on it knowing  that  it  contained  dishonest  entries.
    Given that she had used the passport to make three journeys between the
    United Kingdom and Nigeria it is inconceivable that she could not  have
    known that there were incorrect stamps in the passport.  She  does  not
    appear to indicate that she was in ignorance of the stamps merely  that
    she had no control over what the Nigerian officials were doing.

18.   The  paragraph  specifically  states  that  it  applies  where   false
    documents are submitted whether or not material to the application.  In
    other words even if the Appellant did not need to  show  that  she  had
    left earlier than she did, the fact that  the  false  stamps  indicated
    that would be sufficient to come within the paragraph.

19.  The Respondent clearly felt that the Appellant was being dishonest  and
    made that very clear in the notice cancelling her leave.  The issue  in
    the case is whether the Judge made it clear in his  determination  that
    it was for the Respondent to prove dishonesty and that  the  Respondent
    had proved dishonesty.  Judge Parkes in granting permission  to  appeal
    was concerned that Judge Doyle had not spelt out where the burden  lay.
    This was a narrow point.  It is clear from reading the determination as
    a whole that the Judge was aware that the Respondent  needed  to  prove
    the dishonesty.  At paragraph 9 the Judge explicitly  stated  that  the
    Respondent relied on admissions made by the Appellant at  interview  to
    prove the Respondent's case.

20.  The Judge noted that the decision notice of the Respondent set out  the
    Respondent's case quite clearly.  The Judge thereby  accepted  that  it
    was for the Respondent to set out what were the facts and  matters  she
    relied on to establish the dishonesty of the Appellant.  It was not for
    the Appellant to prove her innocence but for the  Respondent  to  prove
    the Appellant's dishonesty.  The Judge was  satisfied  at  subparagraph
    (g) that the Respondent had adequate grounds to cancel the  Appellant's
    leave because the Respondent was relying on  a  misrepresentation.   In
    other words the Respondent was putting forward the evidence she  relied
    upon to support her contentions.

21.  I therefore accept the submission made by the Respondent in their  Rule
    24 response that it was clear that the Judge was aware that the  burden
    was upon the Respondent and  that  that  burden  had  been  discharged.
    Whilst the Judge could perhaps have put matters a little  more  clearly
    the determination could be understood by the losing  party  as  to  why
    they had lost.  The  Respondent  put  forward  evidence  to  show  that
    dishonest  passport  stamps  had  been  proffered  in  the  Appellant's
    passport and the Appellant's leave had been cancelled  on  that  basis.
    There was no error of law in the Judge's determination.

22.  The Appellant was concerned as to  the  consequences  for  her  if  her
    leave was cancelled and she was required to  return  to  Nigeria.   She
    would no longer have a face-to-face relationship with her daughter  and
    grandchildren.   While  it  is  correct  that  the   Judge   does   not
    specifically deal with that argument in his conclusions  it  is  not  a
    relevant consideration under paragraph 321(A).  It is difficult to  see
    how having put forward a  passport  with  dishonest  entry  stamps  the
    Appellant could  then  succeed  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Article 8.  The Judge referred to the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
    making an impassioned plea that her  focus  was  on  her  daughter  and
    grandchildren but evidently did not consider that that  was  sufficient
    for the appeal to be allowed outside the  Rules.  Again,  there  is  no
    error in that.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

As I have dismissed the appeal no issue of a fee order arises.



Signed this 28th day of  August  2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


