
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14184/2015
      IA/14189/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 August 2016                              |On 22 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                 KULJEET [T]
                                 MANDEEP [T]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These are the appeals of Kuljeet [T] and her  husband,  Mandeep  [T],
       born respectively on [ ] 1987 and [ ] 1978, against the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal of 18 December 2015 dismissing their appeals,
       brought (purportedly, as it transpires) against the decisions of  the
       Secretary of State of 13 February 2015 to refuse them  further  leave
       to remain.


    2. The application, signed on 1 April 2015, was  for  further  leave  to
       remain based on the private and  family  life  that  the  couple  had
       established here. Nothing further is relevant as  to  the  nature  of
       that application given the subsequent course  that  proceedings  have
       taken.


    3. Mrs Toor was granted leave to enter, and then leave to remain,  until
       27 July 2014. She applied for further leave  to  remain  on  26  July
       2014, before that leave expired; that  application  was  returned  as
       invalid on 27 October 2014. The basis for the  Respondent's  view  on
       invalidity was that they had previously been notified, on  21  August
       and 21 September 2014 that they needed to attend a participating Post
       Office in  order  to  provide  the  biometric  information  that  was
       essential to any immigration application. As they had failed to  duly
       provide that information, their application was invalid.


    4. They then made their further joint application, on 15 December  2014,
       the refusal of which leads to the present proceedings. The  Secretary
       of State refused that application on 13 February 2015,  stating  that
       as there was no settled Sponsor there was no viable application under
       Appendix FM; and as to their private life, they were to be assumed as
       having sufficient connections with their country of origin  for  them
       to be unable to establish that they faced very serious  obstacles  to
       their integration there. The refusal letter did not signify that  any
       right  of  appeal  ensued  from  it,  doubtless  because  they   were
       overstayers who were not at this  time  being  subjected  to  removal
       directions.


    5. In their grounds of appeal of 9 April 2015, the Appellants sought  to
       argue that the decision carried the right of appeal, because they had
       wrongly been treated as overstayers. Their argument  was  that  their
       case should be assessed by  analogy  with  Basnet  [2012]  UKUT  113,
       implying, somewhat obliquely, that the Secretary  of  State  had  not
       established the basis for her contention  that  their  first  set  of
       applications were invalid: in particular, she had not shown that  the
       warning notices and the final notification  of  invalidity  had  been
       validly served upon them.


    6. The Appellants  also  sought  a  reconsideration  of  that  decision,
       contending that it should be reconsidered, but the Secretary of State
       declined to do so in a "Reconsideration Request: Rejection" letter of
       14 May 2015, stating that the grounds upon which they sought a second
       look at the case were not those  that  fell  under  the  Respondent's
       policy so to do.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal determined  the  appeal  without  a  hearing,
       noting that the Appellants had only ever paid the lower  fee  as  was
       appropriate to receive a decision without a  hearing,  and  that  the
       Respondent had failed to duly file a bundle of documents  in  support
       of her appeal. Accordingly disposal without a hearing was  considered
       appropriate. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the argument  based  on
       Basnet, because this was not an invalidity application predicated  on
       the non-payment of fees; and,  more  significantly,  found  that  the
       appeal before it was effectively void, because  the  Appellants  were
       overstayers who had not received any removal directions  which  might
       found  a  right  of  appeal  under  section  82  of  the  Nationality
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    8. Grounds of appeal against that decision argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law in failing to appreciate that the burden of
       proof was upon the Secretary of State to  demonstrate  that  she  had
       successfully served  the  decisions  upon  them.  They  invoked  Syed
       (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 144 for  the  proposition
       that decisions had to be effectively communicated to  their  intended
       recipients to have legal consequences. They  also  argued  that  they
       should be treated  as  enjoying  the  right  of  appeal  because  the
       consequence of the decision made against them was  that  they  lacked
       leave. Finally they contended, in grounds 2 and 3  of  those  lodged,
       that they had a legitimate  expectation  that  their  application  be
       considered "systematically" and that they  had  suffered  "particular
       detriment" which the Upper Tribunal should view favourably.


    9. Judge Allen granted permission to appeal for the Upper Tribunal on 29
       June 2016, the First-tier Tribunal having previously  refused  to  do
       so, because a  different  view  might  have  been  taken  as  to  the
       existence of a right of appeal.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

   10. The Appellants wrote to the  Upper  Tribunal  prior  to  the  hearing
       before me, stating that they would not  be  attending  and  asked  to
       participate simply by way of written submission. They stated that the
       First-tier Tribunal had been wrong to accept the  Respondent's  claim
       to have served letters upon them, and wrong to fail to  consider  the
       private and family life that they had established  in  this  country.
       They provided the  birth  certificate  of  their  son  [MT]  born  in
       Hillingdon Hospital on [ ] 2013.


   11. At the hearing before me Mr Wilding provided a series of letters from
       the Respondent to the  Appellant  giving  details  of  the  biometric
       process to which she was subject. They were all addressed to  her  at
       [Southall]. It was his submission that there was no right  of  appeal
       given that the Secretary of State had discharged the burden of  proof
       upon her to establish  the  invalidity  of  the  first  applications;
       accordingly, the Appellants were correctly identified as  overstayers
       at the time their second applications were refused.


Decision and reasons


   12. This is an "old style" appeal  under  the  saved  provisions  of  the
       Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (because the  application
       was made on human rights grounds and the decision pre-dated  6  April
       2015: see The Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 3,  Transitional
       and Saving Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 at Article 9).  Under
       the saved provisions,  the  only  classes  of  decision  sufficiently
       analogous to the instant situation as to have any chance of  carrying
       a right of appeal are those set out in section 82 thereof:


           "82 Right of appeal: general
           (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person
           he may appeal [to the Tribunal]
           (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-
           (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the
           United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person
           has no leave to enter or remain,
           ...
           (g) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
           Kingdom by way of directions under [section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba)
           or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33)] 2
           (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),
           (h) a decision that an illegal entrant is to be removed from the
           United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of
           Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (control of
           entry: removal),
           (ha) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
           Kingdom by way of directions under section 47 of the
           Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (removal: persons
           with statutorily extended leave) ..."


   13. In short, an overstayer can only enjoy the right of  appeal  if  they
       are subject to an affirmative decision ordering  their  removal  from
       the United Kingdom. A  person  without  leave  at  the  time  of  the
       decision on their claim will be treated as an  overstayer  unless  it
       can be said that their lack of leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  "the
       result of the refusal". The point is made by Wyn-Williams J in Daley-
       Murdock [2010] EWHC 1488 (Admin) at [51]: "The  phraseology  "if  the
       result of the refusal is that the person has no leave..... to remain"
       clearly conveys the notion that it is the refusal  which  brings  the
       leave to remain to an end. In the instant case, of course, it was not
       the refusal which brought the Claimant's leave to an end but, rather,
       the fact that leave had [previously] expired ..."


   14. Subject to any successful  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
       treatment of their first  applications,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
       Appellants  had  become  overstayers  from  the  time   their   leave
       previously expired, on 27 July 2014. When they were  refused  further
       leave in February 2015, their lack of leave was  not  otherwise  "the
       result of the refusal", but  rather  the  product  of  their  earlier
       overstaying. Had their attempted application of  26  July  2014  been
       valid, then of course they would have benefited  from  the  statutory
       protection conferred by section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  That
       sets out:


           "3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision
           (1) This section applies if-
           (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in the
           United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for variation
           of the leave,
           (b) the application for variation is made before the leave
           expires, and
           (c) the leave expires without the application for variation
           having been decided.
           (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
           period when-
           (a) the application for variation is neither decided nor
           withdrawn,"


   15. The Appellants made their applications  before  their  leave  expired
       during July 2014, and it subsequently expired before a  decision  had
       been made on it. Section 3C(2) therefore potentially  extended  their
       leave until such time was it was decided or  withdrawn.  However,  in
       fact their application did not demand substantive  determination:  it
       was  merely  identified  as  invalid.   Accordingly   the   statutory
       protection under section 3C never came into operation.


   16. The only possibility of reopening the July 2014 application  such  as
       to trigger the operation of  section  3C  leave  and  to  extend  the
       Appellants' leave until  the  February  2015  decision  would  be  to
       demonstrate that the Secretary of State's declaration of  their  July
       2014  applications  as  invalid  (on  27  October  2014)  was  itself
       unlawful.


   17.  Hence  the  relevance  of  Basnet.  That  authority  explains  where
       invalidity is alleged, the burden of proof which normally  lies  upon
       an Appellant  may  shift  to  the  Respondent,  as  where  in  postal
       applications the  question  of  the  accuracy  of  the  billing  data
       supplied to pay for an  application  can  be  answered  only  by  the
       Respondent. In such a case  the  Respondent  has  to  show  that  the
       application was  not  "accompanied  by  such  authorisation  (or  the
       applicant or other person purporting  to  pay)  as  will  enable  the
       respondent to receive the entire fee in question" [27]. In Basnet the
       Tribunal relied upon the fact that the Appellant was  an  intelligent
       young man pursuing a business studies course at degree  level,  aware
       of the importance of completing the application form accurately,  who
       had made a timely application and who had stated that he was  certain
       that he had provided the correct data, to find that his  evidence  of
       the accuracy of the  billing  data  carried  the  day  when  measured
       against the unevidenced assertion of the Secretary of  State  to  the
       contrary.


   18. I accept that by analogy the burden of proof may be on the  Secretary
       of State to establish other forms of invalidity where the  matter  in
       question is exclusively within her own knowledge. This might apply in
       a case where only the Secretary of State has knowledge of how it  was
       that letters were served on an applicant.


   19. However, in this case, given the Secretary of  State's  provision  of
       letters sent to the address the Appellants have consistently provided
       for service (indeed the same address appeared on their appeal forms),
       I accept that the Respondent has ostensibly discharged that duty.


   20. In these circumstances, and absent any response from the Appellant, I
       accept that on balance of probabilities the  Respondent  duly  served
       the letters relating to  the  prior  application's  validity  on  the
       Appellant.


   21. The Appellants have put a further  argument  based  on  the  lack  of
       effective notice to them, citing Syed. However, that determination of
       the Upper Tribunal predated the amendment to the  Immigration  (Leave
       to Enter and Remain) Order 2000  by  the  provision  of  Article  8ZB
       thereof addressing Presumptions about receipt  of  notice  which  was
       substituted for the provision analysed  in  Syed  on  July  12  2013.
       Article 8ZA expressly allows for service by post.


           "8ZB.- Presumptions about receipt of notice
           (1) Where a notice is sent ..., it shall be deemed to have been
           given to the person affected, unless the contrary is proved-
           (a) where the notice is sent by postal service-
           (i) on the second day after it was sent by postal service in
           which delivery or receipt is recorded if sent to a place within
           the United Kingdom;"


   22. So the burden of proof in truth lies upon the Appellants to establish
       that the Secretary of State has failed  to  effectuate  service  upon
       them. Had they attended one of the hearings at First-tier Tribunal or
       Upper Tribunal level to explain their side of things, they might have
       raised issues such as how carefully they check their post and whether
       they share a letterbox with neighbours. However they  have  not  done
       so. In those circumstances I do not  accept  that  the  "contrary  is
       proved" regarding the normal course of  service,  and  I  accordingly
       find that the First-tier Tribunal was correct in its conclusion  that
       there were no appeals properly before it.


   23. I accordingly dismiss the appeals brought by the  Appellants  against
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. And  I  declare  that  their
       attempt to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was in fact void.


          Decision:


The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                                       Date: 10 August 2016

Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 10 August 2016


Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal





