
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14118/2014
                                                               IA/14121/2014
                                                               IA/14123/2014
                                                               IA/14126/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2014                            |On 5 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                          HONEYLET DE VILLA DELGADO
                         Andrea mae DE VILLA DELGADO
                           Arnold MONTALBO DELGADO
                         VON HARVEY DE VILLA DELGADO

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. The appellants are a family of four comprising mother, father  and  two
    children.  Their youngest child is 7 years of age  and  Von  Harvey  De
    Villa Delgado is 9 years old.

 2. The appellants applied for leave to remain outside of  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8.  In a letter dated 6 March 2014  the  respondent
    refused their applications and at the same  time  issued  decisions  to
    remove the appellants to  the  Philippines.   The  appellants  appealed
    those decisions and their appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    M R Oliver  at  Richmond  on  10  October  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 16 October 2014 he dismissed their  appeal  against  the
    respondent's immigration decisions.

 3. On 3 November 2014 a First-tier Tribunal Judge  granted  permission  to
    appeal in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellants seek permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver  who,  in  a
             determination promulgated on 16  October  2014  dismissed  the
             appellants'  appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
             refuse to grant leave to remain.

          2. Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal  and
             the  determination,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  reaching  his
             decision the judge arguably made  an  error  of  law  for  the
             following reasons:-

               a.      It is arguable that in assessing the  best  interests
                  of the children that the  judge  failed  to  pay  adequate
                  regard to the respondent's guidance.

               b. It is arguable that in assessing the 'ties' of the  family
                  (and in particular, of the children)  to  the  Philippines
                  the judge failed to have adequate regard to  the  guidance
                  in the decision  of  Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  Rules)
                  Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).

          3. Accordingly I am satisfied that the grounds and  determination
             disclose an arguable error of law."

 4. Thus the matter came before me to determine whether the decision of the
    Immigration Judge contains an error of law.

Submissions for the Appellants

 5. The appellants' submissions are set out in the grounds of appeal  which
    I set out in full below:

         "THERE IS A LACK OF SUFFICIENT REASONING FOR THE REJECTION  OF  THE
         CLAIMANTS' APPEAL  UNDER  THE  IMMIGRATION  RULES  APPENDIX  FM  R-
         LTRPT.1.1 AND SPECIFICALLY THE SECRETARY OF STATE OWN  GUIDANCE  ON
         EX.1. 'Consideration of a child's best interest under family  Rules
         and  in  Article  8  claims  where  the  criminality  threshold  in
         paragraph  399  of  the  Rules  DO  NOT  apply'  (to  be  found  at
         http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/policyandlaw
         /IDIs/chp-8-annex/ex1guidance-1pdf?view=Binary)

          CRITERIA AT PARAGRAPHS 14-15 FOR 'Where a  non-British  child  has
         been in the UK for more than seven years' was not considered.

         14.  The seven year threshold recognises that  over  time  children
         start to put down roots and integrate into life in the  UK  to  the
         extent that being required to leave the  UK  may  be  unreasonable.
         You need to consider whether in the specific circumstances  of  the
         case it would be reasonable to expect the child to live in  another
         country.  You will need to consider the facts for each child within
         that family and for the family  in  the  round.   You  should  also
         engage with any issues explicitly raised by the  family  or  by  or
         behalf of  each  child.   Relevant  considerations  are  likely  to
         include:

         i.  whether there would  be  a  significant  risk  to  the  child's
         health: For example,  if  there  is  evidence  that  the  child  is
         undergoing a course of treatment for a life threatening or  serious
         illness and treatment is not be available in the country of return;



         ii.  whether the chid would be leaving with its parent(s)?   It  is
         generally the case that it is in a child's best interests to remain
         with its parents.  Unless specific factors apply it will  generally
         not be unreasonable to expect a child to leave the country with its
         parents, particularly if the parents have no right to remain in the
         UK;

         iii.  the extent of wider family  ties  in  the  UK  -  you  should
         consider the extent to which the child is dependent on wider family
         members in the UK;

         iv.  whether  the  chid  is  likely  to  be  able  to  be  able  to
         (re)integrate into  life  in  another  country?   Relevant  factors
         weighing in favour of successful (re)integration include:

              .    whether the parent(s)  or  child  is  a  citizen  of  the
                country and so able to enjoy the  full  rights  of  being  a
                citizen in that country;

              .    whether the parents and/or child have lived in or visited
                the country before for periods of more than a  few  weeks  -
                the question here is hw  having  visited  or  lived  in  the
                country before that the child would be able to adapt  and/or
                the parents would be able to support the child  in  adapting
                to life in the country;

              .    whether the child or  parents  have  existing  family  or
                social ties with the country - a  person  who  has  extended
                family or networks of friends should be able to rely on them
                for support to help reintegrate on return;

              .    whether the child or parents have relevant cultural  ties
                to the  country  -  you  should  consider  any  evidence  of
                exposure to and the level of understanding of  the  cultural
                norms in the country.  For example, a period of  time  spent
                living mainly amongst a diaspora from the country may in  of
                itself give a child an  awareness  of  the  culture  in  the
                country;

              .    whether the child can speak, read and write in a language
                of that country; or is  likely  to  achieve  this  within  a
                reasonable time  period.   Fluency  is  not  required  -  an
                ability  to   communicate   competently   with   sympathetic
                interlocutors would normally suffice.

              .    whether the child has attended school in that country;

              .    any country specific risks  (refer  to  relevant  country
                guidance);

         vi.  other specific factors raised by or on behalf of the child.

         15.  Families or children may highlight the differences in  quality
         of education, health and wider  public  services  and  economic  or
         social opportunities between the UK and the country of  origin  and
         argue that these work against the  best  interests  of  the  child.
         Other than in exceptional circumstances, this would not normally be
         regarded as a relevant consideration, particularly if the parent(s)
         or wider family have the means or resources to support the child on
         return or the skills, education and training to provide  for  their
         family on return, or if AVR support is available."

 6. In oral submissions Mr Waheed submitted that the basis  of  the  appeal
    concerned Von Harvey De Villa Delgado, a child who has now lived in the
    United Kingdom for over seven years.  It has  been  submitted  that  in
    paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination the judge has given no proper
    analysis as to whether it is reasonable to expect Von Harvey  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

 7. Reliance was placed by Mr Waheed on a determination of the Tribunal  in
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC).   The
    judge has not properly considered that Von Harvey has no  ties  to  the
    Philippines.  He has not properly  considered  the  evidence  that  was
    placed before him including a letter from the headteacher at page 27 of
    the appeal bundles.  Von Harvey is entrenched into the  United  Kingdom
    and all his social ties are in the United Kingdom.  Mr Waheed relied on
    paragraph 14 of the respondent's policy as set out in the grounds.   In
    summary the judge erred in law because the appellant has no  "Ogundimu"
    ties with the Philippines.

 8. Ms Holmes on behalf of the respondent submitted there was nothing wrong
    with the determination.  The grounds criticise the judge  because  they
    say he did not take note of the guidance  issued  to  the  respondent's
    officers but the issue is whether the guidance was ever  raised  as  an
    issue before the judge.  The judge has in any  event  covered  all  the
    points he needed to cover.  He starts his findings at paragraph 13  and
    finds the family cannot satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and at paragraph 15 looks at Von Harvey and mentions  Section  55
    of the Borders Act.  It is clear from the determination that the  judge
    had in mind the best interests of Von Harvey and the judge then went on
    to remind himself of relevant case law.  The judge  found  he  did  not
    accept the parents' evidence and he did not  accept  that  the  parents
    would have to pay for the children  to  attend  State  schools  in  the
    Philippines. He takes into account guidance of the Supreme Court in  ZH
    (Tanzania) that it is important for children to have contact with their
    own culture.  In summary the judge did not believe all of the  parents'
    evidence and has considered all he needed to consider.  The guidance is
    not fully in the appellants' favour and it is only guidance.   Ogundimu
    is not relevant to the facts of the appeal before me.   Ogundimu  is  a
    deportation decision and the proposal was to remove Ogundimu on his own
    with no family members to accompany him.  In this appeal  two  children
    will be  returned  with  their  parents.   Even  if  Ogundimu  has  any
    application to these appeals it does not prevent the judge  finding  as
    he did.

 9. Ms Holmes made reference to Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.  In  Zoumbas
    the children were aged 7 years, 4 years  and  5  months.   The  Supreme
    Court found there was no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in
    the children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
    of Congo.  No doubt it would have been possible to  have  stated  that,
    other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the  children
    that they and their parents stayed in the United Kingdom so  that  they
    could obtain such  benefits  as  healthcare  and  education  which  the
    decision maker recognised might be of a higher standard than  would  be
    available in the Congo.  But other things were not  equal.   They  were
    not British citizens.  They  had  no  right  to  future  education  and
    healthcare in this country.  They were part of a close knit family with
    highly educated parents and were of an age when their  emotional  needs
    could only be  fully  met  within  the  immediate  family  unit.   Such
    integration as had occurred into United Kingdom society would have been
    predominantly in the context of that family unit.   More  significantly
    the decision maker concluded that they could be removed to the Republic
    of Congo in the care of their  parents  without  serious  detriment  to
    their wellbeing.

My Findings

10. Although the findings of the judge in relation to Von Harvey  De  Villa
    Delgado, which are at paragraphs 15 to  19  of  the  determination  are
    somewhat brief, I have no difficulty in concluding that he reached  the
    only decision open to him on the evidence before him and he did not err
    in law in coming to that conclusion.  The judge was  fully  aware  that
    the parents were reliant upon the level of  integration  and  education
    Von Harvey had achieved in the United Kingdom not least because  he  is
    now 9 years of age something the judge also recognised at  paragraph  1
    of the decision.  Although he failed to make mention of the guidance of
    the Tribunal in EV (Philippines) [2014]  UKUT  [reference]  he  plainly
    followed the guidance set out therein which is also in accordance  with
    a decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas referred  to  by  Ms  Holmes
    before me.  It is clear from the decision that the judge  did  have  in
    mind the education of the children and he did not accept  the  parents'
    evidence that State schools in the Philippines charge for tuition.   He
    had placed before him a letter from the headteacher indicating that Von
    Harvey was well settled at school and that any move at  this  stage  of
    his education would be disruptive but  that  is  something  which  goes
    without saying when the proposal is to remove a child who  has  settled
    well into primary school education in the  United  Kingdom.   Any  move
    will be disruptive for the child.  The judge was not  unaware  of  that
    nor was he unaware of the submissions before him that the children only
    spoke English.  Indeed he said that they were  of  an  age  where  they
    could easily pick up a language to which they have inevitably  been  to
    an extent exposed at home.  He noted that the parents and children  are
    Filipino not British and he concluded that it is in the best  interests
    of the children to return with their parents as an intact family  unit.



11. It is submitted that by coming  to  this  conclusion  the  judge  erred
    because he failed to follow the respondent's guidance.  I have read the
    note of proceedings carefully and  no  reference  to  the  respondent's
    guidance was ever placed before the Tribunal.  It is not  an  error  of
    law to fail to take into account matters not placed before  the  judge.
    However even if it had placed before the judge it is difficult  to  see
    that the judge could have come to any conclusion  other  than  the  one
    that he did.  The guidance is directed to the decision maker not to the
    judge.  It can be seen from the refusal  letters  that  the  respondent
    properly took into account the best interests of the children  and  the
    application of paragraph 276ADE at paragraphs 21 to 25 of  the  refusal
    letter.  The policy itself makes it clear that where a child is leaving
    with its parents it is generally the case that it  is  in  the  child's
    best interests to remain with its parents.   Unless  specified  factors
    apply it will generally not be unreasonable to expect a child to  leave
    the country with its parents particularly if the parents have no  right
    to remain in the UK.

12. It can be seen from the determination that this is the  conclusion  the
    judge came to and his findings, whilst brief are  entirely  sustainable
    and were open to him on the evidence before him.

13. I therefore find that the judge did not err in law in his decision  and
    his decision will stand.

Conclusions

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

15. I do not set aside the decision.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant


