
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14436/2014
                                                               IA/16314/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th November 2014                           |On 8th December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Rakesh Bhatia
                                Rajni Bhatia
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Z Rasheed of Sterling Avram Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Pirotta promulgated on 14th July 2014.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The first Claimant is a male Indian citizen born 16th June 1985 and  is
    married to the second Claimant a female Indian citizen  born  11th  May
    1984.  The first Claimant applied for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) and the second Claimant  applied  as
    his dependant.

 4. The applications were refused on 12th March 2014.  In relation  to  the
    first Claimant, he was awarded the  95  points  he  had  claimed  under
    Appendices A, B and C but his application  was  refused  on  non-points
    scoring grounds, with reference to paragraph  245DD(h)  and  (i).   The
    second Claimant's application was refused because the first  Claimant's
    application had been refused.

 5. The Claimants appealed and requested that their appeal be determined on
    the papers.

 6. Judge Pirotta considered the appeals together on the  papers  and  made
    the following findings in paragraphs 11 and 12 of her decision;


         "11. The Secretary of State has awarded the 95 points necessary  in
             the three categories yet has refused the applications.   There
             is no explanation for this ambiguity and the decisions must be
             unlawful as the award of points to the requisite appendices as
             detailed  in  the  refusal  letter  must  lead  to  successful
             applications  yet   the   decisions   were   to   refuse   the
             applications.
         12.  The appeals succeed in so far as the decisions  were  unlawful
             as they are contradictory and ambiguous, not supported by  the
             evidence and the findings made by the Secretary of State,  for
             which the necessary points were awarded."

 7. Judge Pirotta allowed the appeals under the Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis that they were not in accordance with the law, and directed  that
    the decisions should be remitted to the Secretary of State for  further
    consideration.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal relying on the following grounds;

         "The judge does not appear to have noted  the  substantive  reasons
         for refusal given on pages 2 and 3  of  the  refusal  letter  (copy
         appended), which related to the 'non-points  scoring'  requirements
         of the relevant rule, namely 245DD(h) and (i).  It is plain that to
         succeed in their applications the Appellants needed to satisfy  all
         of the requirements of 245DD, not just those that  related  to  the
         acquisition of points.
         In these circumstances where the error  of  law  is  so  clear  and
         fundamental, the Tribunal is invited to set aside the determination
         of Judge Pirotta without an oral hearing for permission  to  appeal
         and relist the  matter  before  another  judge  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal."

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  V
    A Osborne in the following terms;

         "1.   The  Respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against   the
             determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta promulgated
             on 14th July 2014 by which she allowed the Appellants' appeals
             to the extent of remitting them back to the Secretary of State
             for a further decision to be made.
         2.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that as the  Secretary  of
             State's  representative  had  acknowledged  that   the   first
             Appellant met the requirements of the Points-Based  System  in
             respect of his Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) application the  decision
             to refuse his application was contradictory.
         3.   Within the grounds of application it was pointed out on behalf
             of the  Respondent  that  when  the  application  was  refused
             although full points have been awarded, the  application  also
             fell to be considered by virtue of  the  'non-points  scoring'
             requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules   namely   paragraph
             245DD(h) and (i).
         4.   The notice of refusal had set out full  reasons  for  refusing
             the application under the provisions of paragraph 245DD and in
             the circumstances it could not be said that  the  decision  of
             the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  was  in  any  way
             contradictory.
         5.   I am satisfied that the Secretary  of  State's  representative
             considered all of the requirements under the Immigration Rules
             - both by virtue of  the  Points-Based  System  and  paragraph
             245DD and gave logical reasons for  refusing  the  application
             based upon  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  answers  at
             interview with regard to the viability of  his  business  plan
             and other proposals.
         6.   In the circumstances I am satisfied the determination  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge demonstrates an  arguable  error  of
             law and accordingly permission to appeal is granted."

10. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

11. At the hearing before me Mr Mills relied  upon  the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission  to  appeal,  in  submitting  the
    judge had materially erred in law, and the decision should be set aside
    and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

12. Mr Rasheed agreed that the judge had erred in law  but  submitted  that
    the decision would have had to be remitted back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State in any event, as the Secretary of State  had  erred  in  awarding
    points, as those points should not have been awarded if  the  Secretary
    of State was not satisfied with the genuineness of the  application  as
    set out in 245DD(k).  Therefore Mr Rasheed's position was that although
    the judge had  erred  in  law,  the  error  was  not  material  as  the
    application would need to be considered again by the Secretary of State
    in any event.

13. Mr Mills responded by contending that 245DD(k) which I set  out  below,
    related to a points scoring requirement in Appendix  A,  not  the  non-
    points scoring requirement.

    (k)  If the Secretary of State is not satisfied with the genuineness of
         the application in relation to  a  points  scoring  requirement  in
         Appendix A, those points will not be awarded.

14. Both representatives agreed that if a material error of law  was  found
    then the appropriate course of action would be to remit the appeal back
    to the First-tier Tribunal as the appeal  had  not  been  substantively
    considered.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. As I announced at the hearing, I found that the judge erred in law  for
    the reasons given in the grant of permission, when read  together  with
    the grounds contained within the application for permission to  appeal.
    It does appear that the judge did not consider the  non-points  scoring
    reasons for refusal set out in pages 2 and 3 of the refusal decision.

16. I am not aware of any statutory  power  which  enables  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to remit a decision to  the  Secretary  of  State,  but  if  a
    decision is found to have been made not in  accordance  with  the  law,
    then the decision remains outstanding before the Secretary of State for
    a lawful decision to be made, but that is not the case here.

17. In my view it is appropriate to remit these appeals back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal so that they can be substantively considered by a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  In deciding to remit the  appeals  I  have  taken
    into account  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  7.2  which
    states;

    7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that;
         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or
         (b)  the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

18. The appeals have not been substantively considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and therefore remittal is appropriate.

19. The appeals are to be determined on the papers by a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge  other  than  Judge  Pirotta.   Mr  Rasheed  indicated  that  the
    Claimants may request that they have an oral hearing, and  if  an  oral
    hearing is requested, then they must pay the appropriate fee and notify
    the Tribunal that an  oral  hearing  is  requested,  which  would  then
    presumably take place at the Birmingham Hearing Centre.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The Secretary of State's appeal  is  allowed
to the extent  that  Claimants'  appeals  are  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and no anonymity order is  made.







Signed                              Date 1st December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the determination of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside  so
has the fee award.  No fee award is made by the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  this
must be considered by the First-tier Tribunal when  the  appeals  are  heard
again.






Signed                              Date 1st December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


