

                                            [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/14489/2014

                                 THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On November 28, 2014              |On December 01, 2014            |
|                                  |                                |
|                                  |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                        Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR SHEHAN MANDIS KARUNARATNE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Whetwell (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born November 5, 1973 is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.  On
    September 19, 2002 he came to the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  with
    limited leave to remain. He was subsequently granted discretionary  due
    to the fact he was caring for his uncle, Dr Bastian, and that leave was
    valid until December 12,  2013.  His  uncle  died  on  August  8,  2012
    although by February 2012 the appellant had entered into a relationship
    with his partner. He applied on December 12, 2013 for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of his private  and  family  life  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. This application was rejected by the  respondent  on  March  11,
    2014.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on March 25,  2014.
    On  September  3,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Borsada
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard his appeal. He  dismissed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules but  allowed  the  appeal  under
    article 8 ECHR in a determination promulgated on September 17, 2014.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on September 25,  2014  and  on
    October 30, 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  granted
    permission to appeal finding it  arguable  the  FtTJ  had  erred  by  a
    possible misapplication of Nagre.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 5. Mr Whitwell submitted the FtTJ erred because he found the appellant and
    his partner  did  not  meet  GEN  1.2  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    consequently there was no need to proceed further because  this  was  a
    specific requirement of the Rules and it was wrong for the FtTJ to find
    the Rules were not met  and  then  in  effect  overlook  that  specific
    failing and allow it under article 8 ECHR. There  was  nothing  further
    that needed considering outside of the Rules and this  was  a  material
    error.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 6. The original appellant was  unrepresented  at  the  hearing  but  I  am
    satisfied he had notice of the same because the notice of  hearing  was
    properly sent to both him and his solicitors on November 4,  2011.  His
    solicitors were contacted on the morning of  the  hearing  and  advised
    they were no longer acting. I called the case on  at  3.30pm  by  which
    time the appellant had not attended. I was satisfied he had been served
    and proceeded to deal with the case.



    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 7. The background to this appeal is that the appellant came to the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in 2002. According to the chronology contained  in
    the original  appellant's  bundle  it  seems  he  lived  here,  without
    permission, between 2002 and 2007. On December 20, 2007 he submitted an
    application for discretionary leave to remain to care  for  his  uncle.
    This was refused by the respondent on November 10, 2009 and also  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge on May 6, 2010. Following a successful appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal he was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    until December 14, 2013.

 8. According to the chronology  in  the  appellant's  bundle  he  met  his
    partner in February 2012 but they only commenced partial  co-habitation
    in July 2012 and as at the date of the original hearing they still only
    stayed together when his partner's son stayed at his father's.

 9. He submitted his current application on December 12, 2013  just  before
    the expiry of his leave. GEN 1.2 of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules makes it clear that two years co-habitation is required prior  to
    the date of the application. It therefore follows  that  the  appellant
    could not for the purposes of the  appeal  before  the  FtTJ  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM because he did not satisfy  the  definition
    of a partner-this being a requirement of Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM.
    The fact the genuineness of the relationship was not disputed  mattered
    not when considering compliance with the Rules. The appellant would now
    satisfy the definition of GEN 1.2 if he were to submit  an  application
    but whether he qualified under Appendix FM is a different issue.

10. The FtTJ also considered his position under paragraph 276ADE HC 395 but
    concluded in paragraph [11] of his determination that he did have  ties
    to Sri Lanka and consequently he could not meet this Rule.

11. The respondent's challenge to the FtTJ's decision is that he was  wrong
    in law to consider this appeal outside of the Rules when he failed  the
    most fundamental requirement of the Rules. The appellant did not file a
    response to the grounds of appeal so I have no idea what  his  view  of
    the matter is but I note he chose not to attend a hearing for which  he
    had been given ample notice.

12. I have considered  the  FtTJ's  determination  and  in  particular  his
    approach to the article 8 issue. He accepted there was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the appellant and his  partner  and  he
    also noted the reason why they did not live  together  on  a  permanent
    basis. The FtTJ noted  he  had  overstayed  but  found  the  respondent
    accepted his explanation because she granted him discretionary leave to
    stay based on his care for his uncle.

13. This finding in paragraph [8] of the determination would appear  to  be
    at odds with the chronology of his immigration history. The  respondent
    actually refused the application he submitted in 2007 and  opposed  his
    appeal before the First-tier Judge in May 201. It  was  only  following
    his appeal to the Upper Tribunal that his appeal  was  allowed  by  the
    Tribunal. Thus the FtTJ's finding on this issue in paragraph [8] of his
    determination is wrong.

14. The issue is whether the FtTJ should have considered the  case  outside
    of the Rules. Mr Whitwell submits he should not  because  he  says  the
    appellant failed to satisfy the most basic  and  important  requirement
    namely they had  cohabited  for  a  period  of  two  years  before  his
    application. The FtTJ accepted he did not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules and stated this in paragraphs [10] and [11] of his determination.



15. It is the FtTJ's paragraph [12] where the respondent submits there  has
    been an error. Mr Whitwell submits that the  FtTJ  does  not  give  any
    reasons why it was necessary to go outside of the Rules. What the  FtTJ
    actually does in paragraph [12]  is  to  assess  proportionality  under
    article 8 ECHR and it is based on this assessment that she  allows  the
    appeal.

16. There have been a number of cases on the correct approach to take where
    article 8 is raised  and  the  Administrative  Court  has  also  passed
    comment on this approach.

17. The conclusion of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb (sitting as a Deputy  High
    Court Judge) in R on the application of Halimat SA Adiya Damiola  Aliyu
    and Fatima Oluwakemi Aliyu) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin)  (approving
    the decision  of The Queen on the application  of  Ganesabalan  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC  2712  (Admin))  was  that  the  respondent  always  had  a
    discretion to grant leave outside of the  Rules  (apart  from  complete
    code situations) and that discretion had to be exercised on  the  basis
    of article 8 considerations and in particular an assessment of relevant
    factors in Article 8.2 ECHR. There is no threshold  criterion  to  meet
    but that discretion must be  taken  alongside  other  factors  such  as
    compliance with the Rules and an individual's circumstances relevant to
    article 8. If there is no arguable case the respondent need merely  say
    that. However, where there are good arguable grounds that the Rules  do
    not  deal  with  them  then  the  individual's  circumstances  must  be
    considered and a balancing act required by  proportionality  should  be
    undertaken.

18. It therefore follows the FtTJ was not required to carry out a two stage
    test and would have to consider the  appellant's  article  8  claim  if
    there were good arguable grounds that the Rules did not deal with  them
    then   the  individual's  circumstances  must  be  considered   and   a
    proportionality balancing act must be undertaken.

19. I have therefore looked at the factors relied on by the FtTJ and  these
    can be summarised as follows:

     a. The strength of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
        partner.
     b. The disruption to their lives if the appellant had to return to Sri
        Lanka.
     c. The partner's loss of emotional support if  the  appellant  had  to
        leave.
     d. The fact the partner could not go and live in Sri Lanka.
     e. The strength of the appellant's private life and the fact he  built
        this up whilst he was here lawfully.
     f. The relationship began when he had leave.
     g. Minimal effect on the economic well-being of the United Kingdom.
     h.  His  general  account  as  set  out  in  paragraph  [5]   of   his
        determination.

20. The respondent has not challenged the actual findings on article 8  and
    her appeal is based purely on the approach.

21. Having carefully considered Mr Whitwell's submissions  I  am  satisfied
    that the FtTJ's approach is in line with current judicial thinking.

22.  Whilst  he  erroneously  found  the   respondent   had   granted   him
    discretionary leave and the appellant in addition  did  not  satisfy  a
    fundamental requirement of the Rules I accept the FtTJ was entitled  to
    consider this appeal under article 8 as there were  factors  which  the
    Rules did not cover. In particular, the FtTJ accepted  (not  challenged
    by the respondent) this was a genuine and subsisting relationship which
    by the date of hearing had lasted over two years  and  he  had  already
    been granted a period of discretionary leave.

23. I do not find an error in law.

    DECISION


24. There was no material error of law The original decision is upheld.


25. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award was made and I see no reason to alter that decision.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
