
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15978/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd June, 2016                   |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              USMAN RASHID DAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel, instructed by Pride
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Pakistani citizen, born on 20th October,  1987,  who
    was originally granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 20th March 2011.  On 28th April, 2014  he  applied
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    identifying Alpha College of  Grosvenor  House,  Edgware  High  Street,
    Middlesex as his  sponsor,  with  the  course  he  proposed  to  attend
    commencing on 13th May, 2014 and ending on 8th October, 2015.

2.   The respondent refused that application by  letter  dated  19th  April,
    2015 and gave the appellant notice that it was proposed to  remove  him
    from the United  Kingdom  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appellant's appeal appears to have been heard at  Newport  on  16th
    December, 2015 when the appellant was neither present nor  represented.
    The judge arranged for an email to be sent to the appellant telling the
    appellant that he had failed to provide evidence to show  that  he  was
    unable to attend the hearing of the appeal and attend  court.   He  was
    warned that the judge would proceed to hear the appeal in his  absence.



4.   No evidence was placed before the Tribunal either in the form  of  oral
    evidence and documentary evidence, save for a small  bundle  which  was
    provided by the Presenting Officer at the hearing.  The judge  accepted
    that bundle and relied on it.  In doing so I  believe  that  the  judge
    erred in law.  He should not have  allowed  himself  to  have  received
    evidence from one party in  the  absence  of  another,  unless  he  was
    satisfied that the absent party had already received the bundle and had
    the opportunity of commenting on it.

5.   I indicated to the representatives that in my view the judge had  erred
    and invited them  to  comment.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  quite  properly
    accepted that the judge  had  erred  by  agreeing  to  receive  further
    evidence from the Presenting Officer in the absence  of  the  appellant
    and giving the appellant  the  opportunity  of  making  submissions  in
    respect of that evidence.



Notice of Decision

6.   As a result the appellant has not had a fair hearing and in  accordance
    with the Senior President's Practice Statement I  have  concluded  that
    the matter must be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh before a judge other than Judge R E Barraclough.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


