
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers IA/15147/2015
     IA/15148/2015
     IA/15149/2015
     IA/15150/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 September 2016                      |On 03 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mrs Elizabeth Robert DSilva
                        Mr Robert Kote Bagilu DSilva
                          Miss Elvira Roshni DSilva
                             Miss Elvita DSilva
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents    Mr E Waheed of Counsel, instructed by Norton Folgate
                    Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.  However, I refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    DSilva family were the appellants.

 2. The appellants are citizens of India.  The first and second  appellants
    were born on 1 April 1969 and 14 May 1964 respectively  and  the  third
    and fourth appellants were born on 20 June 1999 and on 24 October 2000.
     They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision  of  the
    respondent dated 25 March 2015 to refuse to vary their leave  to  enter
    or remain and to give directions for their removal under Section 47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 11  February  2010
    and was given leave to enter as a student  until  18  June  2012.   The
    second, third and fourth appellants arrived in the UK on 29  May  2011,
    being the husband and children of the first appellant and were  granted
    leave as her dependants.

 4. The appellants were granted leave to remain outside of the  Immigration
    Rules until 19 December 2014.   On  18  December  2014  the  appellants
    submitted applications for  further  leave  to  remain  on  family  and
    private life grounds providing medical evidence relating to the  second
    appellant who had undergone a  pancreas  and  kidney  transplant  on  9
    August 2013.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn, in a decision promulgated on 19
    February 2016, dismissed the appellant's appeal under Article 3 of  the
    European Convention on  Human  Rights  but  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8.

 6. The Secretary of State appeals with permission.

Error of Law

 7. The Secretary of State set out the findings of fact made by Judge Flynn
    and submitted in light of those findings that the judge had  erred  and
    made a material misdirection in law.  The Secretary of  State  referred
    to the fact that at [67] of the Decision and Reasons  the  judge  found
    that the appellants have no home in India and that they no savings  and
    as a result of this, coupled with the health  problems  of  the  second
    appellant, the children's interests would have to  be  subordinated  to
    those of the second appellant and this would negatively impact on them.
     The Secretary of State submitted that this  contradicted  the  judge's
    earlier findings that the first and second appellants would be able  to
    secure work [49] and  her  finding  that  the  second  appellant  could
    procure medical treatment in India [47].

 8. The judge also found that the appellants do  have  contact  with  their
    family in India.  Although the judge found at [67] that the  children's
    education would be disrupted at a critical stage no reference was  made
    by the judge to the ability of the children to study in India,  bearing
    in mind her finding at [64] that they had spent eleven  and  ten  years
    respectively in their native country and retain  familiarity  with  it.
    It was argued that the judge also erred in  finding  that  less  weight
    should be given to the public interest.

 9. The Secretary of State relied on AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 in relation
    to claims about difficulties with disruption of  education  and  argued
    that the judge failed to assess the ability of the children to study in
    their native country, which represented a material error of law.

Grounds 1 and 2

10. It was argued, that given the judge's findings of fact, that she  erred
    in law in allowing the appellants' appeal outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.   I  am  satisfied  that  no  material  inconsistency  has  been
    established and that the judge gave clear reasons for the findings  she
    reached.

11. In particular  it  was  argued  that  the  judge's  finding,  that  the
    appellants would have no home in India and no  money,  contradicts  the
    judge's findings that the first and second  appellant  would  have  the
    ability to work to generate two salaries and have  contact  with  their
    family in India.

12. The judge made findings, at [67] that were open to her, that  the  need
    of the  parents  to  provide  and  financially  pay  for  the  father's
    treatment in India would negatively impact upon  their  children.   The
    judge had properly acknowledged the ability of  the  first  and  second
    appellants to work in India but  accepted  that  they  had  sold  their
    family home to pay for the first appellant's studies and that:

         "More significantly, I have no doubt that  the  second  appellant's
         health, including the need to obtain medical advice and  treatment,
         will be a major concern for the adults, in addition to the need  to
         find accommodation and employment."

13. It was open to the judge to make those findings as to the impact of the
    return, particularly in relation to  the  best  interests'  assessment,
    notwithstanding her findings that the parents  could  obtain  work  and
    that they have contact with family in India.  The judge took this  into
    consideration and found that there was  "only  limited  family  support
    available to them" [67].  This followed on from her earlier finding  at
    [64] where she accepted the first appellant's evidence that she has  no
    family in India and that they have limited contact with  her  husband's
    family, who live at a considerable distance from their former home.

14. The fact that the judge found that they  would  most  likely  have  two
    salaries was not inconsistent with her subsequent findings  as  to  the
    difficulties the family would face on return to India and in particular
    the negative impact on their children.

15. Looking at the First tier Tribunal's decision as  a  whole,  I  am  not
    satisfied that it can be said that  the  conclusion  of  the  judge  is
    irrational.  I am not satisfied that there is  any  material  error  of
    law.

Ground 3

16. I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge  made  any  material  error.  The
    appellants' case can be distinguished from AM  Malawi.   In  this  case
    there has been the intervening factor of the poor health of  a  parent.
    The judge at [65] carefully considers the position of the  children  in
    this case and their best interests including  that  in  evidence  their
    mother indicated that they did not plan to stay  in  the  UK  but  that
    "everything changed" when her husband's health deteriorated.  The judge
    gave reasons for accepting that this was a significant  change  in  the
    family's circumstances.

17. The judge went on to find that although the family's removal would  not
    breach Article 3,  nevertheless  she  was  satisfied  that  the  second
    appellant's health, and the need for the family to cater for his health
    needs on return to India, was an additional factor which  was  relevant
    to the assessment to the family's circumstances and the children's best
    interests.

18. The judge also found  and  gave  reasons  for  that  finding  that  the
    children's ties were strengthened and developed as their stay in the UK
    had been extended.

19. The judge  gave  careful  consideration  to  the  children's  education
    including that they had lived in India and she accepted that they would
    retain some familiarity with their native  country.   However,  it  was
    open to her to find as she did that the education system  is  different
    and that the children  will  experience  in  adapting  and  that  their
    knowledge of their native country and education system will "after such
    a long time", now be vague.

20. It was also open to the  judge  to  make  the  findings  that  she  did
    considering the children's education and  the  impact  on  it  if  they
    return to India in the light of  their  father's  illness.   I  am  not
    satisfied therefore that the judge's concern about  the  disruption  to
    the education of the third and fourth appellants is  inconsistent  with
    her findings that they had lived previously in India and  would  retain
    some familiarity with it.

21. It is not correct to say, as the permission judge did, that  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  children  could  study  in
    India; rather the judge found that they would retain  some  familiarity
    with India.  I am not satisfied that any material error has been shown.

Ground 4

22. It was argued that the judge erred in finding that less  weight  should
    be given to the public interest in removing the  appellants  due  to  a
    previous grant of exceptional leave to remain when that leave was  only
    granted for a matter of months and the delay in the respondent deciding
    the case was not for the purpose of enabling the  second  appellant  to
    receive medical treatment in the UK.  Mr Tarlow was unable to  say  how
    the judge might have erred in  this  regard  and  made  no  substantive
    submissions on this ground.

23. The judge at [69] found that the respondent had allowed  a  significant
    delay of more than two years before considering  the  appellants'  2012
    applications.   The  judge  fully  took  into  consideration  that  the
    Secretary of State only allowed further leave to  remain  for  a  short
    period and that the delay was not to permit  the  second  appellant  to
    have medical treatment.  However the judge was very clear, at [53] that
    she did not accept that the grant of further leave to remain should  be
    decisive as it was clear that this grant was for a short period.

24. There was no error in the judge finding, as she then did, at [69]  that
    the  circumstances  were  unusual  given  the  respondent's  delay  and
    subsequent grant of leave to the appellants.  It was open to the  judge
    therefore to attach less weight to the public interest; the  judge  had
    correctly directed herself in relation to  the  requirement  to  attach
    little weight to private life formed when  an  applicant's  status  was
    precarious, as it is not disputed it is in this case.   The  judge  had
    also found at  [61]  that  it  was  clear  that  the  children  had  no
    responsibility for their situation.  Read in its entirety there was  no
    error in the judge reducing the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest in this appeal.  The judge gave adequate reasons for doing  so
    and it cannot be said that such a decision was irrational.

Ground 5

25. The final point raised by the respondent was in relation to the alleged
    inconsistency in the judge's findings at [68] that the rejection of the
    transplanted  organs  would  result  in  a  significant  waste  of  the
    resources provided to treat the second appellant, given that it was the
    Secretary of State's case that there was no suggestion that the  organs
    are being rejected.

26. The Secretary of State also relied on the  fact  that  the  judge  made
    findings that the  appellants  had  failed  to  show  that  the  second
    appellant would not be able to access treatment in India or  that  such
    treatment would not be affordable (paragraphs [47] and [51]).  However,
    I have taken into consideration that at [52]  the  judge  accepted  the
    opinion of Mr Crane, Consultant Transplant and Vascular Surgeon.

27. The judge found at [68] that if the second appellant's transplants were
    to be rejected  this  would  result  in  a  significant  waste  of  the
    resources provided to treat the second appellant  and  took  this  into
    consideration in attaching  less  weight  to  the  public  interest  in
    removing the appellants.  Although the Secretary of State  argued  that
    there was no suggestion that the organs are being rejected that is  not
    what the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found.

28. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was taking into consideration  all
    of the evidence including of the appellant's consultant, Mr Crane,  who
    had provided an opinion where he "refers to the  possibility  that  the
    transplants would be rejected"  if  the  appellants  were  returned  to
    India.  The judge saw no reason for doubting his  opinions  (at  [52]).
    The fact that the judge found that this fell short  of  the  very  high
    threshold required to allow the second appellant's appeal under Article
    3 does not prevent the judge taking this possibility into consideration
    in the Article 8 balance.

29. I am not  satisfied  therefore  that  any  material  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn shall stand and  the  appeal
of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.  Although the third  and  fourth  appellants
are minor children, there was no identifying information  other  than  their
names and I am not satisfied that an anonymity direction is required.


Signed                                  Date:  3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was made and I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

