
IAC-HW-AM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/15121/2014
                                                               IA/15122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 20th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                 MS EMELIE JUANICO WINGCO (FIRST appellant)
             MISS JOANNA MARIE JUANICO WINGCO (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S. Goh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of  Philippines  and  are  mother  and
    daughter respectively.  The first Appellant who I shall refer to as the
    Appellant was born on 4th September 1957 and the second Appellant who I
    shall refer to a Joanna was born  on  22nd  March  1996.   They  appeal
    against decisions of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blum  sitting  at
    Richmond Magistrates' Court on 31st October 2014 in which he  dismissed
    their appeals against decisions of  the  Respondent  dated  12th  March
    2014.  Those decisions were to refuse to allow their  applications  for
    indefinite leave to remain as dependants of Mr Renato David Wingco born
    18th August 1957 ("Mr Wingco") and  to  remove  them  from  the  United
    Kingdom  pursuant  to  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The Appellant is the spouse  of  Mr  Wingco  and
    Joanna is his daughter.  Judge Blum allowed Mr Wingco's appeal  against
    that part of the Respondent's decisions which affected him.

2.   Mr Wingco entered the United Kingdom on 27th September 2002 as  a  work
    permit holder.  He was granted further periods of leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the same basis the last period being  granted  on
    1st October 2008 valid until 2nd  November  2013.   The  Appellant  was
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on 11th September 2009 as the
    spouse of a work permit holder with  leave  valid  until  2nd  November
    2013.  Joanna was granted leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  on  3rd
    February 2010 as the dependant child of a work permit holder with leave
    valid until 2nd November 2013.  On 22nd October 2013 Mr Wingco  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  work  permit
    holder with the second and third Appellants  as  his  dependants.   The
    refusal of those applications led to these proceedings.

Immigration Rules Relevant to the Appellants

3.   Paragraph 134(ii) of the Immigration  Rules  provides  that  indefinite
    leave to remain may be granted on application  provided  the  applicant
    has met the requirements of paragraph 128(i) to  (v)  throughout  their
    leave as a work permit holder.  Paragraph 128 was deleted on 6th  April
    2012 by HC 1888 except insofar as it was  relevant  to  paragraph  134.
    The provisions of paragraph 128 were that an applicant must be  capable
    of  undertaking  the  employment   specified   in   the   work   permit
    (subparagraph iii) and must not intend to  take  employment  except  as
    specified in the work  permit  (iv).   Paragraph  134(iv)  states  that
    indefinite leave to  remain  may  be  granted  provided  the  applicant
    provides certification from the employer that the applicant is paid  at
    or above the appropriate rate for the job as stated  in  the  Codes  of
    Practice in Appendix J.

4.   Paragraph 134(5)  requires  an  applicant  to  explain  those  absences
    covered by paragraph 128A  of  the  Rules  which  in  turn  requires  a
    continuous period of five years or four years lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom meaning residence in the United Kingdom for an unbroken  period
    with valid leave.  The period shall not  be  considered  to  have  been
    broken where the applicant has been absent from the United Kingdom  for
    a period of 180 days or less in any  of  the  five  consecutive  twelve
    calendar month  periods  or  four  consecutive  twelve  calendar  month
    periods under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme.



Explanation for Refusal

4.   In refusing the applications the Respondent noted that  Mr  Wingco  had
    been employed by Woodside Care Home since 13th June  2012  although  he
    had never  been  issued  with  a  work  permit  allowing  him  to  take
    employment with that company.   He  could  therefore  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 128(i) to (v).  He had failed  to  provide  a
    certificate from his employers  that  he  was  paid  at  or  above  the
    appropriate rate contrary to paragraph 134(iv).  There was  an  absence
    of the documentary evidence specified in  paragraph  134-SD  explaining
    the reasons for the Appellant's UK absences throughout  the  five  year
    qualifying period as required by paragraph 134(5)

5.   The applications from the Appellant and Joanna fell in line  with  that
    of Mr Wingco.  The decisions did not breach Article  8  as  the  family
    could return to the Philippines together.  Consideration was  given  to
    the Respondent's duty under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 as Joanna was 17 when the applications  were  made
    although she was 18 by the date of decision.

The Hearing at First Instance

6.   Mr Wingco was told by Woodside Care Home that they would deal with  the
    transfer of the work permit so that the Appellant would  be  authorised
    to work for them.  Unfortunately they did not do so and in  consequence
    Mr Wingco  took  employment  with  Woodside  Care  Home  that  was  not
    specified in his work permit.  The Judge found that  Mr  Wingco  should
    have been aware of the status of his work permit and  could  have  made
    checks to ensure that the transfer did actually occur.  In the end  his
    immigration status was his responsibility.   Instead  of  applying  for
    indefinite leave to remain after living in the United Kingdom for  five
    years he had applied to extend his leave to remain  as  a  work  permit
    holder.  That was his decision.  Whilst the Judge had sympathy  for  Mr
    Wingco the Judge was not satisfied that Mr Wingco met the  requirements
    of paragraph 134(2) with reference to paragraph 128(iv).

7.   However Mr Wingco had remained in the United  Kingdom  lawfully  for  a
    continuous period of ten years and had passed his Life  in  the  United
    Kingdom Test. It was conceded by the Presenting Officer that Mr  Wingco
    met all the requirements for a grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    pursuant to paragraph 276B of the "ten year Rule".   Judge  Blum  found
    the decision to remove Mr Wingco  contrary  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    paragraph 276B and allowed Mr Wingco's appeal on that basis.

8.   That left the appeals of the Appellant and Joanna.  If  Mr  Wingco  had
    succeeded under paragraph 134 there was provision for  the  appeals  of
    his dependants to be granted in line with the main applicant.   However
    paragraph 276B contained no such provision and the issue fell therefore
    to be decided under Article  8.   The  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE as she was over the age of 25 and  had
    two children and her other family in the Philippines and had  therefore
    not lost ties with that country.  Joanna similarly could not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE as she had only resided here for  four
    years and nine months.  She had not spent half her life in  the  United
    Kingdom nor had she lost her ties with the Philippines.

9.   The Judge considered the Article 8 claim outside the Immigration  Rules
    following the step-by-step approach required  by  the  case  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  At paragraph 28 he wrote:

         "The ultimate question for me is whether the decision affecting the
         Appellants in circumstances where the family and  private  life  of
         the  Appellants  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  be   enjoyed
         elsewhere taking full account of  all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family and private  lives  of
         the Appellants in a manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a
         breach the fundamental right protected by Article 8.  In  light  of
         recent  case  law  I  take  this  to  mean  that  there   must   be
         unjustifiably harsh consequences to their private and family  lives
         in order for the Appellants to succeed under Article 8."

10.  The Judge was satisfied that all three Appellants shared a family  life
    together.  Although Joanna was now 18 she was  still  living  with  her
    parents.  She had been accepted at university and  her  place  deferred
    for a year.  Both she and the Appellant had established a private  life
    in the United Kingdom, the Appellant had  been  lawfully  employed  for
    five years Joanna had established friendships and achieved  success  at
    school.

11.  There did not appear to be any reason why the Appellants  including  Mr
    Wingco could not all relocate back to the Philippines.  Mr  Wingco  had
    been living lawfully in the United Kingdom for ten years  and  was  now
    eligible for a grant of indefinite leave to remain  but  his  links  to
    this country were primarily in the form of his employment.   There  was
    no other evidence of the links or bonds he had established  here.   The
    family lived  most  of  their  lives  in  the  Philippines,  spoke  the
    language, still owned property and land there and still  had  immediate
    family in that country.  There was no reason why Mr  Wingco  could  not
    find alternative employment in the Philippines.

12.  Joanna had lived in the United Kingdom for nearly five years since  she
    was almost 14 years old.  She had become used to  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and wished to study at an English university.  While she  could
    not study English law in the Philippines there was nothing to stop  her
    from studying for some other degree or putting  in  an  application  to
    study in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.   She  had
    spent the formative years of her life  in  the  Philippines  and  could
    maintain contact with her friends in the UK through social  media.   If
    Mr Wingco chose to remain in the  United  Kingdom  that  would  be  his
    choice but there would be nothing to stop him from returning  with  his
    wife and daughter to the Philippines should he wish to continue  living
    with them.  He had entered the United Kingdom in 2002 and was separated
    from the Appellant and Joanna for almost seven years  although  he  did
    return to see them on holiday.  The  Judge  found  there  would  be  no
    disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights and  dismissed  the
    Appellant and Joanna's appeals under the Immigration Rules and on human
    rights grounds.

The Onward Appeal

13.  The Appellant  and  Joanna  appealed  against  those  decisions  whilst
    requesting that the decision to allow Mr Wingco's appeal be  preserved.
    Just as the Respondent had made clear that the Appellant  and  Joanna's
    applications fell to be refused in line with the Respondent's  decision
    relating to Mr Wingco so the Appellant's appeal and  that  of  Joanna's
    were linked to Mr Wingco and therefore stood or fell with  Mr  Wingco's
    appeal.  The Judge should have had regard to paragraphs  198,  199  and
    199A of the Immigration  Rules  which  governed  the  requirements  for
    settlement as a child of a work permit holder  who  has  had  leave  to
    remain under paragraphs 128 and 134.  However there was no  mention  of
    those paragraphs.  Even  the  Respondent's  own  internal  guidance  to
    caseworkers referred to the need to consider paragraphs  198,  199  and
    199A. In relation to the Appellant the grounds argued  that  paragraphs
    196D and 196E governed the requirements for settlement as the spouse of
    a work permit holder who had leave to remain under in Mr Wingco's  case
    paragraphs 128 and 134 but Judge Blum  had  omitted  any  reference  to
    paragraphs  196D  and  E  at  all  in  his  consideration.   Even   the
    Respondent's own internal guidance to caseworkers referred to the  need
    to refer to paragraphs 196D and E.

14.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  on  22nd  December  2014.   She  found  it
    arguable that the Judge had erred in allowing Mr  Wingco's  appeal  but
    dismissing the Appellant and  Joanna's  appeals  "under  the  incorrect
    Immigration Rule".

15.  I pause to note here that paragraph 198 sets out  the  requirements  to
    be met before leave to enter or remain can be granted to the child of a
    person with limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under paragraphs 128 to 193.  The child may be given leave to enter  or
    remain for a period of leave not in  excess  of  that  granted  to  the
    person with limited leave to enter or remain provided that the child is
    able to produce to the Immigration Officer on arrival  a  valid  United
    Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity. In the case  of  an
    application for limited leave to remain the child should not have  been
    last granted entry clearance or leave as a visitor, temporary admission
    or temporary release and was able to satisfy the Respondent  that  each
    of the requirements of paragraph 197(i) to (vi) and (viii).

16.  The difficulty with the grant of permission was that it overlooked  the
    point made at paragraph 26 of the First-tier's decision.  The Judge was
    well aware that there were provisions under the Immigration  Rules  for
    the grant of indefinite leave to remain as dependants of those  granted
    indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 134.  That however  was  not
    the issue in the  case  because  Mr  Wingco  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 134 and therefore the Appellant and Joanna could not  succeed
    under paragraphs 198 and following.  If Mr Wingco had  succeeded  under
    paragraph  134  then  those  paragraphs  198  and  following   of   the
    Immigration  Rules  would  have  been  relevant.   It  was  unfortunate
    therefore that the grant of permission misstated the possibility of  an
    arguable error of law.

17.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission on 5th  January  2015
    stating it was fully open to the Judge to conclude that  there  was  no
    breach of Article 8 in the  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  and
    Joanna's appeals.  What had appeared to escape the notice of  both  the
    Judge and the Presenting Officer was that Mr Wingco fell  foul  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B(v) which provide that an applicant  must
    not be in the United Kingdom in breach of immigration laws (apart  from
    any period of overstaying for a period of 28  days  or  less).   As  Mr
    Wingco was working not in accordance  with  his  work  permit,  he  was
    therefore in breach of Immigration Rules and could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276.  The Respondent's response continued:

         "Notwithstanding that the Respondent appears  to  have  erroneously
         conceded the point and the Judge has similarly erred  in  accepting
         this concession it remains a material matter in  the  consideration
         of the Appellants' appeals under Article 8 that the first Appellant
         has only succeeded on appeal as the result of an error in law.  The
         Judge dealt with the matters as raised before him.  It was not  for
         the Judge to descend into the arena and look for alternative  means
         for the Appellant to succeed.  The grant of ILR is a permission  it
         does not compel  a  person  to  remain  in  the  UK  or  render  it
         disproportionate for them to live elsewhere.  This is  particularly
         pertinent where it does not appear that the decision was reached on
         the correct legal basis".

The Hearing before Me

18.  In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine  whether  there  was  an  error  of  law   in   the   Judge's
    determination such that the decision fell to be set aside  and  remade.
    In submissions Counsel accepted that the ground  of  appeal  (that  the
    Judge had overlooked paragraphs 198 and following)  could  not  succeed
    and indicated she did not wish to make submissions on that point.   She
    was in  some  difficulties  since  although  she  had  represented  the
    Appellant at first instance she had not drafted the grounds  of  onward
    appeal.

19.  The Judge had erred because he had failed to consider Section 117A  and
    B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which  came  into
    force on 28th July 2014.  The  two  Appellants  and  Mr  Wingco  had  a
    private and family life together in the United  Kingdom.   They  worked
    and supported the economy paying taxes.  Their appeals should have been
    allowed under Article 8. Mr Wingco had asked  the  care  home  and  the
    managers there, they had assured him that matters had been put in hand.
     It was  therefore  harsh  not  to  let  Mr  Wingco's  dependants  have
    indefinite leave to remain.  The Respondent had given Mr Wingco a  work
    permit.  Organising the work permit was done by the employer Mr  Wingco
    had no hand in it.

20.  In reply the Presenting Officer said that the purpose  of  the  hearing
    was to consider whether there was a material error of law in the  first
    instance decision.  The Appellant was attempting to reargue  the  case.
    The Respondent had not lodged a cross-appeal against  the  decision  to
    allow Mr Wingco's appeal.  Judge Blum had accepted a concession made by
    the Presenting Officer during the case as if it was a matter of law  on
    the ten year Rule.  The Judge had taken  into  account  the  impact  on
    Joanna's education although she had established her own form of private
    life in this country.  Although it was accepted that the Mr Wingco  had
    relied on his employer the Tribunal had also pointed out that Mr Wingco
    should have been aware of his status and what was happening to his work
    permit was his responsibility.  The new provisions in the 2002  Act  at
    Section 117A and B did not assist the Appellants in this  case.   There
    was a reference in the grounds  to  the  fact  that  someone  could  be
    granted leave in line with someone granted leave to remain under a work
    permit.  That was not the case here.

21.  Finally in closing Counsel for the Appellants  stated  that  Mr  Wingco
    had been here for more than ten years and the Appellant and Joanna came
    to join him.  Mr Wingco had a right to have a family unit  and  sending
    the Appellant and Joanna back to the Philippines meant that that family
    unit would be broken up and that would breach Article 8.  Therefore the
    appeal should be allowed.

Findings

22.  Given the Judge's findings under paragraph 134 in relation to the  work
    permit that  Mr  Wingco  had  worked  at  the  Woodside  Care  Home  in
    circumstances where he had no permit to do  so,  Mr  Wingco  could  not
    succeed under paragraph 276B as he was in breach of Immigration  Rules.
    Nevertheless the Presenting Officer made a concession  that  Mr  Wingco
    could succeed under the ten year  Rule  and  the  Judge  accepted  that
    concession and allowed Mr Wingco's appeal accordingly.  The  Respondent
    has not sought to cross-appeal the Judge's decision perhaps because  it
    arose from a concession by the Presenting Officer (albeit one incorrect
    in law).

23.  For the  purposes  of  this  appeal  it  matters  not  that  Mr  Wingco
    succeeded  in  his  appeal  under  what  was  arguably   an   incorrect
    interpretation of the Immigration Rules. The situation could still have
    arisen that Mr Wingco was granted further leave. The  Respondent  could
    for example have exercised her discretion simply  to  grant  Mr  Wingco
    leave to remain regardless of the merits of his  application  and  that
    decision would be unimpeachable.

24.  The only significance therefore for this appeal  is  whether  the  fact
    that Mr Wingco now has leave to remain means that when carrying out the
    proportionality exercise under Article 8 there  is  a  disproportionate
    interference with the family's established rights. There is clearly  no
    error in the Judge's decision that Mr Wingco could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 134. Nor is there any error that  the  Appellant  and  Joanna
    could not succeed under the Rules as Mr Wingco's dependants. The  grant
    of permission was in error. That strictly speaking would be the end  of
    the  matter  but  I  permitted  counsel  for  the  Appellants  to  make
    submissions to me on whether the Judge erred in law in his treatment of
    Article 8.

25.  The Judge found that Mr Wingco, his wife the Appellant and  Joanna  had
    a family life together and that is  not  disputed  by  the  Respondent.
    Undoubtedly  there  would  be  interference  in  that  family  life  by
    requiring the Appellant and Joanna to return to the  Philippines  since
    there could be no such requirement that Mr Wingco goes with them as  he
    has leave to remain here.  The decision to interfere with the  family's
    life together is in accordance with the legitimate aim  of  immigration
    control because of the fact that Mr Wingco was in breach  of  his  work
    permit by working for a company for which he was not authorised to work
    and that gave rise to the  Respondent's  decisions.   The  question  is
    whether  the  interference  potentially   splitting   the   family   is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.

26.  The Judge carefully  considered  the  matter.   He  was  aware  of  the
    arguments  regarding  Joanna's  education  and  the  Appellant's   work
    history.  He was also aware on  the  other  side  of  the  balance  the
    connections which both Appellants had to the Philippines and  how  they
    could relocate to their country of origin.

27.  It is not clear whether the Judge  had  in  mind  that  the  Appellants
    could in any event return to Philippines and make an  application  from
    there for leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  dependants  of
    someone with indefinite leave to remain.  However if such a route  were
    to be taken then clearly the Appellants would need to show  that  other
    requirements such as financial matters could be satisfied.

28.  Ultimately the question  on  proportionality  under  Article  8  was  a
    matter for the Judge.  He was aware that in carrying out the  balancing
    act he had to take into account the fact that the Appellants could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules  and  therefore  there  had  to  be
    compelling and compassionate circumstances such  that  they  should  be
    allowed outside the Rules.  He referred at paragraph 28 (which  I  have
    quoted above) to the  fact  that  there  must  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellants for them to succeed  under  Article  8.
    Whilst therefore he did not cite the extensive Article 8  case  law  on
    this point it is clear he was  aware  of  the  general  thrust  of  the
    jurisprudence what the Appellants needed to demonstrate to be  able  to
    succeed outside the Rules.

29.  As the Respondent points out the grant of leave to remain to Mr  Wingco
    is not a requirement  that  he  must  reside  in  this  country  merely
    permission to do so if he so chooses.  He had lived in this country for
    several  years  before  the  Appellants  joined  him.   What  was   the
    obligation on the United  Kingdom  to  promote  family  life  in  those
    circumstances?  The Judge expressed the view at paragraph 31 that there
    was no reason why the Appellants could not all  relocate  back  to  the
    Philippines (to include Mr Wingco).  In other words  that  family  life
    could be developed there it did not have to be developed in the  United
    Kingdom.  It is correct that the Judge did not refer to the  provisions
    in Section 117A to D which were in force  by  the  time  he  heard  the
    appeal but as was submitted to me those provisions did not  assist  the
    Appellants in this case.

30.  Joanna was not a qualifying child.  By the date the  appeal  was  heard
    she was over 18 and had not lived in this country for seven years.  Any
    private or family life established by the Appellant whilst  her  status
    was precarious  would  be  afforded  little  weight  in  the  balancing
    exercise in any event.  The case was not without its  difficulties  but
    the Judge considered the circumstances of the case in some  detail  and
    gave cogent reasons for his findings.  I consider there was no error of
    law in his decision to dismiss the appeals of the Appellant and Joanna.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier did not involve the making  of  an  error  of
law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Appeals dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made as there is no public policy  reason  for  so
doing.



Signed this 20th day of February 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals of the Appellants were dismissed there can be  no  fee  award
for them (Judge Blum made a fee award for Mr Wingco).



Signed this 20th day of February 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

