
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15686/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision Promulgated            |
|On: 21 November 2014            |On: 24 November 2014            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                            INDRA BAHADUR BASNET
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khosla, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen  of  Nepal,  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas in which he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 4 April 2012 and  was  refused
    by reference to paragraph 245HD and Appendix A of the Immigration Rules
    (HC395) on 21 June 2012.  The Appellant exercised his right  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge
    Lucas on papers on 12 September 2012 and was dismissed.  The  Appellant
    applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper   Tribunal.    His
    application was refused firstly by  Designated  Judge  McClure  and  on
    renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Warr.  Following  an  application  for
    Judicial Review the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission
    to appeal was quashed and on remittal to the Upper Tribunal  permission
    to appeal was granted by Mr C M G Ockelton the  Vice  President  on  14
    October 2014.

 3. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Mr Khosla and
    Mr Tufan appeared for the Respondent. Mr Khosla explained that  he  had
    spoken with Mr Tufan. The circumstances of this case were agreed to  be
    on all fours with R (on the application of Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33.
    It was clear that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance  with
    the law and that the Appellant's appeal should  have  been  allowed  on
    that basis and that it follows that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law. Mr Tufan did not  disagree  but  added  that  it
    should be made clear to the Appellant that the Secretary of State  will
    make a new decision based on the Immigration Rules  in  place  from  20
    July 2012. Mr Tufan submitted a copy of the Respondent's guidance "Alvi
    judgement - how to handle cases" and referred to page 13 of 24.

 4. I agreed that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a
    material error of law and that the decision  would  be  set  aside  and
    remade  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis   that   the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

DECISION

 5. This appeal involves a very narrow issue.  The  Appellant  applied  for
    variation of leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.  His
    application was refused  because  he  was  not  given  any  points  for
    'Sponsorship' as the Respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  Standard
    Occupation Classification (SOC) Code provided  in  his  certificate  of
    sponsorship was on the  Respondent's  website  as  required  under  the
    Respondent's codes of practice.

 6. The Appellant argues that the requirement to demonstrate that  his  job
    appeared on the list of graduate level occupations  as  stated  in  the
    Codes of Practice is unlawful as the Codes of Practice, at the time  of
    the Respondent's decision, had  not  been  laid  before  Parliament  in
    accordance with section 3(2) Immigration Act 1971.

 7. The Appellant's argument, as submitted by Mr Khosla  is  on  all  fours
    with the Supreme Court decision in Alvi. The Respondent recognises this
    fact and following Alvi has amended the  Immigration  Rules  so  as  to
    ensure that requirements to be met by applicants for leave to enter  or
    remain are contained in the Immigration Rules. By not recognising  that
    the requirement upon which the Respondent based her decision to  refuse
    leave to remain was unlawful the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred
    in law and I set aside the decision.

 8. It being accepted that the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance
    with the law it follows that I must remake the decision on  that  basis
    and in doing so I allow the Appellant's appeal.

Summary

 9. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I remake the decision and I allow the Appellant's appeal.



Signed:     Date: 21 November 2014

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
