
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia/15612/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 2 December 2014                            |on 9 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        DESISLAVA SEVDALINOVA ASENOVA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bulgaria, born on 26 February 1987.   She
    applied on 26 February 2013 for a document to certify a permanent right
    of residence in the UK.  The respondent refused that application on  29
    April 2013, stating:

      In accordance with Regulation 15(1)(a) an EEA national who has resided
      in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous  period
      of 5 years shall acquire a right to reside in the UK permanently.

      ... you state that you [have been] employed as a seasonal  worker  ...
      from 2007 to 2012.  Continuity of residence means that you are allowed
      to be absent from the UK, your place of residence, for  the  following
      reasons:

          a) periods of absence ... which should not  exceed  6  months  in
             total in any year;

          b) periods of absence ... on military service; or

          c) any one absence ... not exceeding 12 months for  an  important
             reason such as pregnancy and  child  birth,  serious  illness,
             study or vocational training or an overseas posting.

      ... your P60's ... [state your] address in Bulgaria.  This means  that
      you are not a resident of the UK but a resident of  Bulgaria  who  has
      undertaken periods of  absence  from  Bulgaria  for  the  purposes  of
      seasonal work.  As you are not a resident of  the  UK  you  cannot  be
      considered for permanent residence.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the  grounds  that
    it was not her responsibility that her  P60's  showed  her  address  in
    Bulgaria, and that she had provided bank account  and  other  documents
    showing her address in the UK, on the farm where she worked.   She  had
    resided there for each of the years she had spent in the  UK,  and  had
    not been absent for over 6 months in any year.

 3. The appellant did not seek an oral hearing.  Her case came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Myers who dismissed it by determination promulgated
    on 17 September 2013.  At paragraph 10 the judge said that although the
    appellant was living and working in the UK  she  was  not  continuously
    resident because her permanent address as evidenced in  her  forms  P60
    remained in Bulgaria.  The Seasonal  Agricultural  Worker's  scheme  in
    which she  had  taken  part  did  not  allow  workers  to  bring  their
    dependants.  They lived in accommodation provided by the employer  such
    as a caravan, dormitories or bunk houses.  Although a SAWs worker could
    obtain their own accommodation if they wished, those were factors which
    indicated that they were not ordinarily resident.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    grounds that she had not seen any rule that a SAWs worker could not  be
    treated as a resident and that she had provided evidence to  show  that
    she did meet the terms of the Regulations.

 5. On 3 October 2013 Designated Judge Peart granted permission to  appeal,
    on the view that the appellant might be assisted by Regulation  3(2)(a)
    and by 2 cases cited in the grant of permission.

 6. Regulation 3(2)(a) reflects the terms  of  point  (a)  in  the  refusal
    decision.  (It is plain that (b) and (c) do not apply to this case.)

 7. Unfortunately due to an administrative oversight there was  some  delay
    in listing case for hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  was  no
    appearance by or communication from the  appellant.   (She  might  have
    been in Bulgaria since the notice of hearing was issued.)

 8. I observed to Mr Mullen that on the face of the  refusal  letter  there
    was no good reason to refuse the application in the first  place.   The
    appellant is not caught by any of the conditions  regarding  continuity
    of residence set out in Regulation 3 and replicated  in  the  decision.
    Having a private address in Bulgaria is  not  inconsistent  with  being
    resident in the United Kingdom.  Many people have more than one address
    in more than one country.  The letter does  not  give  an  intelligible
    reason for refusing the application.  Nor does the First-tier  Tribunal
    determination explain why a seasonal agricultural worker  spending  the
    greater part of each year in  the  UK  may  not  be  considered  to  be
    resident here.

 9. Mr Mullen sought to persuade me that the appellant might be  unable  to
    meet the terms of  the  Regulations,  including  the  definition  of  a
    worker, for other  reasons  which  are  not  set  out  in  the  refusal
    decision.  He said that since the case was not set  down  for  an  oral
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent has had  no  earlier
    opportunity to advance such a case.

10. I do not find that submission attractive.  The time to explain  clearly
    to the appellant why her application was refused  was  in  the  refusal
    decision.  The respondent knew the appeals to the FtT and to the UT had
    been filed, so if it was right to raise further  points  at  all,  that
    could have been done at a much earlier date.  It is rather late now.

11. The statements by the appellant in her grounds of appeal to the FtT and
    to the  UT  are  all  vouched  by  her  documents.   Looking  at  those
    documents, at Regulations 3 and 5 and at the refusal  decision,  I  can
    find no sensible reason why the appellant should not be thought to have
    resided in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous
    period of 5 years from 2007 to 2012.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  and  the
    following determination  is  substituted:  the  appeal,  as  originally
    brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed.

13. No anonymity or fee order has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            8 December 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




