
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/15609/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 8th March 2017

                            On 6th July 2017
                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                        KAMLESHKUMAR MAGANLAL CHAUHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr N Ahmed (Counsel, instructed by Bhavsar Patel,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of India. He applied for leave to remain
   which was refused. his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Hollingworth at Nottingham on the 5th of May 2016. The appeal was allowed
   for the reasons given in a decision promulgated on the 17th of May 2016
   under the provisions of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, the Judge found
   that there were insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and his wife
   continuing their family life in India.

2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis that the
   Judge had erred and that the facts as found did not justify the
   conclusion that the provisions of paragraph EX.1 were met. The Sponsor,
   although now a British citizen, was of Indian origin with her mother and
   brother still living there. It had not been shown that it would be
   unreasonable for them to live there. permission was granted and the
   hearing listed as indicated above.

3. At the hearing the Home Office provided a copy of Agyarko v Secretary of
   State [2017] UKSC 11 and the Appellant provided a copy of the rule 24
   reply. In this decision I will continue to refer to Mr Chauhan as the
   Appellant to maintain continuity in references to the First-tier Tribunal
   decision. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings and
   referred to where relevant below.

4. Both parties maintained their respective positions. Mr Ahmed for the
   Appellant submitted that Agyarko could not be used as a precedent for the
   definition of insurmountable obstacles as that had been a public law
   challenge and not a challenge to a First-tier Tribunal decision and also
   relied on the decision in SS (Congo). At the hearing I indicated that I
   was satisfied that there was an error and reserved the reasons which
   follow.

5. The Judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 14 to 19 of the decision.
   The Appellant had entered the UK lawfully and did not establish his
   relationship on a precarious basis. The Sponsor is not a dual national,
   she came to the UK when she was 19 and had spent over 22 years in the
   country. She has a house subject to a mortgage and works but could not
   service the mortgage if in India. If they lived in India she would need a
   visa and would be denied her EU rights. The Judge went on to find that
   the Sponsor was fully integrated into the UK and her ties to India
   considerably diluted. The factual findings amounted to very significant
   obstacles.

6. In relation to section 117B of the 2002 Act the term precarious refers
   to a person's presence being dependent on the grant of further leave in
   contrast to illegality where there is no leave. The Judge erred in
   finding that the relationship was established when the Appellant was not
   in the UK precariously, clearly the Appellant was in the UK precariously
   as his presence was dependent on the grant of further leave.

7. I do not accept Mr Ahmed's suggestion that the case of Agyarko is not
   relevant. The fact that it was a different sort of challenge does not
   affect the basis of the decision which turned on what could amount to
   insurmountable obstacles as defined in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM. Mr
   Mills referred to paragraph 33 of the decision which cited the Secretary
   of State's position as set out in the Refusal Letter. The approach was
   upheld by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 71 where it was decided that
   there was nothing wrong with the decision of the Secretary of State.

8. In Agyarko the Sponsor had never lived outside the UK let alone in Ghana
   and was unwilling to move. Those are not insurmountable obstacles. The
   ordinary incidents of moving, such as finding accommodation and work and
   establishing a network of friends and support and possibly the absence of
   family are not by themselves obstacles and neither is the need to learn a
   new language. These are all obstacles that the Appellant overcome in
   coming to the UK and the Sponsor would be returning to the country of her
   birth where she has family.

9. The Sponsor may be unwilling to give up what she has achieved materially
   in the UK but that is not an obstacle and her Indian heritage would make
   the process of adapting there considerably easier than the hurdles that
   would have faced the Sponsor in Agyarko. As it is she has assets that
   could be used to establish a family life in India and she has skills that
   could be applied there too in addition to her being able to speak
   English.

10. While the Judge made findings on the factual circumstances of the
   Appellant and the Sponsor it cannot be said that their circumstances
   would see them facing any real obstacles to integration in India let
   alone anything that could be said to be very significant. It was an error
   for the Judge to find that they did as the facts did not disclose
   anything of the sort. In the circumstances the decision will be set
   aside.

11. I had contemplated remaking the decision but there is another basis on
   which the Appellant might be entitled to remain based on the length of
   his lawful residence in the UK. That however is not before the Tribunal
   as consent has not been given for that to be heard although the facts
   could be relevant to an assessment under article 8. In those
   circumstances the appeal will be remitted to be heard by a Judge other
   than Judge Hollingworth.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision which is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
rehearing on all issues, not to be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Hollingworth.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

I make no fee award as this will be decided by the First-tier Tribunal at
the conclusion of the decision.

Signed: Malcolm F Parkes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 23rd March 2017



