

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15474/2014
                                                               IA/15480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 23 December 2014                  |On 20 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                  Mrs pooja
                                misS vishali
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ruperalia, instructed by Just Legal Group
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is the mother of the second appellants.  They  were
    born on 14 January 1979 and 30 September 1996  respectively.  They  are
    both citizens of India.

 2. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Munro that was promulgated on 6 July 2014.
     Judge Munro dismissed their appeals against the EEA  decisions  of  24
    March 2014.  The first appellant was given notice  that  her  residence
    card was revoked and the second appellant was given notice refusing  to
    issue a residence card.

 3. In making  these  decisions,  the  Secretary  of  State  said  was  not
    satisfied that they could derive rights of residence from  the  husband
    of the first appellant, Mr Esze, a Hungarian national, who is the  step
    father of the second appellant because she was not  satisfied  Mr  Esze
    was a qualified  person  for  the  purposes  of  regulation  6  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. After considering the evidence and arguments presented  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge Munro concluded that the appellants had failed  to
    establish that Mr Esze was a qualified  person  and  he  dismissed  the
    appeals.  The grounds of appeal to this Tribunal are that  Judge  Munro
    misdirected himself and/or made  perverse  or  irrational  findings  on
    matters that were material to the outcome.  The grounds  also  rely  on
    article 8 of the human rights convention.

 5. The appellants asserted that they had submitted sufficient evidence  to
    show that Mr Esze was self employed in the UK as confirmed by documents
    from HM Revenue and Customs and his accountants.  The appellants argued
    that the judge had failed to give sufficient  weight  to  the  historic
    documents showing Mr Esze's self employment up to the end of the  2012-
    2013 tax  year  and  that  the  judge  had  erred  by  drawing  adverse
    inferences from the failure to supply similar evidence  for  the  2014-
    2015 tax year when the appeal was determined during that tax year.

 6. Mr Ruperalia began by submitting a fresh bundle of documents.  It would
    appear that neither the appellants nor their representatives had kept a
    copy of the documents submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  also
    transpired that copies had not been provided to the Secretary of State,
    the  appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  being  determined  without
    hearings at the appellants' request.  Unusually, I was the only  person
    who had access to the documents relied on by the  appellants  in  their
    appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I have compared the fresh bundle with that previously  submitted.   The
    first 28 pages of the new bundle contain documents relating to the  EEA
    decisions and the appeals.  They were  not  included  in  the  original
    bundle but are not disputed and have been available to both parties  in
    other ways.  The fresh bundle at  pages  29  and  30  contain  the  tax
    calculation for 2013-2014 in relation to Mr Esze's  income.   That  was
    not before Judge Munro.  He had sight of the tax calculations  for  the
    three previous years.  At pages 31 to 37 the new  bundle  contains  the
    accounts for the tax year ended 5 April 2014.  Again,  these  were  not
    before Judge Munro.  Nor was the self-assessment tax  return  for  that
    tax year before him, although it is included in  the  new  bundle  from
    page 38 although the earlier bundle  contained  similar  documents  for
    earlier  tax  years.   The  new  bundle  also  contains  business  bank
    statements  post-dating  Judge  Munro's  decision.   Although   several
    statements from these bank accounts were submitted  with  the  original
    bundle, there were gaps and several of those in the new bundle were not
    before Judge Munro.

 8. Mr Ruperalia admitted that he had some difficulties because he did  not
    know what had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  He  confirmed
    that he did not seek to rely on any document that was not before  Judge
    Munro when dealing with the question of whether Judge Munro erred on  a
    point of law but that he would seek to rely on fresh evidence  if  such
    an error was found.

 9. Mr Ruperalia relied on the grounds of appeal.  He said that the crucial
    date in these appeals was  November  2013  when  the  second  appellant
    applied for a residence card.  At that  time  the  Secretary  of  State
    decided that the second appellant could not derive a right of residence
    from her step father because it was not accepted  he  was  a  qualified
    person.  In light of that finding, the Secretary of  State  decided  to
    revoke the residence card issued to the first appellant.  Mr  Ruperalia
    reminded me that, at paragraph 13 of his determination, Judge Munro had
    listed  the  evidence  submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    The
    Secretary of State made her decision on the basis  that  the  documents
    relied on where not up to date and, according to  Mr  Ruperalia,  Judge
    Munro merely borrowed this  reasoning  even  though  in  law  there  is
    nothing to indicate when documents might become out of date.

10. I did not need to hear from Mr Smart because I was satisfied  that  the
    arguments presented by Mr Ruperalia amount to  mere  disagreement  with
    the judicial findings made.  It is clear from  the  determination  that
    although Judge Munro is aware of the reasons why the Secretary of State
    made the decisions (see paragraphs 4 and 5) he does not simply  endorse
    those reasons.  Judge Munro carefully assesses the evidence for himself
    (see paragraphs 13 to 19) and concludes that the evidence fails to show
    that it was more likely than not that Mr Esze was a  qualified  person.
    It is clear from paragraph 20 the Judge Munro reached  this  conclusion
    because of the failure of the appellants to  provide  cogent  evidence,
    the burden of proof being upon them.

11. There is absolutely nothing wrong in law with the decision or statement
    of reasons.  The appeals failed because the appellants did  not  supply
    adequate evidence.  The fact they now seek to rely on evidence that was
    not before Judge Munro is an indication that they  now  recognise  what
    they had to do.  It is open for them to make fresh applications to  the
    Secretary of State.

12. I  turn  to  the  remaining  ground  of  appeal  that  relates  to  the
    appellants' private and family life rights.  Although  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal made reference  to  such  rights,  no
    evidence was presented to show the nature or extent of the  appellants'
    private or family life and no arguments were made to suggest  that  the
    EEA decisions were disproportionate.  I add that Mr Ruperalia  did  not
    seek to argue the article 8 point.

13. I acknowledge that Judge Munro failed to address this ground of  appeal
    and the failure to deal with a ground of appeal is an error on a  point
    of law.  However, in these cases because of the lack  of  evidence  and
    the fact that there is no evidence that the Secretary of State intended
    to interfere with the private or family lives  of  this  family  (there
    being no indication of any removal action), the failure could not  have
    been material.  I conclude that any legal error on this point would not
    be reason to set aside the decision.

14. For all these reasons, the appeals to the Upper Tribunal fail  and  the
    decisions of Judge Munro are maintained.



Decision

The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed  because  the  determination
of Judge Munro does not contain an error on a point of law and his  decision
is upheld.



                               Signed   Date 8 January 2015


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
