
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15590/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2018                           |On 09 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                       mr richard boluwatife Oyerinde
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against  a  decision
    of the Respondent made under the European  Economic  Area  Regulations.
    That appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Eldridge
    who, in a decision promulgated on 12 April 2017, dismissed it.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Farrelly on 26 October 2017. His reasons for so
    doing were:-

         "1.  The appellant seek (sic) permission  in  time  to  appeal  the
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge promulgated  on
             12th April 2017.

          2.  The judge dealt with the appellant's appeal and  that  of  his
             father on the same occasion.

          3.  His father argued a retained right of residence following  his
             divorce from his EEA sponsor. The appellant's  claim  also  to
             have a retained right of residence under Reg 10  was  rejected
             on the basis he  was  not  in  the  country  when  his  father
             divorced.

          4.  The grounds argue the  appellant's  appeal  should  have  been
             allowed in line with  his  father's  and  he  was  here  as  a
             dependant family member of his father.

          5.  The respondent's decision in relation to  this  appellant  was
             that he was removable as he had been admitted  on  a  6  month
             family permit under reg 12. His entitlement was  as  a  family
             member of an EEA national via his father.  A retained right of
             family members is set out in reg 10 in relation  to  different
             categories of persons and there are specific requirements.  In
             relation to the termination  of  his  father's  marriage,  the
             judge explained at a (sic) para 12 why the appellant could not
             benefit. It does not follow that because his  father's  appeal
             succeeded so must he as their circumstances are different.

          6.  Although the appellant is not covered by reg.10 it is arguable
             that give the judge accepted his father was  a  family  member
             with a retained right of residence then the appellant now  has
             a claim as a family member of his father under reg 7 (1)(b)".

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset both representatives urged me to accept  that  the  Judge
    had materially erred by failing to consider the appeal under Regulation
    7(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations. I was asked to remit the appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 5. That is an analysis that I share.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Court and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Mark Eldridge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 7 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard






