
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15317/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2016                           |On 11 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Oladapo Abayomi Ogunsola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Nigeria.  On  5
    July 2016 a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judges  Appleyard  and  Mulholland)
    allowed his appeal against a decision made by the appellant  (hereafter
    the Secretary of State or SSHD) on 8 April 2015 refusing to grant him a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as  an  extended
    family member (EFM) of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights.   The
    claimant had applied for a residence card on the basis that he was in a
    durable relationship with a Polish national, Miss Palka, who he had met
    in April 2013.  The SSHD appealed, arguing  that  the  judge  erred  in
    allowing the appeal outright when the SSHD  had  yet  to  exercise  her
    discretion under regulation 17(4) of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  By the time this appeal was considered  as  to
    whether to grant permission by FtT Judge Davidge,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    had reported its decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
    00411 (IAC) stating in its head note that "There is no statutory  right
    of appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a
    Residence Card to a person claiming to be an Extended  Family  Member".
    Judge Davidge concluded that the grounds were arguable and had also  to
    be considered in the light of Sala.

2.   At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Bramble  and  the  claimant.
    Mr Bramble argued that in light of Sala I  should  find  that  the  FtT
    judge erred in law through wrongly  assuming  he  had  jurisdiction  to
    decide the appeal.  Even if Sala were left to one  side,  submitted  Mr
    Bramble, the judge erred in allowing the appeal outright.  The claimant
    submitted that since at the time of the decision of the  FtT  Sala  had
    not been reported, it could not be an error on the part of the judge to
    consider  he  had  jurisdiction.   The  claimant   outlined   all   the
    difficulties he had had with the  immigration  authorities  since  they
    refused his application for leave to remain.

3.   I am satisfied that the judges  erred  in  law  in  assuming  they  had
    jurisdiction.  They cannot be criticised for assuming  they  had  since
    that is what judges at all levels had been doing before Sala.  But  the
    recent decision in Sala now stands as the correct interpretation of the
    relevant law by the Upper Tribunal.  Following established  principles,
    it must be taken to declare what the law must  be  understood  to  have
    always been.  Accordingly the decision of the FtT judges  must  be  set
    aside.

4.   Even had I not applied Sala I would  still  have  found  that  the  FtT
    judges erred in law and I would have set aside the decision because the
    SSHD is unassailably right to submit that the judges were not  entitled
    to allow the appeal outright, since the grant of a residence permit for
    EFMs is under regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations is  a  matter  of
    discretion and she had not as yet exercised that discretion.

5.   Assuming Sala is upheld by the higher courts,  the  claimant  may  well
    have to switch his intention to lodging  an  application  for  Judicial
    Review. In this connection I make the observation that the claimant may
    be entitled to approach the SSHD for a fresh decision on the basis that
    a judicial body (two judges of the FtT) have found the account given by
    him and his partner to be truthful, both being "credible  and  reliable
    witnesses" (para 35).  In the SSHD's grounds of appeal  she  raised  no
    challenge to the FtT's findings of fact and she herself argued that the
    case should be remitted to her to consider whether to grant a residence
    permit under regulation 17(4).

6.   For the above reasons the FtT judge erred in law.  The decision  I  re-
    make is to find that the claimant has no right of appeal and  therefore
    I have no jurisdiction to hear the appeal: Sala.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date
                 [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


