

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15950/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons promulgated      |
|on 31 July 2017                        |on 15 September 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           DURGAVATI SEEWOOGOOLAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Armstrong Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis of Counsel


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callender-Smith  promulgated   on   21
        November 2016 in which the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal.






Background


     2. Ms Seewootoolam, is a citizen of Mauritius, was born on 10  October
        1978.
     3. Ms Seewootoolam entered the  United  Kingdom  on  2  February  2005
        lawfully as a student with leave extended to 31 December 2011. On 3
        July 2012 Ms Seewootoolam applied for leave  as  the  spouse  of  a
        person present and settled in the UK  which  was  refused  with  no
        right of appeal  on  21  November  2012.  On  26  January  2015  Ms
        Seewootoolam applied for leave to remain in the UK on human  rights
        grounds and under the Immigration Rules which was  refused  by  the
        Secretary of State on 2 April 2015.
     4. The Judge sets out findings and reasons at  [15]  to  [39]  of  the
        decision under challenge.
     5. The Judge notes at [15]:


             "The appellant's  position,  as  is  clear  from  her  written
             witness statement and the oral evidence that she gave  in  the
             appeal hearing, has changed substantially  from  the  time  at
             which the Respondent made  her  original  decision  to  refuse
             leave to the Appellant."


     6. The above comment relates to the fact that Ms Seewootoolam for  the
        first time mentioned at the hearing a fear  of  return  based  upon
        domestic violence issues. In relation  to  this  matter  the  Judge
        records:


         "32.     As I  have  said,  the  Appellant  is  unable  to  provide
             evidence to "prove"  that  she  was  the  victim  of  domestic
             violence within the terms of the Immigration Rules. That  does
             not, however, prevent her account been assessed  in  terms  of
             the findings that  I  have  made  about  the  credibility  and
             substance of her account.


         33.  I have considered carefully the medical evidence that has been
             presented in this case including that from a psychiatrist  who
             has examined her and expressed the view that her mental health
             is consistent with  the  treatment  she  has  described  being
             subjected to.


         34.   I have found the Appellant  is  someone  who  had  previously
             complied with all the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
             but, because of the  situation  she  faced  in  terms  of  the
             control and domestic violence been exercised  by  Mr  Jenkins,
             the fact that she became an over stayer was no fault of hers.


         35.   I find that given  the  serious  nature  of  her  psychiatric
             condition, her estrangement from her parents caused by her ill-
             fated relationship with Mr Jenkins and the risk for her should
             she now be returned to Mauritius in the state she is  in  that
             she satisfies the  requirements  of  Paragraph  276  ADE  (vi)
             subparagraph 2.  I find that she  is  someone  who  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for less than 20 years  but  who  would
             face very significant obstacles to reintegration in  Mauritius
             if she was required to leave the  UK.  She  has  a  particular
             handicap in terms of reintegration because of the lack of  her
             former family's support. Those who have suffered the  kind  of
             controlling  domestic  violence  that  she   has   faced   are
             inevitably going to be more vulnerable and fragile on any kind
             of relocation exercise.


         36.  She is clearly in a  situation  where  there  are  exceptional
             circumstances  rendering  any  decision  to  remove   her   to
             Mauritius as being exceptional  and,  thus,  disproportionate.
             She previously had entirely lawful leave. She only  overstayed
             because of the deliberate actions of her  former  partner  and
             not because she wished to. She thought the  overstaying  would
             be converted into lawful residents  through  her  relationship
             with him and that was a reasonable assumption that formed  the
             focus of her view at that time meaning that she  was  thinking
             specifically not of  overstaying  but  are  becoming  a  fully
             lawful resident in the UK.


         37.  She has been a victim of domestic violence over a considerable
             period of time, she has been ostracised now by her family  and
             those who suffer from domestic violence are  entitled  to  the
             basic protection of the law.


         38.  She should be allowed discretionary leave to remain in the  UK
             because that is a temporary status that  enables  her  to  re-
             establish a private life in a much more secure footing.


         39.  It would enable her to address the medical  and  psychological
             conditions she now faces, she can speak English  and  she  has
             never had recourse to public funds  in  the  UK  and  she  has
             experience of working in professional area where she would  be
             able to make a very significant contribution by  remaining  in
             the UK."


     7. The Judges notice of decision, which is the issue under  appeal  is
        written in the following terms:


             "... the appeal is allowed on the basis that,  given  the  new
             factual  matrix  in  this  appeal,  the  decision  is  not  in
             accordance with the Immigration Rules and is  disproportionate
             in the context of Article 8 human rights."


     8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  stating  it  is
        not entirely clear what the Judge means in the notice  of  decision
        at the conclusion of the determination  which  the  author  of  the
        grounds presumed, in the terms of  the  Rules,  is  a  referral  to
        paragraph 276ADE. It is asserted the Judge erred in such finding as
        the focus of the Rules is a requirement for the Judge  to  consider
        the evidence that exists at the date of application.
     9. In terms of article 8 it is asserted there  is  no  proportionality
        assessment with the appropriate reference to section 117  B  taking
        into  account  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   immigration
        control.
    10. The Grounds also assert it was  a  case  in  which  the  Presenting
        Officer submitted the case should be remitted to the  Secretary  of
        State to consider the 'new factual matrix',  evidence  of  domestic
        violence having been seen for the first  time  in  the  appellant's
        bundle of evidence served on the morning of the hearing.
    11. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the Secretary States grounds.




Error of law


    12. Mr Armstrong asserts the Judge committed a procedural  irregularity
        sufficient to amount to an arguable error of law in relation to the
        new issue raised for the first time on the day of the hearing  upon
        which the appeal was allowed. It was argued the Presenting  Officer
        (HOPO) before the Judge objected and the HOPO's note of the hearing
        was handed to the Upper Tribunal and Mr Lewis which is  written  in
        the following terms:


         "Appellant present. Decision 2012. New issue at appeal as appellant
         now claiming domestic  violence.  Appellant's  bundle  only  served
         today at onset of hearing to me and IAC.  This has not been  before
         SOS and IJ decided against my objection is to  go  ahead  and  hear
         appeal today. I did not ask any questions of appellant.  IJ  should
         not be primary decision  maker.  Reps  on  the  other  hand  stated
         appellant waited so long for decision and is venerable  (sic),  and
         therefore asked IJ to allow appeal.


         IJ reserved."


    13. Mr Lewis submitted that no application was made for an  adjournment
        on the day or for the matter to be remitted  to  the  Secretary  of
        State which he later clarified as being a submission that no formal
        application had been made.  It was accepted that the HOPO did raise
        as a preliminary issue at the start of the  case  the  question  of
        whether the matter should be remitted to the Secretary of State but
        that the Judge indicated she was prepared to give the HOPO time but
        claimed to be concerned with the welfare of the applicant  who  was
        described as being vulnerable. Mr Lewis submitted that although the
        Judge indicated she was willing to put the matter back  no  request
        for it to be put back was made and the Judge proceeded to hear  the
        appeal.
    14. Mr Armstrong submitted that the application made by  the  HOPO  was
        the same as an adjournment request and that the  case  should  have
        been put off for further consideration.  It was argued that  on  28
        January 2015 there was human rights claim and that what was adduced
        at the hearing was fresh evidence.  It was not made  out  that  the
        appellant before the First-tier Tribunal would have been prejudiced
        if the new evidence was considered by the Secretary of State.
    15. In relation to Ground 1, I find the Secretary of State has made out
        her case of procedural unfairness. Whether a Judge decides to admit
        new evidence served contrary to the directions given in this or any
        appeal, and particularly that adduced on the day, falls within  the
        discretionary case management powers available  to  the  Judge.  In
        deciding whether to exercise such powers in a party's favour and by
        what  means,  a  judge  must  be  guided  by  the  well-established
        principle that both parties to an action are  entitled  to  a  fair
        hearing.
    16. There appears to be insufficient evidence to support  a  claim  the
        Judge was required to proceed on the day as it was not made out  to
        failure to do so would result in adverse consequences sufficient to
        override any request made by the Secretary  of  State  for  further
        time. It is not disputed the evidence relating to domestic violence
        was not notified to either the First-tier Tribunal or Secretary  of
        State until the appeal bundle was served and  it  is  not  disputed
        that the HOPO raised justifiable concerns at  the  commencement  of
        the hearing that a new issue had been raised at  the  appeal  which
        had not been before the Secretary of State and  that  further  time
        was required to consider this material. It also appears this matter
        was allocated to the Float List meaning that  the  first  time  any
        Presenting Officer may have seen it would have been when  the  case
        was allocated to a particular judges list.
    17. The Judge in the decision under challenge fails to deal  with  what
        was clearly a request for an adjournment, even if not put in a form
        that Mr Lewis may view as being a 'formal application',  and  fails
        to give any satisfactory explanation for why the matter  could  not
        have been put back to another date to allow the Secretary State  to
        consider the new material. The HOPO was effectively ambushed by the
        new material and was arguably denied the right to a fair hearing in
        relation to both the provision of adequate time  to  enable  proper
        consideration of that evidence and to consider  how  that  material
        should be approached in relation to both the previous  refusal  and
        any new issues that may arise. Adequate preparation is also key  to
        proper cross examination. The new evidence  included  a  seven-page
        statement, psychiatric report, further documents, and oral evidence
        given on that topic.
    18. The finding of a procedural irregularity sufficient  to  amount  to
        material error of law is determinative of the outcome as procedural
        unfairness in this case undermines the reliability of the  impugned
        decision.
    19.  The  second  ground  asserts  a  failure  to  undertake  a  proper
        proportionality  assessment  with  reference  to  section  117B.  A
        reading of the decision under challenge suggests there is  arguable
        merit in  this  assertion.  A  properly  conducted  proportionality
        decision will set out  both  parties  cases  and  explain  how  the
        conflicting competing elements stand against each other in arriving
        at the outcome of  the  proportionality  exercise.  This  does  not
        appear to have occurred.
    20. In light of the procedure regularity the  decision  is  set  aside.
        There shall be no preserved findings. The appeal shall be  remitted
        to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Taylor
        House to be heard afresh by a  different  judge  appointed  by  the
        Resident Judge of that hearing centre.


Decision

    21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  a
        differently constituted First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House
        to be heard afresh by a different judge appointed by  the  Resident
        Judge of that hearing centre.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14 September 2017












