
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2016                              |On 19 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                              Anh Thi Ngoc Ngo
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Not represented
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            CONSENT TO WITHRAWAL

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  promulgated  7.12.15,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse further  leave
    to remain in the UK as the spouse of  a  British  citizen.   The  Judge
    heard the appeal on 5.11.15.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson refused permission  to  appeal  on
    17.5.16. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to  appeal  on
    20.6.16.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 19.7.16, listed as an appeal  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 4. By fax copy of an undated letter,  received  by  the  Tribunal  on  the
    morning of the  hearing,  the  appellant's  representatives,  Qualified
    Legal  Solicitors,  notified  the  Tribunal  that  they  have  received
    instructions from the appellant that she no longer wishes to pursue the
    appeal and requesting permission to withdraw the appeal.

 5. The appellant attended the hearing and confirmed the instructions.

 6. The letter further explains  that  the  appellant  has  instructed  her
    representatives to submit a fresh application for variation of leave to
    remain.

 7. In the circumstances, the Tribunal consents to the  withdrawal  of  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, pursuant  to  Rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Decision

 8. The appeal is treated as withdrawn.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Consequential Directions

    Pursuant to Rule 17(5) the Tribunal must notify each party  in  writing
    that a withdrawal has taken effect under this Rule.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been withdrawn.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

