
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15255/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  MD Sujan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr H Shamsuzzoha of Universal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Bangladesh, born on 7 July 1987.  On 25  March  2012  he  entered  with
    leave as a student and applied in time for further leave as a student.





The Decision and Appeal

 2. On 20 February 2014 the Appellant (the SSHD)  refused  his  application
    under  paragraph  245ZX(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and   proposed
    directions for his removal under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The SSHD noted that during the currency of his last leave the Applicant
    had changed the institution at which he was studying at a time when  he
    was subject to Section 50 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009.  The SSHD considered the Applicant's leave had  been  limited
    to study at a named institution and that approval or further leave  was
    required if he was to study at a  different  institution.   Accordingly
    his application was refused on general grounds under  paragraph  322(3)
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  had  not  complied  with  the
    requirements of paragraphs 245ZX(a) and 245ZW(c)(iv).

 4. On 28 March 2014 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds run to four pages of typescript.  Omitting  the
    generic  or  formulaic  elements,  in  essence  the  grounds  are  that
    following the SSHD revocation of the licence of the  college  where  he
    had been studying, the college had come to an arrangement with  another
    college for him to transfer his studies to that other college and  that
    the first and the new college had come entered into some partnership or
    similar arrangement and the Appellant had not been advised he needed to
    refer the matter to the SSHD.  The grounds allege the Applicant was  in
    effect an innocent victim and should not be penalised  for  relying  on
    what he had been told by the colleges where he was studying.  The other
    grounds assert the decision places the United Kingdom in breach of  its
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention to  respect  the
    Applicant's private and family life and that in reaching  the  decision
    under appeal the SSHD had not acted fairly.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 1 December 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Owens allowed the Applicant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules finding that the Applicant's second college  had  Highly  Trusted
    Sponsor status and that his first college had made an arrangement  with
    the other college to enable its students to continue their  studies  so
    that effectively the second  college  partially  took  over  the  first
    college and that "they were in fact the  same  institution  or  in  the
    alternative that they were partner institutions": see paragraph  20  of
    her decision.  Having allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    the Judge did not consider the grounds of appeal based on human rights.

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal arguing the Judge had erred in law
    because the second institution at which the Applicant  studied  held  a
    different Sponsor licence number from the first  institution  where  he
    had studied and he had failed to make a fresh application for leave  to
    remain when seeking to transfer from one institution to the other.  The
    Judge had  failed  correctly  to  apply  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    245ZW(c)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  Further, on the  basis  of  the
    findings of fact made  by  the  Judge  she  should  have  remitted  the
    decision to the SSHD for further consideration and failure to do so was
    an error of law.

 7. On 28 January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal because it was an arguable error of law  that
    the appeal had been  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  when  the
    Applicant was not studying  at  the  institution  which  had  issued  a
    Certificate of Acceptance for Studies to him.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. At the hearing the parties informed me they had been in discussion  and
    agreed that if the Applicant had been in breach of  the  conditions  of
    his leave, such breaches were not  material.   Brief  submissions  were
    made by the representatives for the parties.  They focused  on  whether
    the Judge's treatment of the decision under paragraph 322(3)  disclosed
    an error of law in the reasons why she exercised her  discretion  in  a
    manner different from that of the SSHD.

 9. The SSHD's challenge was only to the  ground  given  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 21.C of her decision that the Applicant's  college  had  been
    taken over by the second college which had allowed him to  enrol  on  a
    new course.

Findings and Consideration

10. Given the SSHD had accepted that any breaches by the Applicant  of  the
    terms of his leave to enter or remain were immaterial, and the  absence
    of any challenge to the eight other reasons  given  by  the  Judge  for
    finding that discretion should be exercised in favour of the Applicant,
    all of which were substantial and material, I find  that  even  if  the
    Judge made an error of law in the legal analysis of  the  move  by  the
    Applicant from one institution to another to continue his studies, such
    error was not of sufficient materiality to set aside her decision.

11. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain  an
    error of law such that it should be set aside and accordingly it  shall
    stand.

12. The Applicant holds a "Certificate of Acceptance for Studies" issued by
    Queensbury College for a course to be completed on 27 March 2015,  that
    is the day after the hearing.  When considering the length of leave  to
    be granted to the Applicant, the Respondent may wish to take this  into
    account and grant leave for a short period.

Anonymity

13.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
appeal I find     that there is no need for one.

NOTICE OF DECISION


    The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain an error of law such
    that it should be set aside and accordingly it shall stand.  The effect
    is that:




    The Applicant's appeal against refusal of further leave succeeds.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   30.
iii. 2015



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



