
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15271/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th November 2016                    |On 7th December 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Sukhwinder Singh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Revill, Counsel, instructed by ATM Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department (the Appellant)  appeals
    against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McDade,
    promulgated on 15th March 2016, allowing the appeal of  Mr  Singh  (the
    Respondent) against the Appellant's decision refusing to  issue  him  a
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).
Background

2.   The respondent is a citizen of  India,  date  of  birth  7th  September
    1976.  He applied for a residence card based on his  relationship  with
    Ms Agnieszka Tancula, a national of Poland. In his decision  the  judge
    considered an interview with the respondent and his  partner  conducted
    by Immigration Officers.  The judge analysed those questions that  were
    said to have been  inconsistent  as  between  the  Respondent  and  his
    partner. According to the judge these amounted to a  mere  7  questions
    out of 522.  The judge found that  some  of  the  inconsistencies  were
    miniscule, that others could be reasonably explained  and  that  others
    had limited significance.

3.   The judge concluded that some of the alleged  inconsistencies  did  not
    reflect what was actually said in the interview.  The judge pointed  to
    the general consistency in answers given  by  the  respondent  and  his
    partner and found that, while the respondent's motivation at  the  time
    of the marriage may well have been to have enabled him to remain in the
    UK, he had in the meantime developed a genuine  relationship  with  his
    wife and became genuinely emotionally committed to her.  Having  regard
    to the financial and photographic evidence and  having  considered  the
    evidence cumulatively, including the evidence  of  the  witnesses,  the
    judge concluded that the marriage was genuine.

The grounds of appeal

4.   The grounds of appeal contend that the judge acted  in  a  procedurally
    unfair manner by refusing to admit a document that was contained in the
    Appellant's bundle relating  to  a  visit  by  immigration  enforcement
    officers to the respondent's home on 14th October 2014  and  which  was
    served in accordance  with  First-tier  Tribunal  directions.   It  was
    submitted that the report went to the  central  issue  of  whether  the
    marriage was one of convenience and that the exclusion by the judge  of
    the report prevented  cross-examination  on  its  contents,  which  was
    wholly disproportionate.

5.   In granting permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated:

         "I find that it is arguable  that  the  judge's  exclusion  of  the
         evidence is entirely inconsistent  with  the  overriding  objective
         that  requires  that  cases  are  dealt  with  fairly,  justly  and
         proportionately. Bearing in mind the burden of  proof  was  on  the
         respondent the judge should have allowed the respondent to rely  on
         its evidence and deal with the matter by attaching the  appropriate
         weight to  the  evidence.   The  judge  also  erred  in  his  final
         paragraph of  the  decision  by  stating  that  the  Appellant  had
         discharged the burden of proof to the requisite standard namely the
         balance of probabilities.  In a marriage of  convenience  case  the
         legal  standard  of  proof  is  on  the  respondent  although   the
         evidential burden shifts."

The Upper Tribunal hearing

6.   I am grateful to both Mr  Bramble  and  Ms  Revill  for  their  helpful
    submissions and for the skeleton argument provided by  Ms  Revill.   In
    essence Ms Revill contends that the judge was fully  entitled  to  have
    excluded the evidence given the concerns expressed by him  relating  to
    the reliability of the document and, in the alternative, had the  judge
    admitted the document it would have made no difference to his  eventual
    outcome  because  of  the  concerns  he  expressed  relating   to   its
    reliability. In other words, the judge could  not  have  attached  very
    much weight to the document or  to  any  answers  arising  from  cross-
    examination of the document given his other findings.

7.   At paragraph 2 of the decision the judge said this:

         "A visit by Immigration Officers was made to the property and  that
         visit generated an interview of both the Appellant and  his  spouse
         Agnieszka Tancula.  The visit to the  property  was  not  evidenced
         either by a witness statement or  a  pocket  notebook  entry.   The
         record of the visit was a summary, non-contemporaneous  and  it  is
         unclear whether the author of the summary was one of  the  officers
         who undertook the  inspection.  I  hold  that  the  result  of  the
         inspection cannot be admitted into evidence because of the apparent
         absence of clear evidence  that  anyone  present  at  the  time  of
         inspection has adduced evidence of the alleged findings."


8.   I have also considered the visit note. This  is  contained  on  a  form
    IS.126. It appears to be a covering report relating to the visit; a log
    reference number is provided as well as the identity, albeit  in  brief
    form, of the Immigration Officers who visited the home.  It notes  that
    the  respondent  was  not  present  at  the  time  of  the  visit.  The
    respondent's wife gave the date of her marriage to the  Respondent  and
    said that they had been living together for three years.  She  provided
    the identity of her employer  following  which  an  inspection  of  the
    bedroom took place.

9.   There was said to be one wardrobe with mainly female  clothing  in  it.
    There were some male clothes in the wardrobe but some of them  had  the
    labels still attached which were in Polish. Ms Tancula had informed the
    immigration enforcement officers that her brother  also  lived  in  the
    property. It was suspected by the immigration  enforcement  staff  that
    the clothing in Ms Tancula's wardrobe  belonged  to  the  Ms  Tancula's
    brother and not the respondent.  There was said to  be  an  absence  of
    male shoes in the room although there was a wedding photograph and some
    other photos of the couple in the room. There was said to be a  general
    absence of the respondent's possessions around the property.

10.  In addition Ms Tancula's  command  of  English  was  said  to  be  poor
    despite her claim in the  interview  that  she  communicated  with  her
    husband in  English.  The  immigration  enforcement  staff  formed  the
    impression  that  the  respondent  did  not  reside  at   the   address
    permanently or that the relationship was subsisting.

Discussion

11.  Having regard to the note I am satisfied that the judge did err in  law
    to a material extent by failing to admit this document.  As  Ms  Revill
    indicated both orally and in her skeleton argument, it was open to  the
    judge to have attached little weight to the report for the reasons that
    he gave, but there are no formal rules in relation to the admittance of
    evidence in this jurisdiction and a document should be admitted  if  it
    is both relevant and in compliance with directions. I am  in  no  doubt
    that this document was relevant and that it was  served  in  compliance
    with directions.

12.  The judge may ultimately  have  reached  the  same  conclusion  had  he
    admitted the document and attached little weight to it. However, in the
    absence of any opportunity to undertake cross-examination based on this
    document it cannot be said that the judge would have inevitably allowed
    the appeal. I am satisfied that the refusal to admit the document  into
    evidence amounted to procedural unfairness and that the matter ought to
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  I am satisfied that this appeal ought to be returned to the same  judge
    with a direction that he admits the form IS.126 document and hears  any
    cross-examination or any further evidence that may be  adduced  by  the
    respondent in relation to the document.  This  is  because  there  have
    been detailed findings of fact by the judge  that  have  not  been  the
    subject of any challenge by the respondent and which are unaffected  by
    the failure to admit the document. I see no reason why  those  detailed
    findings of fact should be displaced in circumstances where they can be
    supplemented  by  a  lawful  and  holistic  assessment  following   the
    admittance of the  document  and  any  further  evidence  that  may  be
    produced by the Appellant.

14.  In those circumstances I find a material error of law. The matter  will
    be remitted back to Judge McDade who will admit the form  IS.126.  Both
    the Appellant and Respondent are given permission to adduce any further
    evidence that they regard as relevant.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to
judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade. Judge McDade will  admit  the  form
IS.126 document and any further evidence upon which either  party  may  seek
to rely.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               06 December 2016

