
                                                                   [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/15930/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons         |
|On 23rd February 2015                         |On 24th February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

                                   Between

                                Jinjian Yang
                          (No Anonymity Direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lam instructed by Chan Neill Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin,  Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China born on 17th December  1987  and  he
    appealed against the refusal of the Secretary of State dated 19th  March
    2014 to vary his leave as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the
    Points Based System further to Paragraph 245(h) and 245 DD(i) of HC 395.
    In addition the appellant appealed against  a  decision  to  remove  him
    further to Section 47 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2006.

 2. In particular the reasons for refusal letter of  the  respondent  stated
    that in making the assessment the evidence submitted had been considered
    (245DD(i)) but rejected in the light of

    (ii) the viability and credibility of the source of the  money  referred
    to in Table 4 of Appendix A

    (iii) the viability and credibility of the  business  plans  and  market
    research into chosen business sector

    (iv) the previous educational and business experience (or lack thereof).

 3. The First Tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but an error of law was found in the decision  on  the
    basis that the judge was not entitled  to  take  into  account  material
    other than that which was before the decision-maker, Ahmed  and  Another
    (PBS: admissible evidence [2014] UKUT 00365 which confirms  'the  appeal
    if it is successful is on the basis that the decision  maker,  with  the
    material before him, should have made a different decision, not  on  the
    basis that a different way of  presenting  the  application  would  have
    produced a different decision'.

 4. Albeit that the judge appeared to have taken into account post  decision
    evidence, I directed that a bundle was produced  to  show  exactly  what
    information had been supplied to the Secretary of State in order for her
    to make a decision.  Mr Lam helpfully complied.

 5. From the clear paginated and indexed bundle before the Upper Tribunal it
    was clear that the Secretary  of  State  had  taken  into  account  some
    documentation but ignored other pieces of evidence.  Mr Lam clearly  set
    out in the bundle  before  me  that  there  had  been  requests  by  the
    Secretary of State for further information, following the submission  of
    the application. The appellant in response sent in further  information.
    The business plan sent in the last tranche of evidence immediately prior
    to the decision had been referred to by the respondent  but  information
    which was relevant and sent prior to and with the  business  plan  being
    appeared to have been ignored. This was highly relevant.

 6. This information clearly was relevant to the three areas  of  contention
    and challenge by the respondent in the decision of 19th March 2014. This
    included the viability and  credibility  of  the  source  of  the  money
    referred to in Table 4  of  Appendix  A.   The  appellant  had  produced
    further  bank  statements  showing  the  funds  remained  available  for
    investment and confirmation from his mother that funding had been  sent.
    It would appear that that funding still remained available  and  in  the
    possession of the appellant.

 7. The appellant had also forwarded evidence regarding the second point  of
    challenge, that is the viability and credibility of business  plans  and
    market research.  As Mr Lam pointed out agreements  had  been  submitted
    and not considered.  I would add that the refusal letter  did  not  make
    clear what consultancy companies across the UK had been searched by  the
    respondent.    As  Mr  Lam  pointed  out  the  test  is  'viability  and
    credibility' on the balance of probabilities, not that the  business  is
    guaranteed to be successful.

 8. In relation to the third challenge it  is  also  quite  clear  that  the
    Secretary of  State  did  not  have  regard  to  the  previous  business
    experience as set out by the appellant in the  documentation  forwarded.
    There is no doubt that the appellant had  undergone  internships  within
    business organisations.  He also had a Master's  degree  of  Science  in
    International Business in business.   That  information,  too  had  been
    ignored.

 9. Mr Lam submitted that the respondent had simply failed to link  all  the
    documentation sent. A consideration of all the information that appeared
    to have been overlooked by the respondent would cumulatively affect  the
    assessment of all three limbs under which the  application  was  refused
    and indeed the overall credibility of the application.

10. As such both Mr Lam and Mr Melvin agreed that the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law as documentation had not  been  considered.   On
    the face of the evidence there was no indication that the appellant  was
    not, on the balance of probabilities a  genuine  entrepreneur,  but  the
    refusal  letter  confirmed  that  verification  checks  had   not   been
    undertaken and as all the relevant documentation had not been assessed I
    find that it is for the Secretary of State to undertake an assessment in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules as the primary decision maker.  Mr
    Lam pointed out that the appellant's business activity had been  delayed
    and restricted by the refusal and appeal process and further delay would
    exacerbate this.  In response  Mr  Melvin  undertook  to  use  his  best
    endeavours to have a  further  decision  made  within  60  days  of  the
    decision.

Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision of  the  Secretary  of
State was not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  it  is  remitted  to  the
Secretary of State for such a decision bearing in mind the findings  herein.



Signed:                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Rimington


Date: 23rd February 2015























