
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15367/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House, Newport |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 19 October 2015                  |On: 21 October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                               RIZWANA NAZNIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr F A Chowdhury
For the Respondent:    Mr N Diwnych, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fowell in which he dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a
    citizen of Bangladesh, against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The application under appeal was  made  on  28  January  2014  and  was
    refused  by  reference  to  paragraphs  245ZX(a)  and  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC395) on 13 March 2014.   The  Appellant  exercised
    her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   This  is  the  appeal
    which came before Judge Fowell on 16 April 2015 and was dismissed.  The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The
    application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on 23  June  2015
    in the following terms

         "... The judge found that  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  false
         document with her application purporting to be  from  her  bank  in
         Bangladesh.

         The application for permission to appeal, which was made  in  time,
         refers to a second letter the appellant obtained from her  bank  in
         an attempt to show the first letter was  genuine.  The  application
         challenges the reasons given by the judge for not placing  reliance
         upon this second letter. It is pointed out that the burden of proof
         was on the respondent to show the first letter was false.

         The judge nowhere acknowledges that the burden of proof was on  the
         respondent to show the first letter from the bank was  false.  This
         might not be material if the judge had fully set  out  reasons  for
         accepting both that the original letter  was  false  and  that  the
         further letter was not to be relied upon.  Arguably,  however,  the
         judge's reasoning on these points is not entirely adequate."

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnych represented the Secretary of  State
    and Mr Chowdhury appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant.  No  additional
    documents were submitted.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that  the  Appellant  was  born  in  Bangladesh  on  15
    December 1987. She first came to the United Kingdom with leave to enter
    as a student on 20 October 2007. The Appellant was  granted  successive
    extensions of leave to remain as a Tier  4  student  until  30  January
    2014. Her application for a further extension of leave to  remain  made
    on 28 January 2014 was refused because the  Respondent  considered,  on
    the basis of a document verification report, that a bank statement  and
    solvency letter purportedly from First  Security  Islami  Bank  Limited
    submitted in support of the application was false.

 5. At  the  appeal  hearing  on  16  April  2015  the  Appellant  was  not
    represented. After hearing evidence from the Appellant the Judge  found
    both that the documents from the bank submitted  with  the  application
    and a further letter submitted in support of her appeal were false. The
    appeal was accordingly dismissed.

 6. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  Appellant  asserts
    that the Judge erred in law firstly by not recognising that the  burden
    of proof was upon the Respondent to show that the  bank  statement  and
    solvency letter was false, secondly by placing too high a  burden  upon
    the Appellant to prove her case and thirdly by  incorrectly  concluding
    that there was an inconsistency between the Appellant's  oral  evidence
    and the contents of the letter submitted in support of the appeal.





Submissions

 7. For the Appellant Mr Chowdhury said that there was no  mention  of  the
    appropriate burden of proof in  the  Judge's  decision.  Both  parties'
    evidence should have been dealt with in the same manner. The burden  of
    proving that the documents submitted in support of the application were
    false lies upon the Respondent to the higher  end  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities. The contents of the document verification report do  not
    meet this standard.

 8. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Richards said that there is  plenty
    of detail in the document verification report.  It  clearly  identifies
    that the visa assistant at the British  High  Commission  made  contact
    with the bank by telephone and ascertained that the account existed but
    that the bank statement and solvency letter did not reflect the correct
    state of the account and were forged. The Judge goes on to give reasons
    why the letter, purporting to come from the bank, submitted in  support
    of the appeal to rebut the document verification  report  evidence  was
    also false.

 9. In response Mr Chowdhury said that he had looked at the Oxford  English
    dictionary  definition  of  "correspondence"  and  accepted  that  this
    referred only to written communication nevertheless in  his  submission
    it could also include "verbal correspondence". Mr Chowdhury  emphasised
    that nowhere in the decision is it  acknowledged  that  the  burden  of
    proof is upon the Respondent.

Error of law

10. In my judgement the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  This  case  revolves  around  a
    straightforward issue and it is dealt with extremely succinctly by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. He could perhaps be criticised  for  dealing
    with the matter almost too succinctly  but  that  does  not  of  itself
    disclose any error of law.

11. The issue in question is whether documents lodged by the  Appellant  in
    support of her application and her appeal were false.  The  application
    was refused because the Respondent considered that a bank statement and
    solvency letter submitted  in  support  of  the  application  were  not
    genuine.  In  this  respect  the  Respondent  relied  upon  a  document
    verification report. This document verification report is  very  clear.
    The author of the report confirms the time and date when  he  contacted
    the First Security Islami bank and under the heading "contact  history"
    he records

         "The  bank  representative  confirmed   that   the   bank   records
         demonstrate  that  this  account  does  exist.  However  the   bank
         statement and solvency letter is forged and was not issued  by  the
         said branch. Both are fabricated. The information held by the  bank
         differs from what is detailed  in  the  information/documents  that
         were provided in support of the application form."

12. So far as the burden of proof is concerned it is  indeed  correct  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not mention the applicable  standard
    of proof and that the burden fall upon the Respondent. It could perhaps
    be said that there is an implicit reference in his  conclusion  "it  is
    for the appellant to satisfy me on the  balance  of  probabilities  ...
    (but) given the evidence as to the original documents being false  ..."
    although this is not a  clear  reference.  Nevertheless  it  is  in  my
    judgement clear from this succinct conclusion that the Judge has  first
    looked at the evidence of the original  documents  being  false  before
    going on to look at the document submitted with the appeal in rebuttal.
    There can be no doubt that this  is  the  correct  order  and  that  in
    following this order the Judge is putting the Respondent  to  proof  in
    the first instance.

13. Returning to the document verification report it is clear in my
    judgement that this is evidence produced by the Respondent that
    satisfies the burden of proof that is upon the Respondent. The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge could not fail to be satisfied on the balance of
    probabilities and subject to any rebuttal evidence that the documents
    submitted in support of the application were false. So far as this
    standard of proof is concerned the question of whether there is a
    'higher' balance of probabilities test has been aired before this
    Tribunal on many previous occasions with the conclusion that the
    leading authority on the civil standard of proof is Re B (Children)
    [2008] UKHL 35 in which Lord Hoffmann stated, in [15]:

         "There is only one rule of law, namely that the occurrence  of  the
         fact in issue must be proved to have been more probable  than  not.
         Common sense, not law, requires that  in  deciding  this  question,
         regard should be had, to whatever extent appropriate,  to  inherent
         probabilities."

         This echoed the oft cited statement of Lord Nicholls in  Re  H  and
         Others (Minors) [1996] AC 563, at page 586:

         "The balance of  probabilities  standard  means  that  a  court  is
         satisfied an event occurred if the Court  considers  that,  on  the
         evidence, the occurrence of the event was  more  likely  than  not.
         When assessing the probabilities the Court will have in mind  as  a
         factor, to whatever extent is appropriate in the  particular  case,
         that the more serious the allegation, the less likely  it  is  that
         the event occurred and, hence, the stronger should be the  evidence
         before the Court concludes that the allegation  is  established  on
         the balance of probability. Fraud is less likely than negligence ??

         Built into the preponderance of probability standard is a  generous
         degree  of  flexibility  in  respect  of  the  seriousness  of  the
         allegation ?..

         Although the result is much the same, this does not mean that where
         a serious allegation is in issue the standard of proof required  is
         higher.  It  means  only   that   the   inherent   probability   or
         improbability of an event is itself  a  matter  to  be  taken  into
         account when weighing the probabilities and  deciding  whether,  on
         balance, the event occurred."

    The conclusion of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the  document
    verification report was sufficiently strong  evidence  to  support  the
    serious allegation of forgery cannot in my judgement be impugned.

14. The burden upon the Respondent having been satisfied it reverted to the
    Appellant to show on the balance of probabilities by  way  of  rebuttal
    evidence that the documents were  genuine.  The  Appellant  produced  a
    letter dated 30 March 2015 purportedly from First Security Islami  bank
    and gave oral evidence. The letter whilst purporting  to  confirm  that
    the documents submitted with the  application  were  genuine  makes  no
    mention of the document verification report or its contents. Rather  it
    says

         "We have received correspondence from the above account holder ..."

15. The Appellant's oral evidence records that the Appellant said that  she
    did not write to the bank but that she called the bank  manager.  There
    was no correspondence.  The  Judge  draws  a  distinction  between  the
    Appellant's evidence of a telephone call and the letter referring as it
    does to correspondence. This inconsistency causes the Judge to conclude
    that the letter of 30 March 2015 is false and as such  that  it  cannot
    rebut the evidence of the document verification report.

16. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal it is submitted that the
    telephone call amounted to "verbal correspondence" and  therefore  that
    there is no inconsistency. In his submissions Mr  Chowdhury  maintained
    this approach despite accepting  that  the  Oxford  English  dictionary
    definition of "correspondence" involved only written communication.  Of
    course "verbal" includes  both  written  and  oral  but  it  is  in  my
    judgement beyond peradventure that "correspondence" can only  refer  to
    written communication. As such the First-tier Tribunal  judge  did  not
    fall into error in finding inconsistency and  concluding  as  a  result
    that the letter was false.

17. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal. This appeal is therefore dismissed.

Summary

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands
    and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
