

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/15943/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 24 May 2016                           |on 1 June 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     M E
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

No appearance by or for the appellant

For the respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, aged 49, is originally from Somalia.   He  has  acquired
    Dutch nationality.  He says that he has lived in the UK since 2002, but
    has failed to demonstrate that he has a permanent right of residence in
    terms of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the regulations").

 2. On 12 March 2010 the appellant was convicted at Bristol Crown Court  of
    committing arson recklessly and sentenced to 8 years imprisonment.

 3. On 28 June 2012 the respondent decided  to  make  a  deportation  order
    under the regulations. Her reasons are explained in  a  letter  of  the
    same date.

 4. The appellant filed notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  on  16
    July 2012. His grounds were that he had resided lawfully in the UK  for
    10 years and so the decision ought to have been subject  to  imperative
    grounds of public security; and that  as  his  wife  and  children  all
    resided in the UK, he had no family ties in Holland,  and  he  suffered
    from serious mental illness, the decision to deport would be in  breach
    of article 8 of the ECHR.

 5. A panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge Page and Mrs J Holt
    heard the appellant's appeal at Newport on 2 October  2012.  The  panel
    found that the appellant had not  established  either  10  or  5  years
    continuous residence in the UK for purposes of the regulations, and  so
    the criterion was that removal required to be justified on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public  health  (paragraph  74).  The
    panel went on to find that deportation was justified in  terms  of  the
    regulations and was proportionate in terms of articles 3 and 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal. His case was heard on  15
    April 2013 by a panel comprising the  President,  the  Hon  Mr  Justice
    Blake, and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Phillips. In terms of  a  ruling
    and directions dated 19 April 2013 that panel dealt with six points  of
    error  of  law  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  finding  force
    principally in point 3, failure to consider whether  the  prospects  of
    the appellant's rehabilitation would be promoted or diminished  by  his
    deportation (paragraphs 14 and 15) and in the connected  point  6,  the
    sufficiency of the reasoning of the FtT about the impact of deportation
    on the welfare of the children (paragraph 16). The  other  four  points
    found no favour. The decision of the FtT was set aside  and  directions
    were given for its remaking in the UT.

 7. That remaking proceeded on 5 September 2013 before a  panel  comprising
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Phillips. At
    paragraph 29 of its determination promulgated on 28th October 2013  the
    panel said that the prospects of the appellant's rehabilitation had  to
    be  considered  in  the  proportionality  balance,  and  although   not
    themselves determinative were  a  factor  which  "weighs  very  heavily
    indeed".  Later  in  the  same  paragraph  the  panel  said,  "...  the
    evidence...  shows  quite  clearly  that  the  appellant's  psychiatric
    rehabilitation is continuing, progressing and controlled in  a  secured
    environment and further that is being benefited by  the  proximity  and
    support of close family members.  We  cannot  be  satisfied  that  this
    rehabilitation will continue were the appellant to be deported  to  the
    Netherlands and further we are satisfied on the unequivocal evidence of
    Dr Taylor that even if mental health treatment  was  available  to  the
    appellant his deportation is like to  have  a  significant  detrimental
    effect on his mental health."

 8. The panel concluded  at  paragraph  30  that  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant  was  not  a  proportionate  response  within  the  terms  of
    regulations 21 (5) and 21 (6) and remade the decision by  allowing  the
    appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State appealed successfully to the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Judgement was given by   Sir Stanley  Burton,  Jackson  and  Floyd  LJJ
    agreeing: SSHD v AD, LW and ME, [2015] EWCA Civ 145.

10. A letter dated 7 January 2016 from the solicitors who previously  acted
    for the appellant states that the Supreme Court has refused  permission
    to appeal and that they are without instructions from the appellant and
    unable to represent him further.

11. On 4 March 2016 the UT issued notice of the hearing on 24 May  2016  to
    the appellant, whose address is HM Prison Bristol.  Nothing further has
    been heard from him or from any representative.  I was advised  through
    the tribunal clerk that the appellant had  not  arrived  at  the  court
    buildings in Cardiff, having declined earlier  in  the  morning  to  be
    transported from the prison to the hearing.

12. Mr Richards submitted that the hearing should proceed.

13. There was nothing to indicate that the appellant was likely to take any
    further part in the proceedings or that the UT would be  better  placed
    to make its decision if the hearing were to be put off to a later date.

14. In those circumstances, I considered that  in  terms  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, paragraph  38,  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

15. Mr Richards submitted as follows.  He pointed out the extent  to  which
    the Secretary of State had been successful in the Court of  Appeal,  in
    particular regarding the relative insignificance of  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation in the Netherlands as opposed to the UK, and  the  equal
    availability of care in the Netherlands.  It appears that the appellant
    has completed his custodial sentence, and that his address is currently
    at a prison because he is  in  immigration  detention.   His  behaviour
    presents such difficulties that he is not suitable  to  be  held  in  a
    detention  centre.   The  Secretary  of  State's   position   is   that
    deportation remains justified under the regulations, for reasons  given
    in the original decision  dated  28  June  2012  and  in  supplementary
    decisions dated 7 June and  30  August  2013,  read  in  light  of  the
    decision of the Court.  Any improved prospects of rehabilitation in the
    UK were not material enough to make a  difference  in  this  case.   Mr
    Richards accepted that Dr Taylor had given a strong  opinion  regarding
    the appellant's mental health prospects in the Netherlands.  While that
    issue still had to be  weighed  in  the  proportionality  analysis,  Dr
    Taylor's report was now outdated.  The appellant has made  no  progress
    in rehabilitation in the UK.  If his behaviour had stabilised, that was
    due only to the constraints to which  he  was  subject.   There  was  a
    significant risk to the public.

16. Mr  Richards  fairly  withdrew  one  point  of  distinction  which  the
    respondent previously made between the situation in the UK and  in  the
    Netherlands.  The appellant uses khat whenever he has the  opportunity,
    even against advice.  That substance is no longer legally available  in
    the UK, so the situation  in  that  respect  is  the  same  as  in  the
    Netherlands.  (The UT in its previous decision accepted medical opinion
    to the effect that use  of  khat  had  no  detrimental  effect  on  the
    appellant.)

17. I reserved my decision.

18. The facts have been set out at length in  previous  tribunal  decisions
    and by the Court, and need not be rehearsed again in detail.

19. The following passages in the judgement of the Court  are  particularly
    relevant in identifying the task remaining to the UT.

20. At paragraph 3 the issue was set out:

      In each case, the Secretary of State has appealed to this Court on the
      ground that the relative prospects of rehabilitation are irrelevant in
      the case of someone who has no permanent right of  residence  in  this
      country. She also contends that the Tribunal gave manifestly excessive
      weight to rehabilitation, and that the evidence  before  the  Tribunal
      did not justify its finding that rehabilitation  was  more  likely  in
      this country rather than the country of nationality.

21. At paragraph 48 the discussion was introduced:

      I am unable to accept the Secretary of  State's  submission  that  the
      prospects of rehabilitation are irrelevant unless the offender  has  a
      permanent right of residence. Quite apart from the  authority  of  the
      judgment of the CA in Daha Essa,  to  which  I  have  referred  above,
      rehabilitation is  not  infrequently  linked  to  the  health  of  the
      offender. That is obviously the case in respect of  ME  and  AD.  ME's
      offending was inextricably linked to his mental health, as is the risk
      of his reoffending. In Article 28.1, health is expressly  referred  to
      as a  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  determination  of
      proportionality. If ME remains mentally healthy,  he  is  unlikely  to
      reoffend; if his mental health deteriorates, he is liable to reoffend.

22. The last paragraph of the discussion is 54:

      Lastly, in agreement with what was  said  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Vasconcelos, I do not consider that in the case of an offender with no
      permanent right of residence substantial weight  should  be  given  to
      rehabilitation. I appreciate that all Member States have  an  interest
      in reducing criminality,  and  that  deportation  merely  exports  the
      offender, leaving him free to offend  elsewhere.  However,  the  whole
      point of deportation is to remove  from  this  country  someone  whose
      offending renders him a risk to the public. The  Directive  recognises
      that the more serious the risk of reoffending, and the  offences  that
      he may commit, the greater the right to interfere with  the  right  of
      residence.  Article  28.3  requires  the  most  serious   risk,   i.e.
      "imperative grounds of  public  security",  if  a  Union  citizen  has
      resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous  10  years.  Such
      grounds will normally indicate a greater  risk  of  offending  in  the
      country of nationality or elsewhere in the Union. In other words,  the
      greater the risk of reoffending, the greater the right to deport.

23. And from the conclusions, at paragraphs 56 and 59:

      I would allow the  Secretary  of  State's  application  to  amend  her
      grounds of appeal to include the contention that the weight  given  to
      rehabilitation was manifestly excessive.

      ...

      In the case of ME, the Upper Tribunal  seems  to  have  accepted  that
      mental health care in the Netherlands was  of  high  quality,  and  he
      would be able to report to the local authorities to obtain assistance.
      In these circumstances, it was inconsistent to proceed  on  the  basis
      that his treatment in the UK was known and that in the Netherlands was
      a speculative unknown i.e. that on the evidence  before  the  Tribunal
      there was a sufficiently substantial difference between his care  here
      and his care in the Netherlands. Since this was a  consideration  that
      led the Upper Tribunal to its decision, I consider that the  Secretary
      of State's appeal in this case too should  be  allowed  and  his  case
      remitted to the Upper Tribunal. I would add that if the  Tribunal  had
      proceeded solely on the basis that ME's deportation would  damage  his
      mental health, my conclusion might have been different.

24. The essential points to be borne in mind in light of the  judgement  of
    the Court are that the prospects of rehabilitation are not  irrelevant,
    but are  not  to  be  given  substantial  weight;  that  mental  health
    treatment (and any other public care) available to the appellant in his
    country of nationality is of no lesser quality than in the UK; and that
    any likely damage to the appellant's mental health through  deportation
    is a factor on his side.

25. The relevant part of the regulations is as follows:


           Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public
      health grounds


           21.-(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security
           or public health.


           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
            ...


           (5) Where a relevant decision is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
           policy or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying
           with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-
           (a)  the  decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
           proportionality;
           (b) the decision must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
           conduct of the person concerned;
           (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent
           a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
           of the fundamental interests of society;
           (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or  which
           relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not  justify
           the decision;
           (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do   not   in
           themselves justify the decision.


           (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds  of  public
           policy or public  security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
           resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take
           account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of  health,
           family and economic situation of the person, the person's length
           of residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  person's  social  and
           cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent  of
           the person's links with his country of origin.

26. It  is  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  differentiate  between  the
    prospects of the  appellant's  rehabilitation  and  of  improvement  or
    stability in his mental health.  However, the history is such that  the
    prospects for either are not encouraging.  In 2008 he was thought to be
    suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. In 2009 -  2010  that  diagnosis
    was doubted, but since 2012 it has been reconfirmed.  At least when not
    compliant with medication he is  unstable,  disinhibited,  violent  and
    aggressive and presents a significant risk not only to himself  but  to
    others and to  property.   He  has  a  history  of  failing  to  comply
    voluntarily with medication.  His disorder is of  a  relapsing  nature.
    The progress he appeared to be making in  May  2013  towards  discharge
    into the community has evidently come to nothing.  I can only  conclude
    that he continues to  present  a  risk  unless  subject  to  controlled
    conditions.  If he were to be released into  the  community,  the  risk
    would  be  significant.   On  deportation  to  the   Netherlands,   the
    respondent would be under a duty to ensure that the  authorities  there
    were well aware of the history and  circumstances  of  their  returning
    national.  He presents the same problems wherever he may be.  It  is  a
    controlled environment rather than any  other  factor  which  presently
    keeps the public safe from him.  He has not lived  with  his  wife  and
    children since 2005.   Although  there  was  evidence  of  some  family
    contact up  to  2013,  which  was  beneficial,  there  is  no  updating
    information.  Any contact which relatives may still have with him might
    be kept up in various ways, including visits.  His  wife  and  children
    are all also citizens of the Netherlands.

27. The interests of public policy and public security would be  served  by
    the appellant's removal.  He presents a genuine,  present  and  serious
    threat to the fundamental interests of society in the security  of  the
    persons and property of its citizens.  There is  nothing  presently  to
    suggest that the outlook for him is much improved by keeping him  here.
    Although he has been here most of the time since  2002  that  has  been
    spent mainly in detention for mental health,  criminal  or  immigration
    reasons.  There is no evidence of any significant social  and  cultural
    integration.  I find nothing in the principles set  out  in  regulation
    21(5) or the considerations set out in  regulation  21(6)  which  makes
    deportation a disproportionate step.

28. The decision of the FtT which was set aside earlier in  proceedings  is
    remade to the same effect: the appellant's appeal against  deportation,
    as originally brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

29. An anonymity order made earlier in the proceedings  remains  in  place.



            [pic]


            31 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




