
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15198/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 February 2015                        |On 13 February 2015        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MRS SABIHA SHAHEEN
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer
    For the Respondent:    Mr R De Mello of counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the
    Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan  who  was
    born on 6 January 1978 ("the claimant"). The  Secretary  of  State  has
    been  given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss ("the FTTJ")  who  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 12 March  2014  to  refuse
    her application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK as the  spouse
    of a person present and settled here under the provisions of  paragraph
    287 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The claimant entered the UK as a  student  on  25  April  2009.  On  23
    December 2011 she applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a person
    present and settled here. On 17 February 2012 she was granted leave  to
    remain as a spouse for a period expiring on 17  February  2014.  On  26
    July 2013 she applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  same
    capacity. She  and  her  husband  were  interviewed  separately  on  11
    February 2014.

 3. The Secretary of State considered that there were  a  large  number  of
    inconsistencies between the answers of the claimant and her husband. It
    was concluded that they were not credible, were not living together and
    their marriage was not subsisting.

 4. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard  her  appeal  on  4  September
    2014. Both parties were represented. The claimant and her husband  gave
    evidence. The claimant's representative conceded that if  the  claimant
    could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules  she  also  failed  on
    Article 8 human rights grounds.

 5. The FTTJ found that the evidence of the claimant and  her  husband  had
    been difficult to follow and got worse as the hearing progressed. Their
    spoken English was difficult to understand. The husband  in  particular
    tended to conflate different events and "the more nervous he became the
    more unintelligible he became". There was an almost complete absence of
    any documentary evidence to show that they had  been  living  together.
    Notwithstanding this, the FTTJ  found  both  of  them  to  be  credible
    witnesses. Such ambiguities and inconsistencies between their  evidence
    had arisen because of a lack of proficiency in English. He went  on  to
    say that an interpreter should have been  provided  for  them  both  at
    their interviews and at the hearing. However, he took into account  the
    fact that the claimant and her husband had  been  granted  probationary
    leave. He found that the claimant  and  her  husband  had  been  living
    together and continued to do so.

 6. The Secretary of State  applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal. It is argued that the FTTJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for the finding that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting; failing properly to consider  the  inconsistencies  between
    the  evidence  of  the  claimant  and  her  husband  arising  from  the
    interview,  failing  properly  to  consider  the  lack  of  documentary
    evidence and the lack of proficiency in  English.  The  claimant  could
    have but did not ask for an interpreter. The First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
    who granted permission to appeal  also  made  the  point  that  if  the
    evidence which the claimant and her husband gave at the hearing was  so
    poor that it was difficult to follow  and  got  worse  as  the  hearing
    progressed  then  the  FTTJ  should  have  considered  whether  he  was
    presiding  over  a  fair  hearing  and  whether  there  should  be   an
    adjournment in order to provide an interpreter.

 7. The claimant and her  husband  attended  the  hearing  before  me.  The
    claimant has submitted a further bundle of documents with her letter of
    2 February 2015. Mr De Mello told me that the documents  between  pages
    89 and 148 were before the FTTJ. The documents at pages 1  to  88  were
    new material which was not before the FTTJ. The  documents  from  pages
    149 to 174 were procedural documents common to both parties.  In  reply
    to my question, Mr De Mello accepted that the documents at pages 89  to
    148 had not been put before the Secretary of State.

 8. Mr De Mello said that he did not have the record of the interviews with
    the claimant and her husband. I provided him with a copy.

 9. Both representatives agreed that there were  material  errors  of  law.
    These were identified in the grounds of appeal. It was also agreed that
    the outcome should be for the decision to be set aside with no findings
    of credibility or fact preserved. The appeal should be reheard  in  the
    First-Tier Tribunal.

10. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction  and  can  see  no
    good reason to do so.

11. I find that there are  material  errors  of  law  as  set  out  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal and the grant of  permission  to
    appeal. I set aside the decision. No findings of  credibility  or  fact
    are preserved. The appeal should be re-heard in the First-Tier Tribunal
    by a judge other than First-Tier Tribunal Judge Juss.






    .............................................
    Signed        Date 11 February 2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

