
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15439/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2015                             |On 27 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MALES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                           Mr S M Mokhlasur Rahman
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr S M Mokhlasur Rahman against a decision by  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 31 October 2014, First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Talbot. The appeal was by Mr Rahman, a Pakistani national born on
    12 December 1986, against the Secretary of State's decision of 23 April
    2014 to refuse his application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  Migrant
    and to remove him under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. It is unnecessary to set out the reasoning of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge as to why the application for leave to remain
    was rightly refused under the  Rules  because  there  is  no  grant  of
    permission in relation to that issue.

 2. Although grounds of appeal were submitted raising a  number  of  issues
    the only ground on which permission has been granted to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is that the First-tier Judge  failed  to  deal  with  Mr
    Rahman's claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. Although Mr Rahman was represented below he  is  not  currently
    represented and nobody has  attended  to  pursue  this  appeal  on  his
    behalf. Nevertheless  we  have  carefully  considered  the  papers  and
    reached the clear view that there is no substance in  this  appeal.  We
    would add that we respectfully agree also with the view  of  the  judge
    dealing with permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal that  there  is
    nothing in the other proposed grounds of appeal either.

 3. The reason why the First-tier Judge did  not  deal  with  issues  under
    Article 8 is very simple, that there were no  representations  made  on
    behalf of Mr Rahman in relation to Article 8.  It is true that  in  his
    grounds in support of his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal there  does
    appear a statement to the effect that the Secretary of  State  had  not
    taken into account the appellant's human rights  under  Article  8  and
    that he was "enjoying a private life in his current capacity"  so  that
    removal would have "extremely harsh consequences for his private  life"
    but it is clear that that ground was not developed either  by  evidence
    to explain the nature of the private life which Mr  Rahman  claimed  to
    enjoy or submissions to show why interference with  that  private  life
    would be  disproportionate  for  the  purpose  of  Article  8.  On  the
    contrary, Mr Rahman's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal was  that  he
    came from a relatively affluent family in Bangladesh; his father  owned
    a brick mill and was a director of  a  company  trading  in  fertiliser
    dealerships; Mr Rahman had come to the United Kingdom as a  student  in
    2008; in July 2014 he completed a degree in electronic engineering from
    the University of Westminster; and he would like to go on to study  for
    a masters degree in the United Kingdom before returning to  Bangladesh.
    It is clear therefore that he had no intention to settle permanently in
    this country. That appears to be the closest that his evidence came  to
    any case about  private  life  in  this  country  and  it  was  clearly
    insufficient to make good any case under Article 8.

 4. So in our judgment there  is  nothing  in  the  sole  ground  on  which
    permission to appeal to this Tribunal has been granted and  we  dismiss
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
Mr Rahman's appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 27 March 2015

Mr Justice Males
