
[pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15894/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 May 2017                                |On 2 June 2017                 |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                           Muhammad Sajjad Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gondal, Berkshire Law Chamber
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has permission to  challenge  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge Hussain sent on 20 May 2016 dismissing his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant leave to remain as
    a spouse.  The judge's reason for dismissing the appeal was that he did
    not accept that the appellant and his spouse  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  The grounds contend that the judge's decision
    was legally wrong  because  he  should  not  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant's evidence was not credible since (1) at paragraph 22 he  had
    accepted that the appellant had "given plausible explanations"; and (2)
    despite referring to "numerous inconsistencies" his decision ultimately
    relied on just one  inconsistency  relating  to  the  purchase  of  the
    couple's wedding rings.   These  alleged  shortcomings  amounted  to  a
    failure to give adequate reasons and  the  imposition  of  too  high  a
    burden on the appellant.

2.   I do not find the grounds of appeal are made out.  It is convenient  to
    first of all address the second ground of appeal.  In this  regard,  it
    will assist to first set out the judge's "Findings":-

         "20  The sole  issue  in  this  case  is  whether  the  appellant's
             marriage  to  his  British  citizen  spouse  is  genuine   and
             subsisting.  As will be apparent from  above,  the  respondent
             suggests that it is not because  of  discrepancy  between  the
             appellant and his wife at interview and also  entry  clearance
             they have documents addressed to them at addressers which they
             made no mention of on the application form.


         21   The appellant has sought to  explain  the  inconsistencies  in
             their evidence at interview.  His explanation is  set  out  in
             his witness statement and that of his wife.  It is unnecessary
             to repeat that evidence here.  He has also  tried  to  explain
             the reason why a different address appeared on their telephone
             bill namely that both and his wife forgot to ask the  relevant
             authority to note a change in their address.


         22   Whilst the appellant has given plausible explanations for  the
             inconsistencies in the interview evidence  and  the  documents
             showing different addresses, having looked at the totality  of
             the evidence, I have come to the conclusion that the appellant
             has not discharged the burden of proof on him.


         23   The reason for this is that when the appellant  and  his  wife
             gave  evidence,  separately  before  the   present   tribunal,
             numerous inconsistencies  emerged  as  will  be  noted  above.
             These inconsistencies seem to be in the  same  vain  [sic]  as
             those emerging at interview.  In my view it will be  wrong  to
             conclude that simply because the appellant's wife has a  short
             memory that she would get so much of the evidence wrong.   For
             example, it cannot be the case that the  appellant  said  that
             his wedding ring was a surprise whereas  his  wife  said  that
             they both went and bought it together.   She  even  named  the
             Jeweller.  Such  detail  is  significant  events  (sic)  in  a
             couple's life and  I  cannot  see  there  being  a  reasonable
             explanation as to how they differed so much in their evidence.
         24   Having noted  the  inconsistencies  I  have  also  taken  into
             account the areas of agreement.  From this I deduced that  the
             appellant and his partner are known to each  other,  which  is
             why they have some familiarity  with  some  aspects  of  their
             lives.  However on the fundamental issue of whether they are a
             genuine couple,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
             discrepancies looked at in an overall context are far too many
             to overlook.  I conclude therefore that the appellant has  not
             discharged the burden of proving that he is in a  genuine  and
             subsisting marriage with his claimed partner."

3.   From the above it is first of all clear that the judge did  not  simply
    rely on the discrepancies in the evidence of the appellant and his wife
    as to the purchase  of  her  wedding  ring.   Paragraph  23  refers  to
    "numerous inconsistencies as will be  noted  above".   Earlier  in  the
    decision the  judge  identified  the  inconsistencies  as  being  those
    identified on by the respondent in  the  refusal  letter  and  then  at
    paragraphs 5-18 summarised the oral evidence of the appellant  and  his
    wife.  Whilst paragraphs 5-18 are primarily a summary of their evidence
    the judge did at several points identify lack of consistency.  Thus  at
    paragraphs 12, 13 and  14  he  identified  that  the  appellant's  wife
    "changed the position" as regards who attended their wedding,  why  the
    husband's family did not attend and whether her  husband  went  to  the
    airport with her when she left to visit relatives in the U.S.  Further,
    it  is  apparent  when  reading  paragraphs  5-18  together  with   the
    respondent's reasons for refusal that the judge was taking into account
    their attempted explanations  for  inconsistencies  identified  by  the
    respondent.

4.   The judge saw and heard the appellant and his wife  and  afforded  them
    every opportunity to explain the identified inconsistencies.  The judge
    can be criticised for not identifying in his  "Findings"  section  each
    and every inconsistency relied on, but reading his decision as a  whole
    the reader is left in no doubt as to what those were.   From  paragraph
    23 it is also  abundantly  clear  that  the  judge  was  not  satisfied
    considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole  that  the  couple  had  given
    satisfactory explanations about them.  At paragraph 24 the  judge  said
    "I have come to the conclusion that the discrepancies looked at  in  an
    overall context are far too many to overlook".

5.   It is also notable that in the course of reaching this  conclusion  the
    judge was very careful to consider the evidence as a  whole  and  in  a
    balanced way.  Thus at paragraph 24 he notes that he  took  account  of
    "areas of agreement" and felt able in light of them to accept that  the
    appellant and his partner are known to each other.

6.   It is also clear that in assessing the  appellant's  appeal  the  judge
    applied the correct burden and standard of  proof  and  he  had  indeed
    correctly identified what they were at paragraph 19.

7.   Turning to ground (1), this rests in my judgement on  a  misreading  of
    what the judge meant in paragraph 22.  Mr Gondal submitted that in this
    paragraph the judge contradicted himself because on  the  one  hand  he
    accepted the appellant had given "plausible explanations"  yet  on  the
    other  hand  rejected  them.   The  force,  however,  of  Mr   Gondal's
    submissions depends on construing the  adjective  "plausible"  to  mean
    "credible".  There is no support for such a reading either in  ordinary
    language or in higher court authority.  A statement  can  be  plausible
    but not credible: see MM(DRC-plausibility) Democratic Republic of Congo
    [2005] UKIAT 00019.  Plausibility is essentially concerned with whether
    something  claimed  accords  with   known   facts.    Plausibility   is
    insufficient in itself to establish that what  was  claimed  is  to  be
    believed.  Establishing credibility requires assessment of the evidence
    as a whole by reference to a number of established indicators (such  as
    internal and external consistency and sufficiency of detail), not  just
    plausibility.

8.    Not  only  is  Mr  Gondal's  suggested  reading  of  the  meaning   of
    plausibility at odds with ordinary meaning and higher court  authority,
    it is also clear from the judge's decision read as a whole that he  was
    most definitely not using "plausible" to mean "credible".

Notice of Decision

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the appeal must stand.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.





Signed:                                 Date:31 May 2017
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

