
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15695/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2016                  |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Fatbardha [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Akinbolu, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant in this  appeal  Ms  [G]  is  a
    citizen of Albania. However, for  the  sake  of  convenience,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they were referred  to  before  the
    first-tier Tribunal. The respondent appeals  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Petherbridge promulgated  on  3  March
    2016 allowing the appellant's appeal  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Permission to appeal was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 3 August 2016 who said  that  it
    is arguable that the judge has made a material error  of  law  for  all
    three of the reasons  detailed  in  the  respondent's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stated  the  following  in  his
    decision.  He accepted that the appellant is married to Mr Ajet [G] who
    has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  He accepted that
    the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  her
    husband.  He accepted that they have one child born on 22 June 2015 who
    is a British child.  I was informed that the appellant as at  the  date
    of the hearing had given birth to her second  child  born  on  26  July
    2016. Both children are British citizens.

3.   The judge accepted that the appellant had  been  financially  providing
    for his wife and child since she had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2014.   The  respondent  had  taken  no  issue   with   the   financial
    requirements of the Rules and the judge found the same.  He  stated  at
    paragraph 6 that  the  appellant's  appeal  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules because her initial application  which  was  a  human
    rights claim was determined after 6 April 2015  meaning  that  the  new
    appeal regime applied as per Article 9C of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    commencement number 3 2 transitional and saving provisions  order  2014
    SI  2014/2711  amended  Article  8  of  IA14  commencement   number   4
    transitional and saving provisions order 2014 SI 2015/371.

4.   The judge then set  out  the  jurisprudence  that  he  had  taken  into
    account in respect of Article 8. He  took  into  account  the  case  of
    Chikwamba and Section  52  and  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, in respect of the children.   He  considered  the
    best interests of the child and stated that the appellant's  child  had
    been born in this country, is a British citizen, and it is difficult to
    see that the best interests would not be served by her being allowed to
    remain in the United Kingdom. He stated that the practicalities of that
    arrangement would be that the child would have to go  to  Albania  with
    her mother.  The judge at paragraph 45 of his decision  said  that  the
    only countervailing circumstances being that the appellant came to  the
    United Kingdom illegally and that she could perhaps return  to  Albania
    to make an entry clearance application to return to the United  Kingdom
    as the spouse of her husband who has indefinite leave to  remain.   The
    judge stated that however there are material circumstances  that  might
    affect the appellant having  to  return  to  Albania  in  view  of  the
    disassociation with her family  that  caused  her  to  remove  to  this
    country.

5.   The judge found that the Appellant has been her child's primary  carer.
     The judge considered Section  117B  and  found  that  Section  117B(6)
    confirms there is  no  public  interest  in  removing  a  parent  of  a
    qualifying child and that it would be unreasonable for  them  to  leave
    which he found in fact was the case in  this  appeal  and  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8.

6.   The respondent in her three grounds of appeal  states  that  the  judge
    failed to consider a material fact, failed to  give  adequate  reasons,
    failed to give weight to material  matters  and  failed  to  resolve  a
    conflict of fact and therefore made errors in law.

7.   At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in her decision.  Mr  Bramble  relied  on  his
    grounds of appeal and stated that in the refusal letter the  respondent
    had raised the issue that the appellant had said that her family was in
    Albania and this issue as to the whereabouts of  her  parents  has  not
    been resolved adequately by the judge.

8.   In  her  application  and  in  the  representatives'  letter  dated  16
    February 2015 it was stated that all of her family reside  in  the  UK.
    The judge's failure to resolve this which is interlinked with the other
    grounds of appeal as to why she cannot return to  make  an  application
    from that country therefore the procedural error lies in the judge  not
    resolving this essential conflict in the evidence.

9.   The judge did not make a proper consideration of Article 8 and did  not
    allude to the significant difficulties  that  the  appellant  may  face
    returning.   He  said  that  although  the  judge  has  conducted   the
    evaluation but not the whole of it.  The starting point for  the  judge
    should have been that the appellant is in this country illegally and is
    an overstayer.  The judge has not properly applied Section 117B to  the
    appellant's circumstances.

10.  The appellant's representative Ms Akinbolu apologised for  no  Rule  24
    response and submitted that there is no issue  that  the  appellant  is
    able to meet the eligibility requirements and there is no issue  as  to
    the suitability.  She said  that  the  Immigration  Rules  must  inform
    Article 8 considerations and  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are
    relevant to the reasonableness of the child relocating to Albania.   It
    is not reasonable for her to leave the  United  Kingdom.   She  finally
    submitted that even if there is an error in  the  decision  it  is  not
    material.  She further said that the appellant  herself  has  not  said
    that  her  parents  are  not  in  Albania  but  it  is  in  the   legal
    representatives' letter which must be taken in context in which  it  is
    alluded that all of her family reside in the UK and also that they  are
    well-settled here. It was submitted that the appellant  has  no  family
    contact  in  home  country.   This  was  supposed  to  mean  that   the
    appellant's immediate family is in this country and it  should  not  be
    taken as to mean that her parents are also in the  United  Kingdom.  In
    any event  the  judge,  at  paragraph  45,  stated  that  the  material
    circumstances of the appellant which  might  affect  her  returning  to
    Albania is because of her disassociation with her  family  that  caused
    her to remove to this country.

Decision as to Whether there is an Error of Law in the Decision

11.  The position of the respondent is that the judge has not  resolved  the
    conflict  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  appellant's  family.   The
    respondent found that the appellant's family's whereabouts is  relevant
    in regard to the appellant  returning  to  Albania  to  make  an  entry
    clearance  application.  It  was  said  by  the  respondent  that   the
    appellant's representative stated that the appellant's family is in the
    United Kingdom. The appellant's  position  has  always  been  that  her
    parental family are in Albania but her immediate family which  consists
    of her husband and now two children are  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    judge  stated  at  paragraph  45  stated   that   the   appellant   has
    disassociated with her family in Albania which caused her to remove  to
    this country.  This was because the appellant's  parents  were  against
    the appellant's marriage. Therefore,  the  judge's  decision  that  the
    appellant should not return to  Albania  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application it is because she will not have the support of  her  family
    on her return with her child and now two children.

12. It is clear from reading the entirety of the decision  that  the  judge
    was aware that the appellant's parents  lived  in  Albania.  The  judge
    found the appellant credible  and  found  that  when  she  married  her
    husband on 24 October 2014 in Albania and that her parents were against
    this marriage. The Judge took into account that the appellant  came  to
    the United Kingdom illegally and that she could return  to  Albania  to
    make an entry clearance application to return to the United Kingdom  as
    the spouse of her husband who has indefinite leave to remain. The Judge
    was of the view that the appellant should not have to return to Albania
    with her child in order to make entry clearance application  given  the
    appellant's parents opposition to her marriage. The appellant  now  has
    two children. The judge found that the Appellant has been  her  child's
    primary carer.

13. The judge considered the respondent's interest set out in Section  117B
    and found that Section 117B(6) confirms there is no public interest  in
    removing  a  parent  of  a  qualifying  child  and  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the appellant and her child to leave this  country  in
    order to make an application to return. I find no  perversity  in  this
    decision such as it should be set aside.

14. The Judge took into account all the evidence in  this  appeal  and  was
    entitled to find that the appellant has family life  with  her  husband
    and child in  this  country  which  will  be  interfered  with  by  the
    respondent's decision.



Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is dismissed under human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mrs S Chana   Date 25th of September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mrs S Chana   Date 25th of September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
