
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Numbers: IA/15175/2015

                                                        IA/15176/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 22 January 2018                        |      On 19 February 2018         |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              mrs maria mazhar
                          dr bashir ahmed chaudhry
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr P Skinner Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain to allow the  appeals  of
    the respondents.

2.   The respondents are nationals of Pakistan born on 11 March 1985  and  1
    December 1976 respectively.  On 21 July 2014,  they  made  applications
    for leave to remain.  The first respondent,  Mrs  Mazhar,  applied  for
    leave as a Tier 4 Migrant  and  the  second  respondent,  Dr  Chaudhry,
    applied as her dependant.

3.   The judge recorded the decision and reasons of the Secretary  of  State
    at paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.  The judge said that the Secretary of State's
    grounds and reasons for refusing the first respondent's application was
    that she failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a)  because
    she had been refused under one of the general grounds for refusal.  The
    first respondent was previously granted leave  based  on  a  successful
    application made on 1 April 2011  for  leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student to study ACCA at UK  College  of  Business  and  Computing  Ltd
    between 27 July 2011 and 23 March  2014.   With  her  application,  she
    submitted a certificate and  transcript  from  the  London  College  of
    Computing  and  Management  Sciences  (using  the  Centre  ID  on   the
    certificate) confirming that she studied an AAPPS Graduate  Diploma  in
    Business Management awarded on 28 March 2014.

4.   The Secretary of State states that the first respondent did not  submit
    a fresh application for leave to study at London College  of  Computing
    and Management Studies.  She was therefore in breach of Section  50  by
    commencing this study.   The  Secretary  of  State  was  therefore  not
    satisfied that she has complied with the  conditions  attached  to  her
    leave to remain.  Therefore, she does not satisfy the requirements  for
    this category and it has been decided to  refuse  her  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4  (Student)  under  Regulation  322(3)  with
    reference to paragraph 245ZY(c)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

5.   The first respondent brought an appeal against the refusal, as did  her
    husband.  The appeal was first heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  S  J
    Pacey who in a determination, dated 20 July 2015, dismissed the appeal.
     He did so  without  an  oral  hearing.   The  respondent  subsequently
    appealed that decision which was successful in  that  in  a  notice  of
    decision dated 9 November 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Deans  found  that
    the determination of Judge Pacey should be set aside under Rule  32  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) Rules 2014 because despite
    requesting an oral hearing, the matter was determined on the papers.

6.   The judge noted at paragraph 5 that although, pursuant to  the  setting
    aside as referred to above, the matter was listed for an  oral  hearing
    before her, neither of the respondents attended  the  hearing  nor  was
    there an explanation for their absence.  In  those  circumstances,  she
    resolved to determine this appeal on the evidence before her.

7.   The judge held as follows:

         "7.  I have to confess that I have no idea  whatsoever  as  to  the
             reference to Section 50 in the refusal letter.  I just  cannot
             understand how a decision maker could refer to a provision  of
             an Act of Parliament without specifying the name of  that  Act
             and the year in which it was enacted.


         8.   The  substance  of  the  allegation  appears  to  be  that  by
             undertaking studies at the London  College  of  Computing  and
             Management  Sciences,  the  first  appellant  has  breached  a
             condition of her leave.


         9.   I remind myself that the burden of proof is on the  respondent
             to show that the appellant has indeed breached a condition.


         10.  I further direct myself that for the respondent  to  discharge
             the burden which I find to be  on  her,  she  has  to  firstly
             demonstrate that the appellant  was  subject  to  an  explicit
             condition as part of her leave that either prevented her  from
             studying at the  institution  mentioned  or  under  a  general
             prohibition on undertaking studies other than the place  where
             she  was  enrolled  as  far  as  the  Secretary  of  State  is
             concerned.  Secondly, she has to  adduce  cogent  evidence  to
             demonstrate that the appellant has breached that condition.


         11.  Having perused carefully the respondent's bundle, I  have  not
             found a shred of evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant's
             leave was subject to any of the  restrictions/prohibitions  to
             which I have referred above.


         12.  In consequence of this finding, I conclude that the respondent
             has not discharged a burden of proof on her.  Accordingly, the
             first appellant's appeal falls to be  allowed.   As  indicated
             earlier, since the first appellant's appeal is being  allowed,
             it follows that the second appellant's appeal must be  allowed
             also."

8.   The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were as follow:

         "The  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Hussain   in   drafting   the
         determination has  allowed  the  appeals  on  the  basis  that  the
         Secretary of State has failed to adequately discharge the burden of
         proof as she failed to outline the statutory provision  she  relied
         upon in full.


         It is accepted that the decision maker in this  appeal  could  have
         been clearer in reference to  the  provision  relied  upon  however
         Judge Hussain did have at his disposal  a  Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer to assist with any queries  as  to  the  provisions  relied
         upon.


         For a reason unknown to the Secretary of State the First-tier Judge
         has stated in the determination that the  Secretary  of  State  was
         unrepresented,  however  the  Secretary   of   State   was   indeed
         represented by R Archie, who as stated above was present to  assist
         the Tribunal with such oversight that the appeal has  been  allowed
         on."


9.   In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  said
    that he had found in the file a blank Record of Proceedings  which  has
    the name Mr Archie  handwritten  on  the  respondent's  representation.
    Further he had seen letters from the representatives and  a  file  note
    indicating that the respondents wished the case  to  be  heard  on  the
    papers which rendered inaccurate the judge's comments at  paragraph  5.
    He also said it is arguable that the judge failed to note a  Presenting
    Officer was present who may have assisted.  He further noted  that  the
    earlier judge had referred  to  the  refusal  letter  as  being  clear.
    Therefore,  this  case  has  sufficient   uncertainty   and   potential
    inaccuracy in what has been asserted that it is arguable that an  error
    of procedure and/or law has occurred.

10.  Ms Holmes submitted a note from Mr Archie dated 28 March 2017  which  I
    took to be his attendance notes.  Mr Archie said as follows:

         "The appellant did not come to court to give evidence, I relied  on
         the RFRL and asked the IJ to draw an adverse credibility inference.
           The  appeal  should  be  dismissed.   An  allowed  appeal   would
         constitute an error of law because the burden and standard of proof
         would have to me misapplied."

11.  In the light of this evidence Mr Skinner accepted that  Mr  Archie  was
    present at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.

12.  Ms Holmes submitted that Section 50 was in reference  to  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

13.  Paragraph 50(2) states "A condition under section 3(1)(c)(ia)  of  that
    Act may be added as a condition to leave given before  the  passing  of
    this Act (as well as to leave given on or after its passing)."

         "NOTE: Commenced  21  July  2009  (s58).   Sub-section  (1)  amends
         sections 3(1)(c) of the Immigration Act 1971."


14.  Ms Holmes submitted that the judge should have been aware that  Section
    50 referred to the 2009 Act.  If a judge had a problem  with  this,  he
    should have asked the  HOPO  to  help  sort  it  out.   She  relied  on
    paragraph 25 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 which says

         "(1)     the Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a  decision
             which disposes of proceedings except where


             (a)  each party has consented to, or has not objected  to  the
                  matter being decided without a hearing."

15.  Ms Holmes submitted that the judge acted unfairly in not  making  clear
    in the determination that Mr Archie was present.  This was  a  material
    error of law.

16.  As already stated above, Mr  Skinner  accepted  in  the  light  of  the
    attendance notes that Mr Archie was present at the hearing.

17.  As far as I was concerned that did not mean that the issues  the  judge
    said he had to consider at paragraph 10 were resolved by the fact  that
    we now know that Mr Archie was present at the hearing.

18.  Ms Holmes submitted a letter dated 19 July  2011  to  Mrs  Mazhar,  the
    first respondent.  The letter stated that permission had been given for
    the course of study detailed at the bottom  of  the  letter.   It  also
    stated that there was an attached leaflet which explains the conditions
    of her stay whilst in the United Kingdom.  There was no  evidence  that
    this  letter  was  produced  by  Mr  Archie  to  the  judge   or   that
    independently this letter was before the judge.  I accept Mr  Skinner's
    submission that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  twice  been  given  an
    opportunity to clarify the issues raised by her and had  failed  to  do
    so.  Indeed, it was clear from Mr Archie's attendance notes that he did
    not address the issues which the judge had to consider.  There  was  no
    evidence before the judge to demonstrate that the first respondent  was
    subject to an explicit condition as  part  of  her  leave  that  either
    prevented her from studying at the institution  mentioned  or  under  a
    general prohibition on undertaking studies other than the  place  where
    she was enrolled as far as the Secretary of State was concerned.

19.  There was no evidence put forward by Mr Archie to demonstrate that  the
    first respondent had breached any  condition  imposed  on  her  by  the
    Secretary of State.

20.  Consequently, in light of the evidence that was  before  the  judge,  I
    find that his decision does not disclose an error of law.

21.  The judge's decision allowing the respondents' appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun








