
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15006/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 February 2014                           |On 4 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE JAY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             MOHAMMED SAEED ALI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Walker presiding, promulgated on 18 December  2013,  whereby  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  25
    April 2013 to refuse  his application  for  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention was dismissed.

2.   The essential factual background to  this  case  is  as  follows.   The
    appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1961.  He arrived  here  on
    false documentation, probably in May 2006.  He applied  for  asylum  in
    2007 but that claim was refused and certified with no right of  appeal.
    The Secretary of State raised very serious issues in  relation  to  the
    appellant's credibility, in particular the relationship he had with his
    family.  It should be emphasised that at that stage the  appellant  was
    in good  health.

3.   There were then a number of applications for leave to remain, the  last
    of which was refused, as we have said, on 25 April of  last  year.  The
    Secretary of State's refusal letter dated 25 April is lengthy.  It  has
    been accurately summarised in the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    and we have examined it carefully.

4.   The real issue here concerns the  appellant's  severe  mental  illness.
    There is medical evidence in support of it but the current situation is
    summarised in paragraph 13 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    which we set out as follows:

         "Since  2007  his  health  has  deteriorated  with  a   significant
         deterioration taking place in August 2008.  He is wheelchair  bound
         and suffers from severe depression with psychotic symptoms.  He  is
         unable to bathe or to prepare any food without assistance.  He  has
         on occasions spoken of self-harm and is unaware  of  time.   He  is
         incapable of giving proper instructions and  a  recent  psychiatric
         report dated 2 December 2013 from Dr T  M  Choudhry  confirms  that
         using the Pritchard test the appellant is not fit  to  plead,  give
         evidence or give instructions."

5.   The First-tier Tribunal noted that  on  the  available  evidence  which
    appears to have been  accepted the  appellant   has  not  retained  any
    contact with family members in Pakistan. The available  evidence  is  a
    reference to friends and family in the United Kingdom.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal noted that there would be no support network in  Pakistan  and
    that it would be unlikely that the appellant could avail himself of the
    very limited mental health services which exists in that country.

6.   As we have said, the claim was and is brought under Articles  3  and  8
    of the Convention. As for Article 3, his case is that there was a  real
    risk that he would be abandoned helplessly at the  airport  on  arrival
    and so would not be able to avail   himself  of  the  probably  limited
    mental  health services in Pakistan.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal rejected  this  case  on  the  basis  that  the
    burden of proof of establishing "how the appellant could or  could  not
    be escorted to a suitable care  facility  ...  rests  on  or  with  the
    appellant" and that he had not discharged it.  There was  therefore  as
    the Tribunal put it, an evidential void.  As for the Article  8  claim,
    similar  issues  arose.   Finally  the  Tribunal  addressed   paragraph
    276ADE(vi) and noted that it had not been the subject of  any  decision
    by the respondent, "nevertheless, my finding is that the appellant  has
    not been  able to show that he has no ties (including social,  cultural
    or family) with Pakistan".

8.   The main ground of appeal advanced by Miss King today  relates  to  the
    incidence of the burden of proof and the application of the standard of
    proof in this case. The First-tier Tribunal appears to  have  proceeded
    on the basis, Miss King submits, that that the burden of proof remained
    throughout on the appellant.  When we see for example paragraph  25  of
    the determination "the appellant and his advisors cannot  rely  on  the
    premise that he would be abandoned helplessly at  the  airport  without
    then doing or attempting to do anything to alleviate this situation".

7.   The First-tier Tribunal appeared to be suggesting that full and  proper
    enquiries should have been made by the appellant and that there was  no
    burden on the respondent whatsoever.

8.   When the case was called on before us Miss King read  out  for  us  the
    Rule 24 notice which had  been  submitted  by  those  representing  the
    Secretary of State.  That notice had not been  provided  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal or as it happens to Mr Jarvis, representing the  Secretary  of
    State today. He conceded an error of law in relation to the  burden  of
    proof.  Mr Jarvis's position was slightly different.  He did not accept
    that there was an error in relation to the burden of proof but  he  did
    accept  that  the  determination  does   not   properly   address   the
    consequences of removal.  In our judgment the correct  analysis  is  to
    proceed on the basis that a claim under Article 3 of the Convention  is
    made out on the basis of a relatively low standard of proof if  a  real
    risk of serious harm, we paraphrase, is established if  this  appellant
    were  returned  to  Pakistan.  Strictly   speaking,   the   burden   of
    establishing that real risk resides, it is true, on the appellant.

9.   But a question which arises here is at what  stage  is  the  evidential
    burden of  proof  discharged  so  that  in  reality  it  moves  to  the
    respondent Secretary of State.  What Miss  King  submits  is  that  the
    evidential burden has been shifted here or should  properly  have  been
    regarded as having moved to the Secretary of  State  for  this  reason.
    Given this appellant's frank disabilities, his  lack  of  understanding
    and everything else it would be unlikely that he could gain  access  to
    limited health care facilities in Pakistan.  The  focus  should  be  on
    what would or might  happen at the airport. Given the obvious inference
    flowing from the fact that the appellant is incapable and  cannot  look
    after himself coupled with the apparent finding of fact that there  are
    no family members available in Pakistan  to  meet  him.   The  evidence
    evidential burden in relation to the reality of the risk has, Miss King
    submitted,  been  discharged  in  the  circumstances  of   this   case.
    Furthermore, the Tribunal should be in a position to draw inferences in
    this sort of case. It is different  from  other  cases  of  destitution
    where it would not necessarily appropriate to draw inferences. But each
    case of course would turn on its own facts.


10.  This First-tier Tribunal does not appear  to  have  proceeded  on  that
    basis at all.  In the view of this First-tier Tribunal  the  evidential
    burden of proof was never  discharged  notwithstanding  the  inferences
    which could and should have been drawn and the available evidence.   It
    is true that Miss King placed heavy reliance on a report  from  someone
    who is described as a country expert, namely Mrs Uzma Moeen, which sets
    out in some detail what is stated to be the limited  nature  of  health
    care facilities in Pakistan.  The difficulty with  this  report,  which
    was we believe available to the First-tier Tribunal, is  that  it  does
    not come from an expert source in the true sense. Although paragraph  5
    of the report states that Mrs Moeen  is  producing  the  report  as  an
    expert witness  on  matters  within  her  expertise,  namely  what  she
    describes as personal research, and as a specialist  in  Pakistani  law
    and practice, it is obvious from the document that she is a lawyer with
    experience obviously in Asian law matters practising from an address in
    the United Kingdom.

11.  It may well be that the First-tier Tribunal  had  the  deficiencies  in
    this report well in mind when  it  referred  in  paragraph  24  of  the
    determination to the need for there to be an expert's  report  "from  a
    suitably medically qualified  professional  in  Pakistan  but  no  such
    report has been produced."  If the First-tier Tribunal  were  intending
    to reject Mrs Moeen's evidence on the basis that she was not a suitably
    qualified expert we would tend to agree with their conclusion.

12.  The fact remains that  it is demonstrable  from  the  reasons  that  we
    have given that the First-tier Tribunal perpetrated a  significant  and
    material error of law in paragraphs 24 and 25 of its determination.  It
    follows that the decision under appeal cannot stand.

13.  The next issue for our consideration is whether we should  decide  this
    appeal for ourselves or whether we should remit  it  to  a  differently
    constituted  First-tier  Tribunal  for  further   consideration.    The
    relevant test  is  well-known  and  set  out  in  paragraph  7  of  the
    President's  Practice  Statement.  It  amounts  to  this:   are   there
    sufficient facts on which we can properly proceed today or is  there  a
    further fact finding exercise which should better be carried out before
    a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

14.  When this case was called on we were initially attracted  by  the  idea
    that  we  could  decide  the  issues  for  ourselves  but  on   further
    examination we have changed  our  mind.   In  our  judgment  there  are
    additional facts which merit proper investigation.  Not merely  is  the
    evidence unsatisfactory in relation to the  position  in  Pakistan,  we
    have referred already to the report of Mrs Moeen,  but  there  is  also
    material set out in the Secretary of State's refusal  letter,  some  of
    which is properly evidenced before us but other parts of which are not.
     Not merely is there that issue, we do have concerns  relating  to  the
    family in Pakistan which would benefit from further  exploration.   The
    appellant's credibility was effectively blown out of the water, we  can
    use that phrase, back in 2007.  We fully accept and understand that  he
    cannot give evidence now owing to his physical and mental  health,  but
    the Secretary of  State  would  well  wish  to  explore  the  available
    evidence in more detail and establish whether better findings  of  fact
    can be elicited in relation to family  members  in  Pakistan  and  what
    indeed would happen if this appellant  were  returned  to  an  airport.
    Would he be left helpless, to use the appellant's terminology, or would
    there be a good prospect of the appellant being properly  looked  after
    and, furthermore, enabled to access, admittedly  limited,  health  care
    facilities in that jurisdiction.

15.  So it seems to us on balance that there  are  additional  issues  which
    require to be investigated. There is no doubt in our judgment that this
    is  a  difficult  and  sensitive  case  which  needs  full  and  proper
    preparation on the side of the  Secretary  of  State  and  as  powerful
    representation below as the Secretary of State  minded  to  muster.  We
    suspect that the case was presented below largely on the basis  of  the
    decision letter and limited  questions  being  asked  of  the  relevant
    witnesses, but in reality this is a case which with respect to the Home
    Office Presenting Officer  below,  perhaps  required  more  heavyweight
    representation.

16.  That is all a matter for the Secretary of State.  She  can  decide  how
    these cases are presented in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  we  should
    emphasise that today we have been extremely well placed to reach a fair
    and  just  decision  in  the  light   not   merely   of   Miss   King's
    representations and submissions but the excellent submissions  advanced
    to us by Mr Jarvis who has given us  great  assistance  in  this  case,
    indeed all the cases in our list today.

17.  For the reasons that we have given what we are going  to  do  is  allow
    the appeal for error of law and remit  the  underlying  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for redetermination in the unusual way.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Jay


