
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/15389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mr celso antonio rivera cerna
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Emma Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Sandra Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by MReale
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Flynn)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 20 March 2014 to refuse
    to issue a derivative  residence  card  under  regulation  15A  of  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the
    Regulations").

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Peru born on 13 June 1944.  He  came  to
    the UK in 2006 and lived with his family. He submitted  an  application
    for a derivative residence card on 6 November 2013 on the basis that he
    was the primary carer for his grandson, A, who  was  born  in  February
    2012. He also claimed that he was the primary carer for his 17 year old
    daughter, P, the mother of A.  P  and  A  are  both  UK  citizens.  The
    respondent's wife came to the UK in 2001 and was  granted  asylum;  her
    four children joined her in 2004. The respondent claimed that  she  was
    unable to care  for  P  and  A;  because  she  suffered  from  anxiety,
    depressive disorder and diabetes.  P  was  a  full  time  student.  The
    respondent claims that he cared for his wife as well as P  and  A.  The
    other children were adults when P fell pregnant at the age of 14.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but did not accept that his wife could not care for  P  and
    A. There was no evidence that P could not care for A  and  no  official
    documentation to show that the respondent was their  primary  carer.  P
    was almost 18 years old and had her own child which showed that she was
    capable of making her own  decisions  and  it  was  unlikely  that  she
    required a primary carer. If the appellant  wished  to  rely  upon  his
    family or  private  life  then  he  had  to  make  a  separate  charged
    application.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 3 November 2014 and  22  May  2015.  He  was
    represented by Mr G Lee, Counsel. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    the respondent was not the primary carer of A although  he  played  the
    major role in his upbringing. P stated that she  and  the  respondent's
    wife had considered whether she would give up her studies to remain  in
    the UK. Any decision to send A to Peru with the respondent was a matter
    of choice for the family. There was no evidence that P could not remain
    in the UK without the respondent. The requirements of  the  Regulations
    were not met.

 6. The judge decided that the  First-Tier  Tribunal  had  jurisdiction  to
    consider Article 8. The judge  decided  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    failed to properly consider section 55 of the 2007 Act and  that  there
    was family life between the respondent and A  and  P.  The  family  was
    close knit and had always tried to live together. P's dependence on the
    respondent had increased since the birth of A.  It was  not  reasonable
    to expect her or A to leave the UK. They were both qualifying  children
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act as at the date of  application.  The
    respondent had entered the UK with only a short period of leave and had
    remained without leave for almost the whole period  of  his  residence.
    Nevertheless, his UK residence post-dated the start of family life with
    his wife and children and it would not be proportionate to  remove  the
    respondent from the UK. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    failing to consider the respondent's position under Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and wrongly applied section 117B to  P,
    who was no longer a child as at the date of  hearing.  The  judge  also
    failed  to  attach  appropriate   weight   to   the   public   interest
    considerations.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on
    2 September 2015. There was no valid  human  rights  appeal,  following
    Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
    (IAC).

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Ms Savage submitted that the refusal to issue a residence card did  not
    interfere with Article 8. No section 120 notice  had  been  served  and
    departure from Amirteymour was not justified. Paragraphs 26-75 of  that
    decision extensively consider the law. The decision  should  be  remade
    and the respondent's appeal dismissed.

11. Ms Akinbola relied  upon  her  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that
    Amirteymour was wrongly decided. I should instead follow  Ahmed  [2013]
    UKUT 89 and Dereci and others [2011] EUECJ C-256/11.  In  none  of  the
    relevant domestic cases was a removal decision made and each turned  on
    the arguability of the human rights claim  within  the  context  of  an
    appeal against refusal of a residence document.

12. I have considered the authorities. It is common  ground  that  no  "one
    stop notice" has been issued in this case under section 120 of the 2002
    Act and no removal directions have been issued.  There  is  no  binding
    Court of Appeal authority on this issue but I have  decided  to  follow
    the reasoning set out in paragraphs 26-75 of  Amirteymour.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to consider Article 8.

13. The  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  not
    challenged on appeal and remain undisturbed. They are  not  binding  on
    any future decision maker but are soundly based upon the  evidence  and
    should be carefully considered by the Secretary of State if removal  of
    the respondent is considered in the future or if the respondent makes a
    further application to remain in the UK. The respondent will be  72  in
    June 2016 and has a firmly established family life in the UK.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of law  and  its
    decision cannot stand.

Decision

15. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision by dismissing the  respondent's  appeal  under  the
    Regulations. The First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  consider
    human rights issues but its findings of fact  remain  unchallenged  and
    undisturbed.

Signed   [pic]         Date 19 November 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
