
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15769/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On May 18, 2015                               |On May 19, 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ORVEL DONVILLE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)
    For the Respondent:     Mr Gibson-Lee, Counsel, instructed by LB & Co
    Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica. He had been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on May 18, 2006 on the  basis  of
    marriage to a British citizen. On January 13, 2012  the  appellant  was
    convicted of supplying Class B drugs (cannabis) and sentenced to  three
    years custody and made the subject of an anti  social  behaviour  order
    until November 2016.  On  December  12,  2012  he  was  served  with  a
    deportation order. He lodged an appeal on human rights grounds  and  on
    March 15, 2013 The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but allowed his appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds. The
    respondent then wrote to the appellant stating her intention to  revoke
    his indefinite leave to remain and providing him with an opportunity to
    submit representations. He responded on August 9, 2013 but on March 19,
    2014 the respondent took a decision  to  revoke  his  indefinite  leave
    under Section 76(1) of the 2002  Act  leaving  him  with  discretionary
    leave only.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on March 28,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  matter
    came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ghaffar  (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FtTJ") on September 18, 2014,  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on October 3, 2014 he allowed the appeal.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on October 13, 2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred in his approach to section 76 of the  2002  Act  and
    the guidance contained in R (on  the  application  of  Fitzroy  George)
    (respondent) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 28. Permission to appeal was  initially
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers  on  November  20,
    2014. The grounds were renewed and  on  March  16,  2015  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pickup found there was an arguable error  in  law  given
    the terms of section 76 and  the  Supreme  Court  decision  of  Fitzroy
    George.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant arrived late  and  was  not
    present when the submissions were made.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order

SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

 7. Mr Avery submitted the FtTJ approached the issue incorrectly and placed
    undue weight on the issue of delay. The FtTJ should  have  concentrated
    on the provisions of Section 76  of  the  2002  Act  and  the  guidance
    contained in paragraph [31] of the Supreme Court  decision  of  Fitzroy
    George. He submitted the  FtTJ  failed  to  address  these  issues  and
    materially erred. The decision should  be  overturned  and  the  appeal
    dismissed.

 8. Mr Gibson-Lee accepted the findings of Fitzroy George but he  submitted
    the FtTJ had considered the  appellant's  immigration  background  when
    considering whether the respondent had acted reasonably  in  exercising
    her discretion under Section 76 of the 2002 Act. The appellant's appeal
    against the deportation order had been allowed  on  article  8  grounds
    based on the adverse effect it would have on his children, if  he  were
    removed. He submitted the FtTJ made a finding that was open to him  and
    it remained open to the respondent to make  a  further  decision  under
    Section 76 if his circumstances changed.

 9. Mr Avery submitted the respondent would not know if the  appellant  had
    continued to maintain contact with his children if his indefinite leave
    was maintained. The whole point of granting him discretionary leave was
    because his circumstances may change and he would have to  re-apply  to
    demonstrate the same circumstances existed  otherwise  the  deportation
    order should take effect.

10. I reserved my decision.

CONSIDERATION AND FINDING ON MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

11. The appellant had been granted indefinite leave to  remain  based  upon
    his marriage to a British citizen.  He now lives with her and their two
    children. He had  been  sent  to  prison  for  drug  offences  and  the
    respondent took steps to deport him. He  appealed  that  Order  on  the
    basis to remove him would breach his human  rights  and  those  of  his
    family. As recorded at paragraph [4] of the FtTJ's determination he won
    his appeal on the basis his removal would "adversely affect the  health
    and well-being of the children to  such  an  extent  as  to  render  it
    disproportionate".

12. The FtTJ was aware of the provision of Section 76(1) of the 2002 Act as
    he set this out at paragraph [13] of his determination. In  short,  the
    respondent has the power to revoke the appellant's indefinite leave  to
    remain if he is liable for deportation but cannot be deported for legal
    reasons." The FtTJ was also aware of  the  Supreme  Court  decision  of
    Fitzroy George as he referred to the authority in paragraph [17] of his
    determination but he appeared to find the findings had  no  bearing  on
    this appeal because the case was considering the effect of Section 5(2)
    of the Immigration Act 1971 whereas this appeal was not concerned  with
    that. However, the FtTJ has overlooked the fact the Supreme  Court  was
    concerned also with the effect of section 76.

13. I accept Mr Avery's submission that the FtTJ failed to have  regard  to
    the opinion of the Supreme Court. The facts of that case  were  similar
    and importantly the Supreme Court considered  the  position  where  the
    appellant had not been deported because of his article  8  rights.  The
    Supreme Court made clear

         "It made perfectly good sense for the Secretary of State to be in a
         position to re-visit the terms of the leave... If  it  arises  from
         his family connections in the  United  Kingdom,  those  may  easily
         change. If someone in his position cannot be  deported  at  present
         because to do so  would  infringe  his  article  8  rights  and  if
         indefinite leave to remain  were  thereupon  to  revive,  he  would
         remain irremovable if he turned his back on his family or  they  on
         him as may not infrequently occur"

14. The FtTJ should have considered the Supreme  Court's  approach  to  the
    respondent's decision. The appellant was not being asked to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. The appellant had been granted indefinite leave but  he
    had committed a serious offence that led to him receiving a three  year
    sentence and a four year  anti-social  behaviour  order.  He  had  only
    avoided being deported because of his children. As long as his children
    rely on him that situation would not change and of course the longer he
    remains here the stronger his family and private life claim becomes.

15. However, the FtTJ failed to consider properly the intention of  Section
    76 of the 2002 Act in light  of  the  Fitzroy  George  case  and  I  am
    satisfied  he  erred  in  his  approach  in  paragraph  [19]   of   his
    determination. The fact the appellant was the subject  of  anti  social
    behaviour order should have no bearing on his family life-it  is  aimed
    at his behaviour. The fact he is  viewed  as  low  risk  again  has  no
    bearing on his family life. If  he  further  offends  then  that  is  a
    separate issue. The issue of any delay is something to consider but  it
    would not have led to this appellant losing his right to remain here as
    the respondent had accepted the earlier decision.

16. I therefore find the FtTJ erred when finding the respondent  had  acted
    unreasonably in seeking to revoke the appellant's indefinite leave. The
    respondent should not be required to locate an applicant  to  find  out
    whether they are enjoying family life. The appellant broke the law  and
    was given a second chance when  his  appeal  was  allowed  against  the
    deportation order. However the decision under section 76 is a different
    test and I find the ftTJ materially erred in allowing the appeal.

17. The only conclusion to this is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

DECISION

18. There was a material error. I set aside the FtTJ's decision and  remake
    the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
