
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15793/2013
     IA/15794/2013
     ia/15795/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2013                           |On 27 November 2013          |
|Prepared 22 November 2013                     |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               mohammed feruje
                               shamima sultana
                                shabib feruje
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellants, who were born respectively on 1 December 1980, 13  June
    1982 and  10  March  2001  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh.   The  second
    appellant is the wife of the first appellant and the third appellant is
    their minor son.

 2. The first appellant arrived in this country on 2 October 2004  and  was
    granted leave to remain as a student until 31 October 2006.  Thereafter
    he was granted various extensions of leave to remain, most recently  on
    5 February 2011 when he was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant until 5 February 2013.

 3. On 30 January 2013, the first appellant made an application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.   The  second  and  third
    appellants made applications to remain as his dependants.

 4. The first appellant's application was refused on 22 April 2013, and the
    application of the other appellants was also refused then.  At question
    23 of the application form, the first appellant had been asked  to  say
    whether or not one or more contracts had been supplied or no  contracts
    had been supplied, and he ticked the  box  saying  "yes,  one  or  more
    contracts had been supplied".  In fact, by mistake, the first appellant
    had not supplied any contracts with his application, because he made  a
    mistake.

 5. When refusing the application, the respondent's caseworker  gave  as  a
    reason that the first appellant had not  provided  contracts  detailing
    the services that his business offered and that "as you stated on  your
    application form that no contracts have been  submitted,  there  is  no
    indication that any exist and this document does not  form  part  of  a
    series of documents".  The refusal letter continues  by  stating  that,
    "for this reason, we have not requested any  additional  evidence  from
    you as per paragraph 245AA(c) of the  Immigration  Rules  as  paragraph
    245AA(b) does not apply to your application".

 6. The appellants appealed against this decision and  their  appeals  were
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey, sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 5 August 2013.  However, in a determination promulgated on 15 August
    2013, Judge Pacey dismissed the appeals, stating at paragraph  17  that
    "the evidential flexibility policy does not apply here since this  does
    not require UKBA actively to seek to fill gaps in the evidence provided
    by a claimant".

 7. The appellants now appeal before me, permission having been granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 2 October 2013.

 8. Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Wilding accepted that  there
    was an error of law in Judge Pacey's determination regarding the manner
    in which she had dealt with the question of evidential flexibility.  It
    was accepted by the respondent, as set out in the  grounds  of  appeal,
    that in fact the appellant had ticked the  box  saying  "contracts  are
    included".  That was contrary to what was said in the  refusal  letter.
    The basis upon which the refusal was made was that the first  appellant
    had said that no contracts had  been  included  with  his  application.
    That was simply wrong.

 9. Because the first appellant had ticked the box  saying  that  contracts
    were included, the decision maker should have noticed that this box had
    been ticked and accordingly, pursuant to paragraph 245AA of the  Rules,
    he should have turned his mind to whether or not though  contracts  had
    been included, and because they had not he should  have  contacted  the
    appellant to give him the opportunity of correcting this mistake.

10. As this error by the decision maker had been the central thrust of  the
    refusal letter, and the reasons for refusal, Judge  Pacey  should  have
    found  that  the  decision  maker  should  indeed  have  contacted  the
    appellant, and it was a material error of law for her not so to find.

11. I agree with Mr Wilding, for the reasons  which  he  gave,  that  Judge
    Pacey's determination did contain a material error of law, and that the
    decision must now be re-made.

12. Both parties being agreed that the  appropriate  course  was  for  this
    Tribunal to find simply that the decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law, I will so find.

Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

This appeal is allowed to the extent that the  respondent's  decision  being
appealed against was not in accordance with the law.



Signed:                                 Dated: 22 November 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


