

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15915/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27th February 2014                         |on 4 March 2014              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              MOHAMMED SHINWARY
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Rowlands promulgated on the 28th October  2013  in  which  he
        dismissed the appeal against the refusal  of  leave  to  remain  on
        human rights grounds.


     2. In paragraphs 11 to 14 of the determination the Judge sets out  the
        procedural history, including  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to
        attend that hearing and  the  earlier  refusal  of  an  adjournment
        request made by his previous representatives on the basis they were
        without instructions.


     3. In his application for permission to appeal the  appellant  claimed
        not to have received the notice of hearing.  It  appears  from  the
        papers that he may  have  changed  address  without  notifying  the
        Tribunal or respondent. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the
        basis that, although on the available  information  the  Judge  was
        entitled to proceed as he did, the  appellant  may  have  lost  the
        opportunity to have a hearing.


     4. Notice of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal was sent  by  first
        class post to the last address notified as the appellant's  address
        for  service,  which  is  that  set  out  in  the  application  for
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  which  have  not  been
        returned as not having been delivered.  I am  satisfied  there  has
        been valid service of the notice of hearing in accordance with  the
        relevant  provisions.  There  has  been  no  application   for   an
        adjournment but, yet  again,  the  appellant  failed  to  attend  a
        hearing. In the absence  of  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  his
        absence the Tribunal decided to proceed in  absence  as  there  was
        nothing to indicate any other course of action was  appropriate  in
        all the circumstances.


     5. As the appellant has failed to attend to pursue his  claim  and  in
        light of the lack of any obvious  legal  error  in  Judge  Rowlands
        determination, I dismiss the appeal. The determination shall stand.




Decision

     6. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3rd March 2014



