
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15028/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 29th July 2016                     |On 8th August 2016                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY



                                   Between

                         ADEBIMPE OLUWATOSIN ADEYEMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nichols promulgated on 12th January 2016 in which First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Nichols found that the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    have jurisdiction to hear  an  appeal  by  the  Appellant  against  the
    decision of the Respondent  on  31st  March  2015,  to  refuse  her  an
    extension of stay in the United Kingdom  as  a  domestic  worker  in  a
    private household.

 2. The Appellant has sought  to  appeal  against  that  decision  for  the
    reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal. These  are  a  matter  of
    record and therefore not repeated in full here, but in summary  it  was
    argued within the Grounds of Appeal firstly, that the  judge  erred  in
    consideration of the burden of proof  in  respect  of  the  claim  and,
    secondly, that it is argued there that the judge erred  in  failing  to
    correctly apply the required burden of proof to  the  Appellant's  case
    before she  issued  the  decision,  which  effectively  determined  the
    outcome of the appeal in respect of  the  jurisdictional  point,  based
    upon whom the burden of proof was on, in respect of proving whether  or
    not there had been a correct payment of  the  requisite  fee.   It  was
    further argued  within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  Appellant,
    although asking for the appeal to be dealt with on papers, had not been
     notified in advance that there was to be a jurisdictional issue as  to
    whether or not the Tribunal  actually  had  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal has been granted in this case by Designated First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on the 28th June 2016, in which  he  found
    that although on the face the Grounds of Appeal appear to  have  little
    merit because the Appellant was raising an  arguments  that  she  could
    have been presented to the First-tier Judge, he  found  that  that  was
    actually not the main issue in the case and the  underlying  issue,  as
    set out within the Grounds of Appeal, amounted to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant did not know that jurisdiction was going to be in dispute  at
    the appeal hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Nichols.

 4. The original Notice of Appeal was received on 14th April 2015. Although
    it was argued by the Home Office in the reasons for refusal letter that
    the Appellant did not have a right of appeal, the appellant  sought  to
    address  that  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  contended  that   the
    application was made before the expiry of her leave.

 5. The duty judge at first instance had considered whether  or  not  there
    should be a preliminary hearing to resolve the jurisdiction  point  and
    there is a clear note on the file from the duty  judge  on  29th  April
    2015, where the duty judge directed that the  case  was  to  be  listed
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge as a preliminary issue, and  it  was
    stated that  the  judge  will  determine  after  hearing  evidence  and
    submissions, whether or not there was jurisdiction.

 6. However despite the fact that the duty judge had ordered there to be  a
    preliminary hearing on the question of jurisdiction, that  did  not  in
    fact take place. The  notice  that  was  sent  out  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was a notice simply listing the case for a substantive hearing
    on Friday 3rd June 2016.  That notice made no reference  whatsoever  to
    the  question  of  it  being  a  preliminary  hearing  in  respect   of
    jurisdiction.  The case was simply listed for a very  full  substantive
    appeal.   Thereafter  on  18th  September  2015  the  Appellant's  then
    representatives, Kristal Law, indicated that the Appellant  now  wanted
    her appeal to be decided on the paper evidence and on 2nd December 2015
    they indicated they were no longer representing her.

 7. On 19th December the Tribunal received a bundle of documents  from  the
    Appellant in which she sought to rely upon them in respect of what  was
    said to be the substantive issues.   However,  it  is  far  from  clear
    having read the file as to whether or not the  Appellant  actually  did
    understand at that stage that the question  to  be  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was going to be a question as to  whether  or
    not the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
    appeal, rather than it just being a substantive appeal based  upon  the
    merits.

 8. Although the Appellant has not attended the appeal hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, I do take account of the fact  that  she  had  actually
    written into the Tribunal on 26th July asking for the case to be  dealt
    with on the papers.  Although there is no jurisdiction within the Upper
    Tribunal to consider the case on the  papers  it  is  clear  from  that
    letter that she clearly did not intend to abandon her appeal today  and
    intended to proceed with the appeal, but  wanted  the  case  considered
    without her having to attend at the appeal hearing.

 9. However, as there is no provision for  a  paper  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  However, as the Appellant has indicated that  she  does  not
    want to attend at the appeal hearing I do consider that it  is  in  the
    interests of justice to consider the appeal without her being here.

10. Having heard the  submissions  from  Mr  Tarlow,  Senior   Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the Respondent he conceded that  given
    the circumstances of this case that it did  appear  that  there  was  a
    procedural irregularity in  the  case,  in  that  the  duty  judge  had
    indicated that the case was to be listed  as  a  preliminary  issue  in
    respect of jurisdiction, but what appears to have happened  is  that  a
    notice was sent out simply listing the case for a  substantive  hearing
    on the merits and that there was no separate indication  given  to  the
    Appellant that the jurisdictional point was  still  in  issue  and  was
    still to be determined.

11. In my judgement there has been procedural unfairness as a result of the
    matter being listed simply as a substantive appeal  rather  than  as  a
    preliminary hearing on the jurisdictional issue as directed by the duty
    judge, and that therefore the Appellant has actually missed out on  the
    opportunity of attending a jurisdictional hearing and making  arguments
    on the jurisdictional point.  Although she had indicated that  she  did
    not want the appeal to be considered on the papers at  first  instance,
    she may well not have done so, had she understood that jurisdiction was
    still in issue, rather than simply the merits of the appeal itself.

12. The consideration of the appeal by First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nichols
    therefore did result from a procedural error and gave rise to potential
    unfairness to the Appellant  and  in  such  circumstances,  it  is  the
    appropriate for the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nichols to be
    set aside and for the case  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nichols.

Notice of Decision

13.  The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Nichols  did  result  from  a
    procedural error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal and did  result
    in potential unfairness to the Appellant and is  therefore  set  aside.
    The case is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
    before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nichols.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any anonymity order  and  no
    anonymity order is sought before me.  There is no evidence  as  to  why
    the appellant would require anonymity in this case.  I therefore do not
    make any anonymity order.


Signed                                  Date 29th July 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
