
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15668/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2015                             |On 22 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Miss Tian Zhang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin
For the Respondent:    Ms L Appiah


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant before me is the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department it is easier to refer to the parties as they were before the
    First-tier Tribunal so that hereafter Miss Zhang is referred to as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China who was born  on  9  October  1989.
    She applied on 28 October 2013 for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of long residence.  In  essence  this  was  refused  because  the
    appellant was unable to show that she could meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. She had not provided  evidence
    of continuous residence in the United Kingdom as defined in  the  Rules
    for a period of at least ten years.  In particular  the  appellant  had
    been absent from  the  United  Kingdom  between  12  July  2011  and  8
    September 2012 - this being a total of 423 days.   The  relevant  Rules
    state that a period shall not be considered to have been  broken  where
    an applicant is absent from the UK for a period of six months  or  less
    at any one time. The appellant, having  been  absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom for more than that period did  not  comply  with  the  relevant
    rule.

 3. The appellant appealed the decision and the matter came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Aziz.  In a determination dated 6  November  2014
    the judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but  allowed
    it under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent sought permission and was granted leave to  appeal  that
    decision to the Upper Tribunal.  It was found arguable that  the  judge
    failed to recognise the limited utility of Article 8  in  private  life
    cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's moral
    and physical integrity as per Patel and Others v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72.

 5. I heard argument  from  both  representatives  and  having  done  so  I
    announced that I found that there was a material error of  law  in  the
    judge's decision such that it would be set aside.

 6. The proper legal approach to be deployed in such a case as the  present
    one is to identify the substantive content of the relevant  Immigration
    Rules. This is necessary to establish whether an  applicant  for  leave
    satisfies the conditions laid down in those Rules and  also  to  assess
    the force of the public interest given expression in those Rules.  This
    will be relevant to the balancing exercise under Article 8 in  deciding
    whether leave to remain  should  be  granted  outside  the  substantive
    provisions set out in the Rules.

 7. Secondly, if an applicant does not  satisfy  the  requirements  in  the
    substantive part of the Rules they may seek to  maintain  a  claim  for
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules, pursuant to Article 8.   If
    there is a reasonably arguable case  under  Article  8  which  has  not
    already  been  sufficiently  dealt  with  by   consideration   of   the
    application under the substantive  provisions  of  the  Rules  then  in
    considering the case the individual  interests  of  the  applicant  and
    others whose Article 8 rights are in issue should be  balanced  against
    the public interest, including as expressed in the Rules, in  order  to
    make an  assessment  whether  refusal  to  grant  leave  to  remain  is
    disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of Section  6(1)  of  the
    Human Rights Act, read with Article 8.

 8. The First-tier Judge has carefully considered the  arguments  both  for
    and against allowing this appeal under  Article  8  ECHR.   However,  I
    agree with the respondent that the judge does not identify  factors  of
    the appellant's private life which are  not  catered  for  either  with
    respect to Appendix FM or Immigration Rule 276ADE.  In the  alternative
    the judge does not reason sufficiently  why  the  factors  outlined  at
    paragraph 46(i)-(vii) of  the  decision  amount  to  good  grounds  for
    allowing the appeal outside the Rules.

 9. This appeal revolved around the appellant's private life in the context
    of her work and studies, the judge noting that  the  appellant  has  no
    children or extended family in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  found
    that the appellant has established "a very strong private life  in  the
    UK since she arrived here as a 13 year old child and that she has fully
    integrated into society here".  The judge found that in  light  of  all
    the material facts the matters which he took into account on behalf  of
    the  appellant  "just"  carry   greater   probative   weight   in   the
    proportionality assessment. He  appears  to  have  come  to  that  view
    because in paragraph 54 he found there were

         "unique reasons why the appellant broke  her  period  of  continual
         lawful residence.  The appellant only went abroad as part of a  UK-
         based sandwich degree programme that the  Secretary  of  State  had
         given her permission to study.  In  other  words,  her  time  spent
         abroad was in pursuance of completing the work placement  component
         of a degree  course  for  which  the  respondent  had  granted  her
         permission to study."

    It is clear from the judge's  finding at  46(vii)  that  the  appellant
    had a discretion as to where she could have worked.  Her statement of 1
    May 2014 at paragraph 9 states "Even though places  or  countries  were
    optional to choose from, I however chose to complete it in China  ...".
    She then explained why she did so.  These reasons  were  considered  by
    the respondent at pages 2 and 3 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The
    respondent reasoned that the permitted maximum of 540 days or 180  days
    for any one period of absence under the Immigration Rules "is  generous
    and designed to meet a number of eventualities."

10. Unfortunately the judge failed  to  give  the  appropriate  significant
    weight to be attached to public interest  considerations.   It  is  the
    Secretary of State and parliament who are in principle best  placed  to
    make judgments regarding the needs and resources of their societies see
    e.g. Stec v United Kingdom [2006] 43 EHRR 47, paragraph [52]. Where the
    Secretary of State has sought to fashion the content of the Rules so as
    to strike what she regards as the appropriate balance under  Article  8
    and  any  gap  between  the  Rules  and  what  Article  8  requires  is
    comparatively narrow the Secretary of State's formulation of the  Rules
    may allow the Tribunal to be more confident  that  she  has  brought  a
    focused assessment of considerations of the public interest to bear  on
    the matter.  That will in turn allow the Tribunal to give  weight  more
    readily to that assessment when making its  own  decision  pursuant  to
    Article 8.

11. In this appeal the purpose of the Rule is  to  set  out  what  are  the
    requirements for indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    the ground of long residence.  There are allowances for  absence.   The
    appellant has never claimed that she was  obliged  to  be  out  of  the
    United Kingdom for the period that she was or that she could not find a
    placement of suitable length elsewhere.  This aspect  I  find  has  not
    been adequately  dealt  with  by  the  judge  and  this  is  an  error.
    Furthermore the judge has not reasoned sufficiently how he concludes in
    paragraph 54 that the appellant is fully integrated into  society  here
    when the appellant herself appreciated that she may have to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and all her family still remain in China.  These  errors
    amount to material errors of law.

12. For these reasons therefore the decision is set aside.

13. After a short break for Mr Melvin  to  read  the  appellant's  updating
    statement dated 16 April 2015 we proceeded with the resumed hearing.

The Resumed Hearing

14. I heard evidence from the appellant who gave that evidence in  English.
    Summarising that evidence the appellant wishes to stand on her own  two
    feet in this country. She has relied on her parents financially  up  to
    now but she does not want to rely on them forever.  Until the  position
    with regard to the issue of a visa for her has been resolved she cannot
    be employed.  As far as the compulsory course set up by the  university
    is concerned she chose to undertake it abroad.  She realises  that  her
    future lies in designing here in London which  is  a  world  leader  in
    fashion. Working in that field in China would not progress her career.

15. In cross-examination the appellant said that the prospective  employers
    to whom  she  was  talking  offered  advice  on  work  permits  but  no
    applications have been made and  she  did  not  take  any  professional
    advice as to how she might be allowed to work here.

16. Both representatives made submissions.  I took a note of them and  have
    taken them into account in this decision.  Mr Melvin pointed  out  that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of 276ADE  of  the  Rules
    (these being the requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life) and although the  appellant  has
    been in the United Kingdom for a number of years  and  wishes  to  work
    here it is perfectly possible that  she  can  make  an  application  to
    remain under Tier 1 or Tier 2. There are no  exceptional  circumstances
    that can allow her to succeed  under Article 8 ECHR.  There are no good
    reasons why she could not apply under the Rules.   She  has  worked  in
    China and has not lost her ties with that country.

17. Ms Appiah pointed out that the appellant came to the United Kingdom  at
    the age of 13.  She has passed GCSE and A levels here and  her  parents
    have spent a huge amount on her education and living expenses  and  she
    views the United Kingdom as her home country.  It is clear that she had
    to undertake a placement and chose to do it abroad  as  it  would  look
    good on her cv but she wished to return to London  because  it  is  the
    centre of fashion.  If she had known that it would harm her  career  to
    take the placement abroad she would not have done it.  When considering
    the five steps in  R (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] 2 AC 368 there are  exceptional  circumstances.   She
    has not been  in  breach  of  the  Rules  and  has  not  remained  here
    illegally.  Although she has family in China that  consideration  needs
    to be balanced against the private life that  she  has  accumulated  in
    this country.

My Findings

18. The appellant has  been  perfectly  straightforward  in  providing  her
    evidence and there is no issue with her assertions. Stripped  to  their
    essentials I find that the facts are these:- The appellant  arrived  in
    the UK in 2003 age 13 years. She attended  school  and  was  thereafter
    accepted onto a Foundation Diploma Art and  Design  Course  in  London.
    She was then offered and took up a place at London College  of  Fashion
    where she studied.  Although she  states  that  the  UK  is  her  "home
    country" there is clearly no doubt that she retains  considerable  ties
    with China.  For instance, it appears from her immigration  history  as
    set out in her application for leave to remain that  she  has  been  to
    China every year since she arrived in the UK and her family live there.

19. The appellant accepts that the placement abroad that she undertook  was
    of her choosing rather than because it was compulsory for her to do so.
    I have no doubt that she has come to regret that  decision  because  by
    doing so she infringed the relevant rules. I am unclear as  to  whether
    the placement could have been undertaken in the UK but in any event  it
    was not and the appellant was out of the country far  longer  than  the
    period allowed if she was to succeed in her application under the  long
    residence route.

20. The Secretary of State has placed a cap upon the amount of time that an
    applicant may be outside the United Kingdom yet still comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules. That appears to be perfectly  logical  and  sensible
    when considering the meaning of the words  "long"  and  "residence"  as
    referred to in the Rules. It would appear to offend common  sense  that
    an applicant should succeed under the "long residence" Rule where,  for
    instance, an applicant had resided in the UK for a period of  at  least
    10 years and yet had worked away for long periods of time during  a  10
    year period.  It is logical that the "bar" had to be set somewhere  and
    paragraph 276A sets the position of the bar.

21. The points made earlier in this decision about the  width  of  the  gap
    between what the Immigration Rules set out by  way  of  entitlement  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom  and  the  requirement  resulting
    from the application of a relevant Convention right is highly  relevant
    in this context.  The fair balance required to be  struck  pursuant  to
    Article 8 between individual interests protected by that provision  and
    the general public interest typically involves  bringing  into  account
    certain  public  interest  considerations  in  relation  to  which  the
    Secretary of State has a legitimate role to fulfil  by  formulating  an
    approach which gives them proper value and weight.  The maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest  (see  Section
    117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

22. In this case I find that the Secretary of State has sought  to  fashion
    the content of the Rules to strike what she regards as the  appropriate
    balance under Article 8 and such gap as there may be between the  Rules
    and  what  Article  8  requires  is  comparatively  narrow.   Thus  the
    Secretary of State's formulation of the Rules  allows  me  to  be  more
    confident that she has brought a focused assessment  of  considerations
    of the public interest to bear on the matter.  That in turn  allows  me
    more readily to give weight to that assessment when making the decision
    pursuant to Article 8.

23. I find it surprising that  the  appellant  has  not  sought  specialist
    advice as to whether there is any route open to her to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom other than to rely on Article 8 ECHR.  It is unclear  to
    me why she has not done so but that appears to be  an  avenue  open  to
    her.  It is not of course an answer to a meritorious  Article  8  claim
    that she has failed to seek such advice and/or make an application.  If
    she is entitled to succeed under Article 8 then so be it.

24. Looking at the five step process in Razgar as in so  many  appeals  the
    real issue is whether the proposed interference by  the  respondent  in
    the private life that the appellant undoubtedly enjoys  in  the  UK  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim  which  (in  this  appeal)  is  the
    importance of maintaining a credible and coherent system of immigration
    control.

25. At this point I refer  to  paragraphs  18  and  onwards  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision of Nasim and Others (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT  00025
    (IAC).  In R (on the application of the Countryside Alliance) v AG  and
    Others [2007] UKHL 52. Lord Bingham, having described  the  concept  of
    private life in Article 8 as elusive, said that:-

         "... the purpose of the Article is in my  view  clear.   It  is  to
         protect the individual against intrusion by agents  of  the  state,
         unless for good  reason,  into  the  private  sphere  within  which
         individuals expect to be  left  alone  to  conduct  their  personal
         affairs and live their personal lives as they choose" [10].

26. At paragraphs 19-20:-

         "It is important to bear in mind that the 'good reason', which  the
         state must invoke is not a  fixity.   British  citizens  may  enjoy
         friendships, employment and  studies  that  are  in  all  essential
         respects the same as those enjoyed by persons here who are  subject
         to such controls.  The fact that the government cannot  arbitrarily
         interfere with a  British  citizen's  enjoyment  of  those  things,
         replicable though they may be, and that, in practice,  interference
         is  likely  to  be  justified  only  by  strong  reasons,  such  as
         imprisonment for a criminal offence, cannot be used to restrict the
         government's ability to rely  on  the  enforcement  of  immigration
         controls as a reason for interfering with  friendships,  employment
         and studies enjoyed by a  person  who  is  subject  to  immigration
         controls.

         We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others  is
         a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."

27. The appellant has a private life in the United  Kingdom  that  she  has
    enjoyed for many years. Much of this revolves around her work.  She has
    quite naturally integrated into society here but she has  by  no  means
    severed her connections with China and she has her  family  there.  Her
    private life may  be  enjoyed  in  China,  albeit  private  life  of  a
    different nature in some respects than she enjoys in the UK.

28. Having taken into account all the relevant factors and the case law
    surrounding the relevant Rules as well as Article 8 considerations I
    find that the issue of proportionality is resolved decisively in favour
    of the respondent. I am unable to identify or find that there are any
    compelling or exceptional circumstances that exist in this appeal that
    require the grant of leave to remain to this appellant outside the
    rules. Those rules lay down substantive conditions, which, if
    satisfied, would lead to the grant of leave to remain but the appellant
    cannot meet those conditions.

29. The rules coupled with the public interest in the maintenance of
    effective immigration controls as set out in s. 117B of the 2002 Act
    give strong expression to the force of the public interest and there is
    insufficient in the balance in favour of the appellant that requires me
    to find that the decision is a disproportionate interference in the
    private life of the appellant. The decision is therefore lawful.

30. For the above reasons this appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.

32. Miss Zhang's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and under
    Article 8 ECHR.

33. I was not addressed on the matter of anonymity but this is not an
    appeal which appears to require an anonymity direction and therefore I
    do not make one.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton



