
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15918/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 17 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                           Mr Frank Chukwuma Oputa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Peer and Co
                    (Immigration Assist)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Moore
    which was promulgated on 20 February 2015.  Judge Moore  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision by the respondent to  revoke  his
    EEA residence card.

2.   The facts  very  shortly  are  these.   The  appellant  is  a  Nigerian
    national born on 10 August 1978 who was granted a residence card on the
    basis of his marriage to Ms  Valeska  Lucia  Martha,  a  Dutch  citizen
    working in the United Kingdom.  The reason the respondent  revoked  the
    residence card was that she  considered  the  marriage  to  be  one  of
    convenience.  It was carried out at All Saints Church  in  Forest  Gate
    where at a period not covering the particular  date  of  this  marriage
    proven criminality in the  form  of  sham  marriages  had  taken  place
    leading to the criminal conviction and sentencing of the parish priest,
    the Reverend Brian  Shipside  and  also  an  individual  for  brokering
    marriages of convenience.

3.    Judge  Moore  in  an  otherwise  meticulous,  thorough  and   balanced
    determination opens with some unhelpful words regarding the  burden  of
    proof.  In paragraph 7 of the determination he says this:

         "The burden of proof is on the appellant to satisfy me that  as  at
         the date of the respondent's immigration decision  it  was  on  the
         balance of probabilities against the weight of the evidence."

4.   The primary ground pursued before me was that  this  self-direction  on
    the burden of proof was against the weight of the evidence. Ms  Revill,
    who appeared for the Appellant, made some makeweight submissions  on  a
    second ground but I do not consider those to have  any  mileage  and  I
    propose concentrate on this first ground.

5.   Ms Revill says that statement is simply wrong and she refers me to  the
    decision of Hussam Samsam (EEA: revocation and retained  rights)  Syria
    [2011] UKUT 165 (IAC).  The headnote of that decision reads as follows:

         "1.  Where the Secretary of State revokes a residence  card  before
             the expiry of its validity it falls on  her  to  justify  such
             revocation."

6.   Ms Revill took me in particular to paragraph 25 of that judgment  which
    says:

         "25. But a residence card can clearly be revoked on broader grounds
             than conduct making cancellation of the card and removal  from
             the United Kingdom appropriate.  If  a  card  is  obtained  by
             fraud or misrepresentation  then  it  would  be  open  to  the
             issuing authority to cancel it but again the onus would be  on
             the Secretary of State.  But if it could be shown that a  card
             was issued in error  by  administrative  mistake,  we  see  no
             reason why it should be revoked even  if  the  holder  has  no
             right of residence.

         27.  In immigration decisions made outside the context of  EU  law,
             the onus of justifying revocation or  curtailment  of  limited
             leave, indefinite leave or a particular status would  fall  on
             the authority taking the action in question.

7.   I was also taken by Mr Clarke for the Secretary of State  to  the  case
    of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT
    00038 (IAC).  Here the headnote there states that:

         "i)  There is no burden at  the  outset  of  an  application  on  a
             claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is
             not one of convenience.

         ii)   IS  (marriages  of  convenience)  Serbia  [2008]   UKAIT   31
             establishes only that there is an  evidential  burden  on  the
             claimant to address evidence justifying  reasonable  suspicion
             that the marriage is entered into for the predominant  purpose
             of securing residence rights."

8.   There are various passages in this judgment which speak of there  being
    at times an evidential burden on the Secretary of State to  demonstrate
    suspicion whereupon a legal burden passes to the claimant.

9.   The concluding paragraphs of Papajorgji include the following:

         "39. In summary, our understanding is  that,  where  the  issue  is
             raised in an appeal, the question for the judge will therefore
             be 'in the light of the totality of the information before me,
             including the assessment of the  claimant's  answers  and  any
             information provided, am I satisfied that it is more  probable
             than not this is a marriage of convenience?'."

10.  It is beyond question that the judge in addressing this  case  came  to
    the conclusion that this was a  marriage  of  convenience  and  it  was
    therefore a sham marriage.  However, what seems to me to be crucial  is
    that this was a revocation decision and if what I have  read  from  the
    case of Samsam is correct then the onus of proof is on the Secretary of
    State.  Even if that be an evidential  burden  shifting  to  becomes  a
    legal burden on the  claimant  as  might  be  suggested  in  Papajorgji
    (although that  did  not  concern  revocation)  the  judge  undoubtedly
    misstated the position on that burden of proof.  That is so fundamental
    to the administration of justice that I cannot be  satisfied  that  the
    determination which followed is soundly based because there is  a  real
    doubt as to whether the burden of proof was properly applied.

10.  There was clearly evidence pointing in both direction.  Although  there
    were undoubtedly sham marriages being conducted  at  this  church,  two
    matters are of significance.  First that  the  minister  who  conducted
    this particular marriage was not charged with any  criminal  misconduct
    and secondly that the date of this marriage fell outside the  range  of
    dates comprised within the indictment for the criminal proceedings.

11.  Clearly there is a powerful case to be made by the Secretary  of  State
    that this was indeed a marriage of convenience.  It may  very  well  be
    that the outcome on a rehearing will  be  exactly  the  same  but  when
    matters as fundamental as the burden of proof are  misstated  the  only
    safe and proper course is to  start  again.   I  therefore  allow  this
    appeal and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered
    afresh.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The determination is set aside and the matter is remitted  for  a  rehearing
by the First-tier Tribunal but not by Judge Moore.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     16 July 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
