
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/15688/2014
     IA/15691/2014
     IA/15697/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 27 April 2015              |
|Dictated 21 April 2015                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               muhammad imtiaz
                                 sana razaq
                                adeel bashir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although the appellant before the Upper Tribunal is  the  Secretary  of
    State, I will refer to the parties as they were at the First-tier.

2.   The appeal, of two business partners (the first and third  appellants),
    and the spouse of the  first  appellant,  were  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Symes, in a decision promulgated on  17  November  2014.
    The appeals were concerned with applications to remain under the Tier 1
    (Entrepreneur) Rules, which are a part of the points-based system.  The
    applications were refused under the genuineness provisions, referred to
    in the refusal letters as "non-points  scoring  reasons  for  refusal".
    The  refusal  had  concluded  that  the  applicants  were  not  genuine
    entrepreneurs.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pirotta,
    on 20 January 2015.  The grounds were concerned with the case of SSHD v
    Ahmed & Another (PBS: admissible evidence)  [2014]  UKUT  00365  (IAC).
    This case, which was promulgated a few months before these appeals, had
    decided that even the genuineness aspects of a refusal,  although  they
    appeared to be non-points scoring matters, were  in  fact  inextricably
    linked to the award of points.  As a result it  was  decided  that  the
    restriction on the admissibility of evidence  not  submitted  with  the
    application, to be found in section 85A of the 2002  Act  (as  amended)
    was also applicable to genuineness  reasons.   In  granting  permission
    reference was made to this case, and to  it  being  arguable  that  the
    judge had not taken it into account.

Error of Law

4.   It was agreed between the parties, at the start,  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law.  In the second part of paragraph 34 of the  decision  the
    judge had taken a view on section 85(4) as an exception to the  general
    inadmissibility  of  evidence  not  submitted  with   an   application.
    Although this was a view of the law taken  by  many  before  the  Ahmed
    case, and although the Ahmed  case  was  not  brought  to  the  judge's
    attention, nevertheless Ahmed is a reported  Upper  Tribunal  decision,
    and it was promulgated some  time  before  this  decision.   For  these
    reasons it was correctly agreed that the second half of  paragraph  34,
    in treating post-application evidence as admissible in  these  appeals,
    amounted to an error of law.

5.   The rest of the error of law hearing was concerned with  the  issue  of
    whether this error was material to the  outcome.   Ms  Iqbal,  for  the
    appellant, submitted that it was not.  Ms Everett submitted that  there
    were difficulties in  attempting  to  separate  those  aspects  of  the
    decision that rested on admissible evidence, from those that did not.

6.   Having listened to the submissions by both representatives, and  having
    considered the judge's decision in some detail, I came to the view that
    the identified and agreed error of law was not a material one.

7.   The judge's decision summarised the grounds of refusal  for  the  first
    and third appellants at paragraphs 3 and 4.  From paragraph 27  onwards
    the judge went through the refusal reasons in the order that  they  had
    been summarised.  The judge then dealt with all of the  adverse  points
    between paragraphs 28 and 34.  These paragraphs were concerned with the
    interview of the third appellant, the concerns raised about the  origin
    of the funds, concerns based on the fact that the investment  fund  had
    not yet been spent, and concerns about initial clients and equipment.

8.   Until the middle part of  paragraph  34  it  appears  to  me  that  the
    judge's reasoning and findings rest on an analysis of the two refusals,
    and consideration of the interviews, and documentary evidence submitted
    with the applications.  There was one possible point of  concern  about
    admissibility within this, which concerned the question of whether oral
    evidence was admissible.  I did  not  hear  full  submissions  on  this
    point, but Ms Everett did not seek to put forward a position that  oral
    evidence was inadmissible, and neither did she ask for  an  adjournment
    to take instructions or research the matter. No point was raised in the
    grounds as to the inadmissibility of  oral  evidence.   In  short  this
    point was, by agreement, put to one side.  In  all  other  respects  it
    appeared to me that the judge's decision on the genuineness grounds did
    not rest on inadmissible evidence, but instead on a proper analysis  of
    the refusal, the documents submitted with  the  applications,  and  the
    interviews  (not  inadmissible  because  they  were  adduced   by   the
    respondent not the appellants).

9.   If the observation in the second part of paragraph 34  is  taken  away,
    it appears to me therefore that the outcome would be the same,  and  it
    has not been shown that it rested on any matter giving rise to an error
    on a point of law.  As a  consequence  the  identified  error  was  not
    material, and there is no basis  to  set  aside  the  judge's  decision
    allowing the appeals.

10.  Neither side made any points about anonymity or fees.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.  There was  an  error  of  law
but not one material to the outcome, and the decisions allowing the  appeals
therefore stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb


