
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15851/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th August 2016                        |On 19th August 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Ms Aster Tesfai Tedla
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Glass, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is an Eritrean national born on 19th November  1978.  She
    appealed against a decision of the respondent  refusing  her  permanent
    residence in accordance with Regulations 10(5) and (6)  and  Regulation
    15 of the 2006 Regulations.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge C Greasley dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations  but  allowed  it  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  The Secretary of  State  appealed
    against the decision on the grounds that  the  judge  made  a  material
    misdirection in law and referred me to the case of  Amirteymour  &  Ors
    (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) that where no  notice
    under Section 120 of the 2002 Act had been  served  and  where  no  EEA
    decision to remove has been made, an appellant  cannot  bring  a  human
    rights challenge to removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations.

3.   Ms Glass on behalf of the appellant accepted that  the  judge  did  not
    have jurisdiction to consider Article 8  let  alone  allow  the  appeal
    under that Section.  The appellant has not cross-appealed  against  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  respect  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  It is clear from the reading of  the  decision  that  the
    judge has been under a misapprehension that the appellant was  divorced
    from her spouse, who is  an  Italian  national  exercising  his  treaty
    rights in this country which is not the case.

4.   At paragraph 6 the judge  noted  that  the  appellant  did  not  supply
    evidence that the marriage was terminated through the production  of  a
    divorce certificate.  The appellant is in fact not divorced  but  still
    legally married.  In her application  she  said  that  she  was  living
    separately from her husband but at the moment they are living together.
     It would  appear  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  said  in  her
    application that she is separated from her husband has misled the judge
    into thinking that she is divorced, which is why he was looking  for  a
    divorce certificate.

5.   Given that there is no cross-appeal under the EEA Regulations my  hands
    are tied and I have no jurisdiction to set aside the EEA  decision  for
    this mistake of fact.  I will, however, state that it is clear from the
    submissions of Ms Glass that the  appellant  is  still  married  to  an
    Italian national who is exercising his treaty rights and  upon  another
    application being made to the Secretary of State, no  doubt  all  these
    matters will be considered.

6.   So the upshot is that there is an error  of  law  in  the  decision  in
    allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8 because the  judge  had
    no jurisdiction to do so and I allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mrs S Chana                             Date 18 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee reward is made.


Signed   Mrs S Chana                             Date 18 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
