
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15804/2015
                                                               IA/15808/2015
                                                               IA/15813/2015
                                                               IA/15815/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London    |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016             |On 24 November 2016             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR KS
                                   MRS PS
                                     IS
                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents:   Mr B Channer, instructed by MT UK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. We continue that order. Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise, the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  we  refer  to  the
   parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellants are nationals of India. The first  and  second  appellants
   are husband and wife, the third and fourth appellants are their two sons.
   They appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  by  the
   Secretary of State dated 26 March 2015 to refuse their  applications  for
   leave to remain on the basis of their private and family life in the  UK.
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Samimi  allowed  the  appeals  and  the
   Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

3. The background to this  appeal  is  that  the  first,  second  and  third
   appellants came to the UK as visitors on 17 November 2007 with  leave  to
   remain until 15 August 2008. The  first  appellant  was  served  with  an
   IS151A notice as an overstayer on 31 October 2008 and  subsequently  made
   applications for leave to remain on the basis of family life in 2008  and
   2014 both of which were refused. A further application  was  made  on  24
   October 2014 and the refusal of that application is the  subject  of  the
   instant appeal. The fourth appellant was born in the UK in January 2010.

4. The respondent refused the applications under Appendix FM  and  paragraph
   276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge firstly  considered  the  circumstances  of
   the third appellant [10-11]. The judge decided that it was not reasonable
   to expect the third appellant, who at that time had resided in the UK for
   over 8 years, to leave the UK and  allowed  his  appeal  under  paragraph
   276ADE (1) (iv). The judge went on to allow the  parents'  appeals  under
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  having  regard  to
   section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He
   allowed the appeal of the fourth appellant under Article 8 on  the  basis
   that his removal would amount to a disproportionate interference with his
   family life.

6. The primary challenge in the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  is
   in relation to the judge's finding that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
   expect the third appellant to leave the UK and the subsequent decision to
   allow his appeal under  paragraph  276ADE.  As  the  other  two  grounds,
   challenging the conclusions in relation to the first, second  and  fourth
   appellants, flow from the findings in relation to the third appellant  we
   consider this issue first.

7. The relevant provisions of paragraph 276ADE for  the  purposes  of  these
   appeals are as follows;

    "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:

    (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR
    1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.4. in Appendix FM; and

    (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
    private life in the UK; and

    ...

    (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
    for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

    ..."

8. The judge heard oral evidence from the first and second appellants as  to
   their life in the UK and their families in India [7-8]. The  judge  found
   that there were discrepancies in their oral evidence "to the extent  that
   does undermine their credibility as witnesses" [9]. The judge went on  to
   find that the two children "have settled in the United Kingdom  and  have
   integrated to the community life here" and that they "have  been  brought
   up here and have fundamentally integrated in to the British way of  life"
   [10]. The judge concluded at paragraph 11 that it would not be reasonable
   to expect the third appellant to leave the UK as he "has settled well  in
   the society through his school, social network, and cultural assimilation
   to the English way of life".

9. The Secretary of State contends in the grounds that  this  assessment  is
   incomplete because it fails to consider reasonableness in the context  of
   the wider evidence, for example as to the fact that the family are Indian
   and would be removed together and that there was no evidence  as  to  any
   health concerns or to show  that  he  could  not  integrate  into  Indian
   society. In her submissions Ms Ahmad relied on  the  cases  of  Muse  and
   others v ECO [2012] EWCA Civ 10 and MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.
   She submitted that the judge failed to look at all relevant factors.

10. Mr Channer accepted that the judge could have given further reasons  but
   relied on the guidance in R(Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 92 and submitted
   that the Judge's reasoning is sufficient. He submitted that the reasoning
   shows that all of the evidence was taken into account. He submitted  that
   the background had been explained in the first appellant's oral  evidence
   as set out at paragraph 7 of the judge's decision.

Error of Law

11. In discussing the reasonableness test in section 117B (6), which  is  in
   identical terms to that in paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv) the Court of  appeal
   in MA said at paragraph 47;

    "... That will depend on a careful analysis of the nature and extent of
    the links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed [the child]
    should return."

12. In EV (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  Lord  Justice
   Christopher Clarke gave guidance to a tribunal assessing  proportionality
   and the best interests of the child:

"34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present, the  need
for immigration control outweighs the best interests of the children, it  is
necessary to determine the relative strength of the factors  which  make  it
in their best interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
factors that point the other way.

35.  A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will  depend
on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length  of  time  that
they have been here; (c) how long they have  been  in  education;  (c)  what
stage their education has reached; (d)  to  what  extent  they  have  become
distanced from the country to which it is proposed  that  they  return;  (e)
how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what extent they  will
have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that
country; and (g) the extent to which  the  course  proposed  will  interfere
with their family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
citizens."

13. In analysing the  evidence  in  this  case  the  judge  found  that  the
   credibility of the first and second appellants was undermined.  Therefore
   it is not clear what, if any, parts of their  oral  evidence  as  to  the
   children, the family life in the UK and the circumstances in India,  were
   accepted. Although he cited case law giving guidance on an assessment  of
   the best interests of the children the judge  failed  to  carry  out  any
   analysis of the best interests of the children in this  case.  The  judge
   failed to engage in any analysis of the circumstances  the  family  would
   return to in India or to engage in the type of analysis suggested  in  EV
   (Philippines).

14. We accept that reasons need not be  elaborate  or  lengthy.  However  in
   this case the reasons given for finding that it would not  be  reasonable
   to expect the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK  are  inadequate.  We
   therefore set that decision aside. As the  appeals  of  the  other  three
   appellants flow from the  judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the  third
   appellant they  must  also  be  set  aside.  The  findings  of  fact  are
   inadequate and cannot therefore be preserved.

15. The nature and extent of the judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
   in order for the decision to be remade is such that (having regard to the
   overriding objective in Rule 2 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
   2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed   Date: 16 November 2016

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

