
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15393/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                        |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 June 2013                            |On 19 June 2013            |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


Between
                                TUNDE BRAIMAH
                          (no ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G McIndoe, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

              DETERMINATION AND ORDER PURSUANT TO RULES 17 & 39


1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Glossop promulgated on 10 September  2012  concluding
   that there had been a failure to comply with Rule 8(1) (c) of the  First-
   tier Tribunal's Procedural rules, and dismissing the appeal.


2. When the matter came before me, it was explained that the respondent  had
   agreed to reconsider the appellant's application on the basis that at the
   time of its initial submission,  the  correct  fee  had  been  paid.  The
   parties have now consented to the matter being disposed of under Rule 39,
   referring me to and order signed on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  the
   Respondent which provides that it is now agreed between the parties  that
   the matter should be concluded by consent on the basis that:


   a. That the applications for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  Tier  1
      General / dependant categories received by the respondent on 27  April
      2012 are accepted to have been valid
   b. That those applications remain undecided by the respondent
   c. That the outstanding appeals before the Tribunal are hereby  withdrawn
      by the appellants
   d. That Mr Braimah and his dependants' leave to remain is currently being
      extended by section 3C Immigration Act 1971 as amended
   e.  That  the  respondent  will  agree  to  accept  varied   applications
      accompanied  by  the  appropriate  fees  within  14   days   of   this
      determination as follows:
   i. For indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long  residence  from
      the first applicant
  ii. For further leave to remain as the partner and child of a person  with
      indefinite leave  to  remain  in  respect  of  the  second  and  third
      applicants


3. In all the circumstances, I agree to this proposal. I am  satisfied  that
   the decision involved an error of law, and I set it  aside.  It  is  now,
   however, in light of the fact that  the  appeals  are  to  be  withdrawn,
   pursuant to rule 17 and to which I consent, to remake the determination.




4. This disposes of the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.




Signed:                                      Date:  14 June 2013
[pic]

J K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge

                                    ANNEX

It is agreed between the parties as follows:
   f. That the applications for further leave to remain in the Tier 1
      General / dependant categories received by the respondent on 27 April
      2012 are accepted to have been valid
   g. That those applications remain undecided by the respondent
   h. That the outstanding appeals before the Tribunal are hereby withdrawn
      by the appellants
   i. That Mr Braimah and his dependants' leave to remain is currently being
      extended by section 3C Immigration Act 1971 as amended
   j. That the respondent will agree to accept varied applications
      accompanied by the appropriate fees within 14 days of this
      determination as follows:
   i. For indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence from
      the first applicant
  ii. For further leave to remain as the partner and child of a person with
      indefinite leave to remain in respect of the second and third
      applicants
