
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15080/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 November 2016                         |On 14 November 2016            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

             SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel
For the Respondents:   Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant or his wife.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast who appealed against  the
    decision of the respondent on 31 March 2015 to refuse  her  application
    for a permanent residence card pursuant to  The  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations  2006").   Her
    appeal was decided by First-tier Tribunal Judge J Bartlett ("the FTTJ")
    who dismissed it in a decision promulgated on 14 April 2016.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    my references to the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  subjected  to
    domestic violence, such a direction is appropriate.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kamara  on  5
    October 2016 as follows:

         "2. In essence, the poorly drafted grounds appear to disagree  with
            the judge's conclusion that the appellant was not  entitled  to
            claim retained rights of residence because she as  not  married
            to her EEA-national husband.

         3.   Whilst the grounds discuss discrimination in the treatment  of
            unmarried  partners  under  the  Regulations,  I  consider  the
            following to be an obvious point. It is arguable,  in  view  of
            what is said in Regulation 7(3) of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006
            regarding an extended family member who has  been  issued  with
            (inter alia) a residence  permit  being  treated  as  a  family
            member, that the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the  said
            regulations "do not provide for retained  rights  of  residence
            for extended family members."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Balroop, for the appellant, submitted that this had been a  standard
    Regulation 15(1)(f) application, the domestic violence having  occurred
    after the date of application  and  before  the  appeal  hearing.   The
    evidence of domestic violence was not challenged at  the  hearing  (not
    least because there was no HOPO present).  He submitted there should be
    "equality of treatment  between  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  EEA
    Regulations".  He noted there was no provision in the  Regulations  for
    the breakdown of a durable relationship,  unlike  the  breakdown  of  a
    marriage. The appellant and her partner had  been  together  for  eight
    years.  If the Immigration Rules had been applied, the appellant  would
    have been granted leave to remain. This appellant should be  granted  a
    similar "remedy" to that she would have received under the Rules.

 5. Mr Norton referred to Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411
    but accepted that it had limited relevance in view of paragraph 79. The
    appellant would be treated as a  family  member  for  as  long  as  she
    qualified under Regulation 7(3)  by  reference  to  Regulation  8.  The
    evidence before the FTTJ was that the  relationship  had  broken  down;
    there was no provision in the Directive for further leave to be granted
    by reason of domestic violence.  Whilst the appellant's  representative
    had identified a  potential  lacuna,  this  was  not  relevant  to  the
    application of the regulations or the directive; it was a matter  which
    could be raised, if appropriate, in the event  of  a  removal  decision
    being made at some stage in the future.

Findings

 6. As is stated at [8] of the decision, "it  is  common  ground  that  the
    appellant's relationship with an EEA national  broke  down  in  January
    2015. It is also common ground that the appellant was  not  married  to
    the EEA national and therefore her rights arose from a claim  to  being
    [sic] an extended family  member  by  virtue  of  being  in  a  durable
    relationship". Given the terms of Regulation 7(3) this was appropriate.

 7. The FTTJ then went on to say at [9]:

         "The EEA Regulations are clear and they do not provide for retained
         rights of residence of extended family members. I  find  that  this
         means when a relationship between the appellant  and  EEA  national
         broke down her rights of residence rights were lost.  The appellant
         cannot benefit from retained rights and as  her  relationship  with
         the EEA national has broken down, unfortunately for her, she cannot
         fall within the EEA Regulations."

    Whilst this paragraph is unclear and difficult to  follow,  the  FTTJ's
    finding that the appellant cannot benefit from the EEA  Regulations  is
    correct.  Indeed the appellant did not then and does not now assert the
    contrary. Thus the finding of  the  FTTJ  reflects  the  only  possible
    outcome of the appeal.

 8.  I  have  not  been  provided  with  cogent  argument  to  support  the
    proposition that the respondent should have granted the appellant leave
    to remain outside the EEA Regulations.  As the respondent  has  pointed
    out in the reasons for refusal, it is open to the appellant to  make  a
    charged application on human rights grounds. There was no obligation on
    the FTTJ to consider the matter on  human  rights  grounds,  given  the
    guidance in Amirteymour & Ors (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT
    466 (IAC) and the lack of a removal decision by the respondent.

 9. For these reasons, the decision of the FTTJ contains no material  error
    of law.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

11. The decision and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal are not set aside.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                      Dated: 11 November 2016

