

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA 15444-11

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |signed : 31.07.2013          |
|on    09.10.2012 & 26.06.2013                 |     Sent Out: 02.08.2013    |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                     R M
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:     (on 9 October 2012)   Marisa Cohen
      (on 26 June 2013)      David Chirico
      (both counsel instructed by Wilson LLP)
For the respondent:    (at both hearings)          Mr Steven Walker


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

      This is an appeal, by the , against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Russell Campbell and a lay member), sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 7 February and 22 March 2012, to  a revocation of  deportation
    appeal by someone who claims to be a citizen of Sierra Leone. His  date
    of birth is given as 1 January 1972.  The  following  three  paragraphs
    contain the ruling I gave after the hearing of 9  October  2012:  there
    was considerable delay in  relisting  the  appeal  for  the  re-hearing
    directed, owing to difficulties in arranging for those representing the
    appellant to inspect Home Office files relating to  various  stages  of
    his claim. Both Mr Walker and Mr Chirico  did  their  best  to  resolve
    these.

ERROR OF LAW

 2. Permission was given solely on the question of the burden and  standard
    of proof of nationality in the particular circumstances of  this  case.
    The Home Office asserted, on the strength of  a  SPRAKAB  report,  that
    this appellant is from Nigeria, and the panel correctly said  they  had
    to establish that on the balance of probabilities.  However  they  also
    gave this as the standard by which the appellant needed to show that he
    came from Sierra Leone, so as to establish that he faced a well-founded
    fear of persecution there as a homosexual.

 3. Mr Walker conceded that this was an error of law, which required a  re-
    hearing on this point. It may well be, as the Home Office maintained in
    their reply, that there are  only  two  alternative  positive  findings
    possible: either this  appellant  comes  from  Sierra  Leone,  or  from
    Nigeria. However, on asylum/article  3  all  he  needs  to  show  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that he does not come from Nigeria, and does come
    from Sierra Leone, so that  on  removal  he  would  have  to  face  the
    persecution he says he fears there.

 4. Having been alerted by a recent short report to  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Amin Zidan Abdullah [2013] EWCA Civ 42, I no  longer
    consider  this  concession  was  rightly  made.  Although  the  general
    standard of proof in  asylum/article  3  appeals  is  on  a  reasonable
    likelihood  only,  the  appellant  had  to  show  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities that he was not returnable to Nigeria, if he were to have
    an arguable case, based on any real risk of Convention  persecution  or
    ill-treatment on return to Sierra Leone. If that  is  right,  then  the
    first-tier panel made no error of law at all (see 6 - 13 for  my  views
    on their article 8 decision, apart from the nationality point), and the
    appeal would in any event have to be dismissed on that basis.  However,
    since that was of  course  not  the  one  on  which  a  re-hearing  was
    directed, I shall go on to set out my views on the basis on  which  the
    case came before me for that.

 5. Permission was not refused  on  the  article  8  point  raised  in  the
    grounds; though I have no intention of giving any more encouragement on
    that  than  the  first-tier  judge  who  dealt  with   the   permission
    application, it may be argued too, in the first place on error of  law,
    if the nationality point fails.  So  far  as  the  appellant's  claimed
    citizenship is relevant to this point too, here he needs to show it  is
    more likely than not that he comes from Sierra Leone.

FINAL HEARING

 6. The claimed error of law on article  8     had  not  been  accepted  or
    recorded as agreed in any subsequent ruling. However, since if  I  came
    to a contrary view on the appellant's nationality to that taken by  the
    panel, I should inevitably have to reconsider the whole  of  his  human
    rights case for myself, Mr Chirico put before me, and  I  considered  a
    considerable  volume  of  psychiatric  evidence,  including  the   oral
    evidence of Dr Paul Osler. However it is now necessary to return to the
    decision of the first-tier panel on article 8 and consider  whether  or
    not it did contain an error of  law  requiring  a  re-hearing  on  this
    point, subject to the question of the appellant's nationality, which  I
    shall have to decide for myself, for the reasons already given.



 7. Appellant's immigration history

    09.04.1999   arrives in this country on false British passport;  claims
               asylum on detection
    22.03.2003   asylum refused
    18.03.2004   first appeal dismissed
    08.03.2006   sentenced to 8 months'  imprisonment  for  using  a  false
               identity document
    15.05.2006   Abbot &  Co,  solicitors,  write  to  Home  Office  saying
               appellant entitled to Nigerian citizenship,  and  requesting
               he be removed to that country
    30.04.2007   sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment  for  using  a  false
               identity document: the sentencing judge notes that  this  is
               his second  conviction  for  that  offence,  and  recommends
               deportation.
    09.10.2007   receives notice of intention to deport
    26,11,2007   remains in detention under immigration powers
    17.12.2007   appeals against deportation
    23.06.2008   second appeal dismissed
    23.09.2008   face-to-face interview with Sierra Leone High  Commission,
               who refuse to accept him as their citizen
    25.08.2009   telephone interview with Nigerian High Commission
    07.09.2009   Home Office receive report from SPRAKAB,  expressing  view
               that appellant is from Nigeria, and not Sierra Leone
    26.10.2009   Nigerian High Commission in London  issue  appellant  with
               emergency  travel  document:  Home  Office  give   appellant
               removal directions to Nigeria
    29.10.2009   applies for judicial review of removal directions
          11.2010  appellant  bailed  on   judicial   review   application:
               injunction restraining removal to Nigeria refused
    23.12.2010    makes  fresh  asylum/human  rights  claim  on  basis   of
               homosexuality, and requests revocation of deportation order
    11.03.2011   revocation refused (the decision  under  appeal  in  these
               proceedings)


 8. The panel  had  and  carefully  considered  the  following  psychiatric
    evidence: the numbers relate to the paragraphs in which they did so.

    23, 45 & 47  Dr Rachel Daly
    25 & 47 Dr Akpan
    40 - 43 Dr W Hopkins
    44.     Professor Cornelius Katona
    46.     Drs N Shirolkar & L Moodley, and Dr Iles
    48.     Dr Malfatto
    49.     Dr Luciana Rubenstein

 9. The panel dealt with the  various  heads  of  the  appellant's  article
    3/article 8 claim before them, making  findings  of  fact  and  drawing
    conclusions as set out in the following paragraphs:

    94. The appellant is not a homosexual.
    95. He would have access to treatment for his HIV+ condition on  return
        to Nigeria.
    96. The medical evidence before them showed on balance that, while  the
        appellant suffered from a severe depressive illness with  psychotic
        symptoms, in the form of 'hearing  voices',  he  had  insight  into
        these, and could resist them. His condition was well known  to  the
        Secretary of State, and suitable care would be taken of him  during
        the removal process.
    97. The appellant's claimed fear and risk of self-harm  on  return  was
        based on his  claim  to  be  a  homosexual,  which  the  panel  had
        disbelieved; but here they went on to find that the  appellant  was
        himself aware that this was a false claim.
    98. The appellant would have access to suitable medicines and treatment
        to control his psychosis on return to  Nigeria,  in  particular  in
        Lagos. His condition would not make him unable to  seek  treatment.
        So his return to  Nigeria  would  not  infringe  his  rights  under
        article 3 or article 8, so far as either his  HIV+  status  or  his
        mental health were concerned.
    99. While there had been some delay by the Home Office in dealing  with
        the appellant during the early part of his stay here,  the  private
        life he had acquired in this country only became  significant  from
        about 2006. He had twice been convicted of using a false  identity,
        and no proper explanation had been given as to how  he  had  become
        involved in  such  activities.  The  first  conviction  involved  a
        fraudulent attempt to open a bank account.
   100. The appellant could not rightfully have benefited from  any  policy
        to extend exceptional leave to remain to asylum-seekers from Sierra
        Leone, since he was from Nigeria.
 101. Weighing up the factors on both sides, the balance was  in  favour  of
      deportation.

10. Mr Chirico's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  challenged  the
    panel's  decision  mainly  on  the  basis  of  their  findings  on  the
    appellant's nationality (ground 1); but he went on in ground 2,  headed
    "Errors in approach to article 8", to argue as follows:

    13. The appellant's claim not to be Nigerian, but  from  Sierra  Leone,
        was relevant both to the question of
          i) how far removal to Nigeria would  interfere  with  his  private
             life; and
         ii) whether he should have been given exceptional leave to  remain,
             either under the policy relating to those from Sierra Leone  in
             force from 1999 - 2001; or under the  'R  (S)'  policy  between
             2008 - 10.
    14.
          i) If the question of delay by the Home Office had  been  properly
             taken account of, in the light of EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41
             either by them or the adjudicator who decided the first  appeal
             in 2004, then the appellant would have been  granted  leave  to
             remain on that basis; in which case he would have had  no  need
             to overstay, or commit  offences  of  deception  to  facilitate
             that.

         ii) "The Tribunal glosses  (at  100)  the  offences  of  which  the
             Appellant was convicted. These glosses were not based upon  any
             submissions and are based on  no  evidence.  The  Tribunal  has
             consequently  attached  irrationally  elevated  weight  to  the
             Appellant's criminality."

11. Mr Chirico did not add to  these  arguments,  either  in  his  skeleton
    argument (which did deal with the merits  of  the  appellant's  article
    3/article 8 claims), or in oral argument before me. Those at  paragraph
    13 of his grounds depend on my own findings of fact on the  appellant's
    nationality, to which I shall come in due course; if I find that he  is
    from Sierra Leone, then I shall  reconsider  his  article  3/article  8
    claims on all the evidence now before me. However, it is necessary  now
    to consider whether the challenges to the panel's article 8 decision at
    paragraph 14 of the grounds raise any error of law on their part  which
    require a re-hearing on that point, irrespective of my findings on  the
    appellant's nationality.

12. In my judgment the panel's unchallenged finding at paragraph 100  about
    the Home Office delay having taken place before the appellant  acquired
    a significant private life in this country in  2006  is  fatal  to  the
    argument put forward at 14 (i). Even if I had taken the  view  that  he
    should have been given indefinite leave to remain on the ground of that
    delay in 2004, though the fact of his not having it might have  led  to
    the offences of which he was last convicted in 2007,  it  could  hardly
    excuse them.

13. So far as the 14 (ii) argument is concerned, the  main  relevant  facts
    relating to the appellant's convictions were briefly, but  clearly  set
    out in the second sentencing judge's remarks, which were there for both
    sides to see and deal with in the appeal papers before  the  panel.  As
    for the additional information about the first  conviction  (about  its
    involving an attempt to open a bank account), that was equally  clearly
    set out in the decision on the appellant's second  appeal,  which  also
    formed part of the appeal papers: see paragraph  26  of  that.  As  has
    often been said by this Tribunal and the higher courts, the  sentencing
    judge's remarks are the  starting-point  for  dealing  with  the  facts
    behind convictions in deportation appeals. If the appellant had more to
    say about his offences, then it was for his counsel  before  the  panel
    (Mr Chirico) to make sure it was said.

NATIONALITY

14. It follows that I do not see any error of law in the panel's article  8
    findings, which might require a re-hearing on that point, independently
    of the question of the appellant's nationality, to which  I  shall  now
    turn. In doing so I shall assume, contrary to the position  on  article
    8, that it would be enough for him to show a reasonable likelihood that
    he is from Sierra Leone to provide a foundation for his  asylum/article
    3 claim relating to return there. On the other hand,  if  there  is  no
    reasonable likelihood of his being from Sierra Leone, then there  would
    be no such basis for that claim. Such a finding  would  inevitably,  no
    other country of origin having been seriously put forward, result in  a
    conclusion that the appellant was more likely than  not  from  Nigeria;
    but that is by the way.

15. Mr Chirico points out in his skeleton argument that the  appellant  has
    for the last 13 years (in fact now 14) always  maintained  that  he  is
    from Sierra Leone, though he has spent a great deal of time in Nigeria.
    The history he gave had him moving to Lagos when he was  about  15  (so
    around 1987); then returning to Sierra Leone in late 1998, only to find
    his parents and siblings had all been killed. However that encomium  on
    the appellant's consistency is too simple by far: while  his  case,  as
    presented to his solicitors,  and  to  the  appellate  authorities  has
    certainly always been that he is a native of Sierra Leone,  I  need  to
    look in context at exactly  what  he,  or  others,  apparently  on  his
    behalf, have told others at different times over the years. Before I do
    so, it is worth noting  that,  though  it  was  never  doubted  in  the
    appellant's two previous appeals that he  was  from  Sierra  Leone,  no
    issue had been raised on this, and so nothing can be drawn from that.

16. The appellant was not called to give oral evidence, owing to  what  has
    been said about his mental state; so his  own  explanations  for  those
    statements, to which I shall come, are related  on  his  behalf  by  Mr
    Chirico in his skeleton argument. The basis for that is a draft witness
    statement for the appellant, taken by Rachel Henson of  his  solicitors
    in the circumstances described in her own of 6 February 2012; and  Miss
    Henson's own further statements of 21 March 2012 and 21  June  2013.  I
    shall give my own views on each of the occasions concerned as I go, for
    clarity; but it should not be thought that I have reached these, or any
    other findings of fact, without considering the whole of  the  relevant
    evidence before me.

17. Abbot & Co letter       The first time it was asserted,  apparently  on
    the appellant's behalf, that he was from Nigeria was on  15  May  2006:
    this was a point where (no doubt because of credit for time on remand),
    the appellant was less than two weeks from the  end  of  the  custodial
    period of) an 8 months' sentence: his first asylum appeal  had  already
    been  dismissed  in  2004.  Abbot  &  Co,  solicitors,  describing  the
    appellant as "our client", said he had instructed them he wanted to  be
    removed to Nigeria. The history they gave was that he had been born  in
    Sierra Leone, but to a Nigerian mother, by  a  Sierra  Leonean  father.
    Instead of leaving Sierra Leone for Nigeria when he was 15, he had been
    "... forced to leave Nigeria  back  to  Sierra  Leone  because  of  the
    situation in which he found himself" at that age. Then in April 1999 he
    had come from Sierra Leone to this country.

18. The appellant had gone on to say this, according to the solicitors:

       ... he was not looking forward to going back to Sierra Leone, because
       he feared he could be killed, but would like to be removed to Nigeria
       to stay with his mother's relatives. In addition, during his stay  in
       Nigeria, he acquired  Nigerian  citizenship  because  his  mother  is
       Nigerian. He has no family to go back to in Sierra Leone.

       ...  [he]  was  sentenced  on  8   March   and   will   be   released
       unconditionally on 26th May 2006. he  does  not  want  to  remain  in
       Belmarsh prison at the end of his prison terms. Client would want  to
       be removed immediately.

    The solicitors ended by asking  the  Home  Office  to  get  his  travel
    document ready before his release date; otherwise they  were  urged  to
    move him to an immigration detention centre, or  release  him  on  bail
    with suitable conditions.

19. The appellant's explanation, so far as he is said to be  able  to  give
    one, for how that letter came to be written is that he never gave Abbot
    & Co any such instructions; and "it is far  from  clear  that  he  ever
    authorised them to make submissions on his behalf". In addition, it  is
    pointed out on his behalf that three members of  the  firm  were  later
    "...  struck  off  the  Law  Society  Register   for   dishonesty   and
    malpractice". The details are given in an extract from the Law  Society
    Gazette of 19 May 2011.

20. In Miss Henson's  further  statement,  she  describes  the  appellant's
    reaction when she first put the Abbot & Co letter to him  on  20  March
    2012, just before the final first-tier hearing: her  firm  had  had  it
    from the Home Office, in  accordance  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    directions, on the 6th. The appellant remembered someone who  may  have
    been from that firm coming to see him in HMP Belmarsh; but not  signing
    any letter of authority, or getting  any  further  correspondence  from
    them afterwards. He denied that his mother had been Nigerian,  or  that
    he had ever acquired Nigerian citizenship.

21. I probably have as much judicial experience as most people, gained over
    the last 24 years, of the ways of immigration  solicitors,  honest  and
    otherwise. There are certainly dishonest ones to be found, amongst whom
    Abbot & Co may have been; but I know nothing to suggest that  even  the
    dishonest are inspired by any other motives than the ordinary  ones  of
    mankind in general, self-interest being a prime example.  Whatever  the
    honesty or otherwise of the member of the firm who wrote the letter  of
    15 May 2006, I see no reason at all for him to have  done  so,  in  the
    terms he did, if they did not represent the  instructions  he  had  had
    from the appellant. As the passage I have quoted  shows,  it  is  quite
    clear and to the point, and shows understanding of the likely  position
    of a criminal prisoner, nearing the end of a short sentence, but facing
    an uncertain period of immigration detention afterwards.

22. As for the appellant's own memory of Abbot  &  Co's  visit  to  him  in
    Belmarsh, the occasion was six years old by the time it was put to him:
    given the voluminous evidence about his mental state over the years,  I
    do not regard his not remembering giving formal instructions to them as
    reliable evidence that he did not in fact  tell  them  the  version  of
    events set out in the letter, and ask them to see if  the  Home  Office
    would remove him to Nigeria, and I see no  reasonable  likelihood  that
    this was not what actually happened. It is quite  true  that  the  Home
    Office failed to act on  the  letter,  at  the  time  or  at  all;  but
    experience also suggests that Home Office inaction is  not  significant
    of anything other than institutional paralysis, intermittent at best. I
    will return later to the conclusions to be drawn from  this  and  other
    findings I may reach.

23. Nigerian emergency travel document  This came into existence  following
    a telephone interview the appellant had with the High Commission on  25
    August 2009 (as shown in their detention review  of  23  November  that
    year). There is no record of what took place at the interview as  such;
    but the emergency travel document, signed by a passport officer at  the
    Nigerian High Commission, certifies that the appellant (named) "... has
    stated to me that he is a Nigerian and that I have no reason  to  doubt
    his statement." It is clear from the detention review that this process
    was set about following a face-to-face interview between the  appellant
    and the Sierra Leone High Commission on 23  September  2008,  when  the
    official involved refused to accept him as their citizen, and suggested
    he "... could possibly be from Nigeria or Ghana" (see detention review,
    p 2).

24. The appellant's reaction to the news that the Home Office had and  were
    relying on the Nigerian emergency travel document is set  out  in  Miss
    Henson's statement of 21 June 2013: she had told him about it over  the
    phone on 26 April, and read it out to him. He repeatedly denied  having
    spoken to anyone from the  Nigerian  High  Commission,  or  being  from
    Nigeria himself. According to Miss Henson, the  appellant  became  very
    distressed during this conversation, and shouted repeatedly.

25. Mr  Chirico  suggests  in  his  skeleton  argument  that  the  coloured
    photograph of the appellant attached to the emergency  travel  document
    shows something significant, but which he does not specify,  about  his
    physical state at the time of whatever dealings took place between  him
    and the Nigerian High Commission in 2009; but  I  cannot  see  anything
    remarkable in it myself. While the skeleton argument goes on  to  refer
    to the appellant as "serious mental [sic] ill" at the time, it does not
    refer to any psychiatric or psychological evidence to suggest  that  he
    might have told the High Commission that he was one of their  citizens,
    even though he was in fact from Sierra Leone. Instead, it is  suggested
    that this apparent statement by him should not be relied on because his
    account of events in his asylum interview  "... lacks  coherence  on  a
    micro-level  (i.e.  he  repeats  himself,  distracts  himself,  repeats
    himself obsessively".

26. While this depiction of the appellant as an historian may not be wholly
    inaccurate, I have no doubt that the Nigerian High Commission would not
    have issued him with an emergency travel document, in the form set out,
    if he had not declared himself as one of their citizens. I shall return
    later to his motives for doing so, and the conclusions to be drawn from
    them.

27. SPRAKAB report     This  was  obtained  as  part  of  the  Home  Office
    inquiries  which  followed  the  refusal  of  the  Sierra  Leone   High
    Commission to accept the appellant as a citizen. It  was  made  on  the
    basis of the recording of a 20-minute phone interview between  him  and
    SPRAKAB (not necessarily the analysts themselves) on 7 August 2009. The
    general approach to be taken to evidence of this kind is set out in the
    judicial head-note to RB (Linguistic evidence - Sprakab) Somalia [2010]
    UKUT (IAC) 329, upheld with  one  minor  reservation  in  RB  (Somalia)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 277:

        Linguistic  analysis  reports  from   Sprakab   are   entitled   to
        considerable  weight.  That  conclusion  derives  from   the   data
        available to Sprakab and the process it uses. They  should  not  be
        treated as infallible but evidence opposing them will need to  deal
        with the particular factors identified in the report.

28. The analysts were respectively  from  Sierra  Leone  and  'Nigeria  and
    Ghana' (from the languages listed as spoken by him, a person  of  mixed
    descent) themselves; but the language in which he  was  spoken  to  was
    English. The conclusion the analysts reached  was  that  the  appellant
    spoke a variety of this language found "with certainty  not  in  Sierra
    Leone; most  likely  in  Nigeria  or  Ghana'.  They  had  analysed  the
    recording of the conversation they had with the appellant,  both  on  a
    linguistic basis (phonetics, morphology, syntax and  lexica),  and  his
    general knowledge of the culture and geography his claimed  country  of
    origin.

29. The analysts' general comments are that the appellant does not seem  to
    be a mother tongue English  speaker:  they  record  that  he  told  the
    interviewer he was born in Freetown and lived in Kenema, Sierra  Leone,
    and that he does not speak any Sierra Leonean native language, or  Krio
    (the English-derived lingua franca of  the  country),  or  display  any
    geographical, historical, cultural or political knowledge of it.  There
    follow a whole series  of  detailed  specific  phonetic  findings:  the
    symbols used would be too  tedious  to  transcribe  here,  but  can  be
    followed by anyone with a basic knowledge of phonetics: the  conclusion
    on this head is that the appellant has "a pronunciation with  certainty
    not found in any variety of English spoken in Sierra Leone".  A  series
    of morphological or syntactic findings follow:  here  too  details  are
    given  of  each,  with  explanations  of  the  difference.  Again   the
    conclusion is that the appellant's  English  is  not  typical  of  that
    spoken in Sierra Leone, but is typical of that  spoken  in  Nigeria  or
    Ghana. I shall discuss those of the analysts' detailed  findings  which
    are challenged by Professor Patrick (see below) when  I  come  to  deal
    with his report.

30. Turning to 'Lexicon and colloquialisms', the analysts reach  a  similar
    conclusion; but here the only examples given are  two  verb/preposition
    compounds, (leaving aside the phonetic element) 'settle  down'  instead
    of other expressions with the same meaning, and 'brought  up',  instead
    of 'grew up'.  The  section  on  'Knowledge  assessment'  is  similarly
    jejune: apart from a general view, it refers only  to  the  appellant's
    inability to recognize names of streets in Kenema or Freetown,  and  to
    the variety of occupations ascribed by the appellant  to  his  parents,
    whose names he doesn't remember.

31. The SPRAKAB report is challenged on the appellant's behalf  in  one  by
    Professor Peter L Patrick, dated 13 November 2011. Professor Patrick is
    Professor of Sociolinguistics at the University of Essex, and  as  such
    familiar with 'the accepted scientific frameworks  of  linguistics  and
    sociolinguistics'. While he  is  not  an  expert  in  the  dialects  or
    languages of West Africa, he is an expert in Jamaican Creole, to  which
    he says Krio is 'closely historically related[1]'.

32. Professor Patrick begins (at section 1, headlined 'My  own  expertise')
    by opining that the decision  in  RB   would  have  been  substantially
    different, if "an objective, independent scientific linguist" had  been
    consulted.  "By  contrast  to  Sprakab  staff,  I  have  a  substantial
    reputation as a scientific linguist". He says that SPRAKAB reports "...
    generally do not conform to the  minimum  acceptable  requirements  for
    scientific linguistic analysis", without making any attempt to  explain
    what those requirements are, and how SPRAKAB reports  in  general  fall
    short of them; but he says his colleagues in the  field  would  support
    him, if asked. He does however make it clear later, at 3 (r),  that  he
    is not himself qualified to  give  an  opinion  about  the  appellant's
    origin.

33. It seems these comments about RB  are directed towards the  conclusions
    expressed, closely related to the evidence taken by the  panel  in  the
    individual case before them, at paragraphs 164 and 169 of RB ; but they
    fail to deal with, or even to note the treatment at 165 -  166  of  the
    evidence of Professor Derek Nurse, emeritus Professor of Linguistics at
    St John's University, Newfoundland,  put  in  by  the  Immigration  Law
    Practitioners' Association, and discussed  at  paragraphs  136  -  142.
    Professor Nurse is listed as joint author of two of the works listed in
    Professor Patrick's list of references at appendix III.

34. A good deal of Professor Patrick's report is taken up  with  onslaughts
    on points in the SPRAKAB report which do not  form  the  basis  of  any
    conclusions expressed in it; for example, the appellant's not  speaking
    Krio, or English as his mother-tongue, or any West  African  vernacular
    language. He suggests that it was unfair not to assess his knowledge of
    Krio or vernaculars; but it is clear from the SPRAKAB report  (see  29)
    that he had himself disclaimed any knowledge of these languages.

35. Given the length of Professor Patrick's observations, I  shall  confine
    myself to those bearing directly on the point in issue,  which  is  the
    reliability or otherwise of SPRAKAB's conclusions about his speaking  a
    Nigerian, rather than a Sierra Leonean kind of English:  this  is  what
    they were asked to, and did report on by way of language analysis.

36. At paragraph 3 (h) Professor Patrick notes  the  poor  quality  of  the
    recording of the appellant's interview with which he was provided,  and
    which made it impossible for him to make his own assessment of  whether
    the appellant's English sounded native. This is of course  unfortunate,
    but, as Professor Patrick accepts, does  not  exclude  the  possibility
    that the original was of  better  quality.  I  should  also  note  that
    particular familiarity with particular dialects  or  speech  modes  may
    make assessment easier in any event, as everyone  knows  from  everyday
    life.

37. At paragraph 3 (j) Professor Patrick gives the view that

       What knowledge Sprakab's employees do possess of West African English
       appears to derive solely from the analysts' claimed status as  native
       speakers, and hence does not qualify as expert knowledge ...

      He does not say whether, and if so why they  would  have  been  better
    qualified to express an opinion on the appellant's speech if  they  had
    learnt their West African English at a university. However further  on,
    at 4 (b), Professor Patrick does indicate, by  reference  to  the  2004
    Guidelines for the Use of Language Analysis in Relation to Questions of
    National Origin in Refugee Cases, what sort of expertise he regards  as
    valid. The Guidelines, he says, were drawn up  by  a  committee  of  19
    linguists from various countries, "... 5 of whom were full  professors,
    at least 17 of whom held PhDs at the time, and at least  half  of  whom
    have  first-hand  experience  of  linguistic  analysis  in  the  asylum
    context". This body has set its own guideline for expertise,  which  it
    says

             ...  can  be  evidenced  by  holding  of  higher   degrees   in
    linguistics, peer reviewed publications, and membership of professional
    associations ... also from reports, which should use  ...  citation  of
    relevant academic publications ...

38. Professor Patrick goes on at 4 (c) - (i) to explain  how  in  his  view
    SPRAKAB analysts have fallen  short  of  academic  standards,  on  such
    points as training and publication of papers, as well as membership  of
    professional bodies, though he makes clear his view that this  last  is
    no guarantee of expertise on its own.

39. Meanwhile, at 3 (l)  -  (q),  Professor  Patrick  offers  a  number  of
    suggestions about how the appellant's language skills might fit in,  or
    not, with the history he had given. At 3 (l) Professor Patrick sets out
    the appellant's history, noting that in his first appeal he had claimed
    membership of the Kissi and Mende tribes, and in his second that he had
    never been to school and was illiterate when he arrived in this country
    in 1999. However at (m) Professor Patrick notes that he had always been
    content to be interviewed in English, which he said he had learnt  from
    his parents.

40. At 3 (o) Professor Patrick  says  that,  if  the  appellant  came  from
    Freetown as he said, and his parents chose to speak English rather than
    Krio with him, "... he might conceivably have Sierra Leonean English as
    his dominant native language", given the popularity of  English  world-
    wide and particularly in Freetown, over and above the  rest  of  Sierra
    Leone. At (p) Professor Patrick goes on to suggest that  the  appellant
    might have chosen, in a formal situation such as an interview,  to  use
    his own most standard English, which would have been  affected  by  his
    ten years (by then) in  this  country,  and  not  include  non-standard
    features as he might have done at home.  At  3  (q)  Professor  Patrick
    notes the lack of any clear-cut boundaries between English and Krio, as
    set out at nos. 9 and 10 of the 2004 Guidelines.

41. While I am prepared to accept all these points, so far as they go, they
    do not address one of the main negative features (from the  appellant's
    point of view) of the SPRAKAB report, which is  their  conclusion  that
    his English not only fails to show distinctive Sierra Leonean features,
    but does show Nigerian ones. I shall  have  to  consider  this  in  due
    course against the possibility that the appellant did grow up in Sierra
    Leone, as he says, but spent a long time in Nigeria when he  was  still
    young.; however Professor Patrick does not offer any  help  in  how  to
    approach this question.

42. Eventually (paragraph 4 (j), at p 12 of his report)  Professor  Patrick
    approaches the points noted by the SPRAKAB analysts. He makes a general
    point about whether their standard of comparison is  Krio,  or  'Sierra
    Leonean English', and whether a  distinction  should  have  been  drawn
    between the two. He says

       Phonetic brackets [?] and phonemic slashes /?/ are inconsistently and
       incorrectly used, so that the  pronunciation  status  of  the  sounds
       uttered cannot be clearly determined with respect to the varieties to
       which analysis assigns them.

    However Professor  Patrick  does  not  give  any  examples  of  such  a
    solecism, nor explain the function of either brackets or slashes.

43. Finally reaching the points of difference themselves, Professor Patrick
    deals with some of them as follows at 4 (k):

       . "He omits the pronunciation  of  dental  plosive  /t/  in  certain
         positions"

       o ex.: "paren[t]s"

    Professor Patrick's own view on this feature is  that  it  "...  occurs
    variably in all known English dialects, including standard American and
    British English as well as Krio and West African Englishes"

44. To support  this  proposition,  Professor  Patrick  cites  one  of  his
    sources, which from the title in his list seems to be a kind of general
    encyclopedia of varieties of English. However, he  does  not  cite  any
    specific support for the proposition which he  goes  on  to  formulate,
    which is that "Its occurrence does not distinguish Krio or West African
    Englishes from each other, and it is therefore not diagnostic for  [the
    appellant]'s speech".

   45. I shall go on to Professor Patrick's next point.

    . "He omits the pronunciation of alveolar lateral approximant /l/ ... He
      pronounces alveolar lateral approximant [l], in comparison to alveolar
      trill /r/ ..."

       Professor Patrick makes the  obvious  point  that  this  is  not  two
       features, but one: "the variable treatment  of  liquid  sounds  is  a
       widespread feature of West African languages and the creole languages
       descended from them. [Here he cites two other works] It is  an  areal
       feature  found  widely  across  West  Africa  and,  again,  does  not
       distinguish Krio or West African Englishes from each other, and it is
       therefore not diagnostic for [the appellant]'s speech".

  46. Professor Patrick's third and last detailed point on the  phonological
      evidence is this:

       .  "He pronounces aspirated dental plosive [th],  compared  to  non-
         aspirated /t/ ...

       o  Examples  are  given  of  intervocalic  and  initial  pre-vocalic
         'environments'.

       Professor Patrick makes a similar objection here to the  point  noted
       on the left-out /t/ and the [l] for /r/.

47. After making these objections, Professor Patrick goes on:

       Some of these features  might  have  been  traced  to  the  scholarly
       literature on Krio and West African  Englishes  [three  examples  are
       given] though SPRAKAB - whose analyst claims  to  know  the  language
       [sc. Krio] has made no effort to do so. What is more  striking  to  a
       linguist is the absence of analysis, or description, or even  mention
       of any diagnostic features that Sprakab may consider to be diagnostic
       of one variety of language rather than another. Nothing is said  here
       to support or explain the contrast between Krio and the various  West
       African English dialects - the basis of  their  conclusion  -  or  to
       refer it to existing literature.

48. There follows a criticism of SPRAKAB's not differentiating between, for
    example, obligatory and voluntary occurrences of  certain  usages,  for
    which Professor  Patrick  blames  not  only  the  analysts,  but  their
    supervising linguist. Next comes a diatribe against  the  analysts  for
    not using the International Phonetic Alphabet [IPA] as  they  promised.
    Professor Patrick claims that there are 64 instances in  18  word-pairs
    where IPA characters are not used, but  instead  "non-phonetic  symbols
    which do not belong to the IPA and have no clear interpretation.  In  a
    word, they are  nonsense  symbols";  however  he  neither  lists  these
    instances, nor even gives any examples of them. He may or  may  not  be
    entitled to blame the SPRAKAB analysts for flouting the basic rules  of
    scientific language analysis; but it is impossible for me to reach  any
    independent view as to whether he is right or wrong, because,  contrary
    to the basic rules for expert witnesses, he has himself failed in  this
    case to provide me with the means of doing so.

49.  Turning  to  Professor  Patrick's  views  on   SPRAKAB's   grammatical
    (morphological/syntactic) points, he  appears  at  first  sight  to  be
    making  a  justifiable  criticism  at  (p)  of  their   comparing   the
    appellant's English with the standard version,  rather  than  with  the
    kind spoken in Sierra Leone. Unfortunately  however  Professor  Patrick
    has not read the section concerned quite  carefully  enough:  what  the
    analysts say here, in their own words is

       The person's manner of forming words and phrases is not typical of  a
       variety of English spoken in  Sierra  Leone.  The  person  constructs
       phrases in a manner typical of a variety of English spoken in Nigeria
       or Ghana.

50. Clearly it is the features in the appellant's  English  which  make  it
    typically Nigerian or Ghanaian that are being illustrated here, and not
    those which make it different from that spoken  in  Sierra  Leone.  The
    standard English equivalents are  simply  provided  for  reference  and
    comprehension: while Professor Patrick uses the examples  he  gives  to
    attempt to enlist the reader in  making  SPRAKAB  look  ridiculous  "It
    should be evident to non-experts that the  analysts  are  here  judging
    [the appellant] negatively for speaking West  African  English  grammar
    instead of using the Queen's English in formal mode", it is not SPRAKAB
    who end up looking that way.

51. A little thought would have led to the conclusion  that  SPRAKAB  could
    not possibly be blaming the  appellant  for  deviating  from  a  Sierra
    Leonean norm, when they explained 'long time I left' as  'I  left  [the
    country] a long time ago'. It is unfortunate  that  an  expert  witness
    taking part "... in a scientific analysis which may determine  a  man's
    fate" (to borrow Professor Patrick's own words in criticising SPRAKAB),
    should not have reflected on this.

52. On the other hand, when Professor Patrick takes the trouble to  make  a
    specific linguistic point, as he does at (q), then it  is  possible  to
    accept his opinion on some points  without  reservation.  Many  of  the
    points made by SPRAKAB in  their  grammatical  section  relate  to  the
    appellant's failing to  mark  the  past  tense,  compared  to  standard
    English usage: as Professor Patrick explains, this is a common  feature
    of West African English, and appears in other varieties world-wide[2].

53. One exception to that generalization, as Professor Patrick points  out,
    is the stigmatization by SPRAKAB of the appellant's use  (in  Professor
    Patrick's orthography) of "A de for Kenema" as opposed to "A bin tap na
    Kenema". This is a point where Professor Patrick  can  and  does  claim
    some specific expertise, since his 2007 book identifies the  former  as
    typical of Krio. I am prepared to accept his statement that the  latter
    is equally typical, so that this cannot be taken as a point against the
    appellant.  The  only  thing  that  prevents  it  from  being  a  point
    positively in his favour is that Professor Patrick's expertise does not
    go so far as to show that either of these usages  is  not   typical  of
    Nigerian English.

54. Another exception refers to the expression  "I'm  hearing  you",  where
    Professor Patrick is clearly right in saying that this can be heard  in
    many varieties of English, though I have  to  differ  from  him  (as  a
    native speaker of the standard form, which as an American  he  is  not)
    about its being 'standard English grammar'. The result is that I do not
    place any reliance on SPRAKAB's views on  the  grammatical  or  lexical
    features of the appellant's speech; nor do I think it would be right to
    rely on their assessment of his cultural and geographical knowledge  of
    Sierra Leone, which perhaps inevitably formed  only  a  small  part  of
    their report.

55. The remainder of Professor  Patrick's  report  is  concerned  with  the
    inadequacy of SPRAKAB's linguistic sampling, with  'Legally  recognized
    standards in forensic linguistic practice', and with the  questions  of
    whether SPRAKAB analysts are qualified for their  r�le,  or  under  any
    institutional pressures to come to particular conclusions. I shall  not
    concern myself, beyond one or two points referring to RB  with what may
    be called the theoretical side  of  these  questions,  because  it  has
    already been authoritatively established in   that  decision  that  the
    makers of SPRAKAB reports are entitled in principle to  be  treated  as
    expert witnesses. I shall  then  move  on  to  any  challenges  to  the
    individual report in the present case.

56. Professor Patrick refers to the 2010 Practice Directions of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the general requirements for expert witnesses:  this  point
    was dealt with by the panel in RB, but as he  does  not  seem  to  have
    taken any notice of what they said about it at paragraph 167,  it  will
    bear repeating:

       It might be said (although it was not said  in  the  present  appeal)
       that Sprakab reports should be ignored or treated as of  less  weight
       because they do not  comply  with  Practice  Directions  relating  to
       expert evidence. We do not think that would be right.  In  the  first
       place the reports do indicate, within the limits of the anonymity  we
       have held to be justifiable, the identity and  qualification  of  the
       writers. Secondly, unlike many "expert reports", they come in essence
       from an organisation  rather  than  an  individual,  and  it  is  the
       characteristics  and  methods  of  the  organisation  that   are   of
       importance in this context. Thirdly, they are typically prepared  for
       a decision-maker and not for an appeal, and so it is not  appropriate
       to impose on them rules relating to  evidence  prepared  specifically
       for use in litigation.

57. The last sentence contains the only point on which the decision  in  RB
    was disapproved by the Court of Appeal; so the rest  of  the  paragraph
    stands. Though this question had not been argued before  the  panel  in
    that case, they had clearly given it serious thought, and I  intend  to
    follow the first and second part of the views they gave.

58. The other general point which needs mentioning here is the one taken by
    Professor Patrick on  AA  (Language  diagnosis:  use  of  interpreters)
    Somalia [2008] UKAIT  00029.  AA,  like  RB,  was  written  by  Mr  CMG
    Ockelton, and his judicial head-note is correctly  cited  by  Professor
    Patrick:

       It is no part of an interpreter's function to report on the  language
       or dialect used.  The expertise needed  to  identify  a  language  or
       dialect is not typically the expertise of  an  interpreter.   In  any
       event, an interpreter should not be in the  position  of  giving,  or
       being asked to give, evidence on a contested issue.

    The point taken by Professor Patrick on that is that "...  even  expert
    interpreters - whose qualifications exceed those of 247 and 207  -  are
    not competent to make an expert  assessment  of  claimant's  speech  as
    belonging to a particular language or dialect".

59. AA was not referred to in RB, though Mr Ockelton would  certainly  have
    had it in mind. The decision  was  not  about  someone  called  or  put
    forward as an expert witness on behalf  of  the  appellant;  but  of  a
    Tribunal interpreter who counsel for the appellant  wished  to  use  as
    one, a fundamental difficulty perhaps more  apparent  to  the  judicial
    than the academic reader. The suggestion that this might have been done
    was rejected in the strongest terms:

       It is  in  our  view  in  the  highest  degree  undesirable  for  the
       interpreter as a Court official to be asked to contribute in any  way
       to the determination of a contested issue.

60. Such interest as the decision in  AA  has  for  present  purposes  lies
    however in the other basis on which  the  Tribunal  rejected  counsel's
    proposal: This is best seen in the following passage, from paragraph 7:

       An interpreter's function is to comprehend and  communicate,  not  to
       assess or analyse.  A person's skills in interpretation  lie  in  his
       ability to understand what is being said to him in one  language  (or
       dialect) and  communicate  it  accurately  in  another  language  (or
       dialect).  It is simply  wrong  to  say  that  the  abilities  of  an
       interpreter necessarily import an ability to  distinguish  accurately
       between different dialects and to be able to  attribute  dialects  to
       different sources.  A person  whose  first  language  is  French  may
       attain  standards  of  near  perfection  in  English  interpretation,
       without being able to say with accuracy whether he is dealing with  a
       person from Ipswich or Indiana, or even with a person whose own first
       language was not  English.   As  an  interpreter  he  may  widen  his
       vocabulary base  and  his  understanding  of  different  accents  and
       dialects so that he can cope with whatever version of English is used
       by the person for whom he is interpreting, without needing or wanting
       or being required to consider or work out what the  dialect  is,  but
       merely to do his own job  of  understanding  and  communicating.   Of
       course an interpreter may know (or think he  knows)  something  about
       the  type  of  language  or  dialect  the  person  for  whom  he   is
       interpreting is using: but that is quite a different matter.   It  is
       not part of his function as interpreter.

61. The point being made there  is  not  that  people  with  the  kinds  of
    language skills possessed by an interpreter will not  by  their  nature
    have  the  necessary  expertise  for  what  might  be  called  language
    diagnosis; but that this is not  an  interpreter's  job,  and  that  it
    cannot be assumed, as counsel had suggested, that  someone  doing  that
    job would necessarily have the skills required for language  diagnosis.
    As for the ordinary language skills of either a Tribunal interpreter or
    a SPRAKAB analyst, it is not clear on what basis Professor  Patrick  is
    qualified to comment on them.

62. Going on to the points specific  to  this  case,  at  paragraph  5  (h)
    Professor Patrick takes points on the stated  origins  of  the  present
    analysts, which (see 28) are said to be respectively Sierra Leone (247)
    and 'Nigeria/Ghana' (207). Professor Patrick's points are  as  follows.
    Analyst 207 is later said to have been born  in  Ghana,  "...  and  has
    resided [Professor Patrick's emphasis] in Nigeria for a  longer  period
    of time". Professor Patrick goes on  to  make  the  apparently  obvious
    point that origin and residence are not the same thing, and severely to
    criticize SPRAKAB on the basis that they  have  got  the  two  concepts
    mixed up. Then he refers to a previous report, in which the origins  of
    the same analysts as  in  this  case  are  given  differently:  'Sierra
    Leone/Liberia' (247),  and  'Nigeria'  (207).  This  Professor  Patrick
    describes with some scorn as "tailoring of analysts' claims about their
    own identity to fit the analysis in hand".



63. I am not going to apologize for referring to two very  basic  facts  of
    human biology, because it seems they have been  rather  lost  sight  of
    here. Every person (so far in the history of science) has two  parents;
    but can only be born in one place. If one reads the details  given  for
    analyst 207 in the present report with any care, it is clear that he[3]
    was born in Ghana; but that his mother tongue is Hausa, not a  language
    of Ghana, but one of Nigeria. If biography were really the issue, it is
    quite easy to re-construct 207's: though he was born in Ghana,  one  of
    his parents must have been Nigerian. There is nothing  illegitimate  or
    misleading, for those who are not looking for mistakes  for  their  own
    sake, about such a person describing themselves as  of  'Nigeria/Ghana'
    origin, and then going on to explain that, though born in  Ghana,  they
    have lived longer in Nigeria.

64. So far as the details given in the other case are relevant,  it  is  to
    the suggestion of bad faith on  the  part  of  the  analysts,  made  by
    Professor Patrick. Here it is necessary to look at the purpose  of  the
    report: in the present case the appellant had claimed to be from Sierra
    Leone, so that any part-Liberian origins analyst 247 may have had  were
    not relevant to his diagnostic skills,  but  only  his  connexion  with
    Sierra Leone;  however  Professor  Patrick  gives  no  details  of  the
    contested claim in the other case to which he refers.

65. Again, returning to analyst 207, the Sierra Leone High  Commission  had
    suggested (see 23) that the appellant could possibly be from Nigeria or
    Ghana; so that is likely to have been the way in  which  the  issue  in
    this case was presented to SPRAKAB, making it  entirely  understandable
    that 247 should have described himself as  from  'Nigeria/Ghana'.  Once
    again, Professor Patrick has not set out  the  issue  in  the  previous
    case, where any connexion with Ghana may have been irrelevant.

66. Findings of fact   I have already found (at 22 and 26) that there is no
    reasonable likelihood but that the appellant did instruct Abbot & Co to
    secure his removal to Nigeria in 2006, and did claim to an official  of
    the Nigerian High Commission in 2009 that he was a Nigerian citizen. So
    far as his speech is concerned, I have to choose  between  SPRAKAB  and
    Professor Patrick; not in the  constructive  sense  of  preferring  one
    language diagnosis to another, because Professor Patrick  accepts  that
    he is not qualified to give one  in  this  case,  but  by  way  of  his
    inevitably destructive analysis of SPRAKAB's methods and views.

67. I have already made it clear that I  do  not  consider  that  SPRAKAB's
    assessment of the grammatical or lexical features  of  the  appellant's
    speech can be relied on for a diagnosis,  nor  their  views  about  his
    knowledge of Sierra Leone, or lack of it; so the language diagnosis  in
    this case has to depend on the phonological  features  they  noted.  On
    this head I have dealt individually at 43 - 46 with the three  specific
    items  in  their  assessment  which  Professor  Patrick  felt  able  to
    challenge; but there are five others, on which he makes no comment.

68. I shall deal with the overall assessment of  phonological  features  in
    the light  of  Professor  Patrick's  general  challenges  to  SPRAKAB's
    position and methods, and  begin  by  reviewing  the  comments  I  have
    already made about those, referring  to  previous  paragraphs  of  this
    decision. His  only  challenge  to  the  SPRAKAB  report,  specifically
    directed to the  question  of  whether  its  phonological  presentation
    prevents its being independently assessed, is  dealt  with  at  48.  As
    pointed out  there,  Professor  Patrick's  challenge  itself  fails  to
    provide the necessary detail for independent assessment either. At 63 -
    65 I have given reasons for rejecting his claim of  bad  faith  on  the
    part of the individual analysts in declaring their origins.

69. So far as Professor Patrick's strictures on  the  general  position  of
    SPRAKAB are concerned, of course I bear in mind that they were not  put
    before the Tribunal in RB; but in  my  judgment  the  general  approach
    taken there remains valid, and there is nothing in it contrary  to  the
    previous decision in AA, for the reasons given at 58 - 61. Furthermore,
    the Tribunal in RB  give detailed reasons for their views at paragraphs
    154 - 169 of their decision, with  which  Professor  Patrick  makes  no
    attempt to deal, but which themselves deal  with  the  expert  evidence
    before them from Professor Nurse (about which  Professor  Patrick  says
    nothing either).  These  reasons  led  them  to  the  conclusion  that,
    contrary to the challenges made to SPRAKAB's methods and  impartiality,
    "SPRAKAB evidence is of high quality and its opinions are  entitled  to
    very considerable weight".

70. All I want to add to that assessment is by way of drawing together  the
    points already  made  on  Professor  Patrick's  general  views  on  the
    qualifications required by expert witnesses. He  begins  by  suggesting
    that valid language diagnosis evidence can only be given by 'scientific
    linguists', such as himself for example; but (see  32)  does  not  list
    what in his view the minimum acceptable standards for such an  analysis
    might be. At 37 - 38 he makes it clear that he does not  regard  native
    speakers of a language as having any expert knowledge of  it,  contrary
    to the position of those who  possess  the  highly  academic  forms  of
    accreditation referred to by the committee  responsible  for  the  2004
    Guidelines. Professor Patrick makes his own position clear by  vaunting
    the academic qualifications of the committee themselves, five out of 19
    being full professors, and at least 17 having PhDs. While he does  also
    mention that at least  half  of  them  have  first-hand  experience  of
    language analysis, it is quite clear  that  Professor  Patrick  is  not
    inclined to regard anyone without academic qualifications as a  genuine
    expert.

71. Helpful as academic opinions may sometimes be, this of  course  is  not
    the position taken by the law. For present purposes, an expert  witness
    may be taken as someone who not only  has  knowledge  of  a  particular
    subject, not possessed by the ordinary person (which of course  is  the
    position of any native speaker of a language which is not that  of  the
    country where the expertise is to be exercised); but also  is  able  to
    give an explanation for his conclusions on that subject in a way  which
    can be independently verified or invalidated.

72. This is not something the average native speaker, or even  the  average
    court interpreter is capable  of  doing;  but  it  is  something  which
    SPRAKAB analysts can and do provide, by explaining  their  findings  in
    recognizable phonetic  terms.  I  have  already  dealt  with  Professor
    Patrick's challenges to the way in which these analysts have  done  so;
    and it also has to  be pointed out that his strictures on their methods
    have not stopped him giving his own comments on the three  phonological
    features out of seven noted by him on which he felt qualified to do so.

73. I shall now turn to my own assessment of the phonological evidence as a
    whole, dealing first with the points  on  which  it  is  challenged  by
    Professor Patrick. I am inclined to  accept  what  he  says  about  the
    appellant's omission of dental plosive /t/ in  certain  positions:  any
    native speaker of English will be aware that  it  may  happen,  in  the
    example given ('parents') in any spoken variety of the language.

74. If Professor Patrick's next point ([l] for /r/ for short), were  simply
    a question of straight  'l'  for  'r'  substitution,  as  his  comments
    suggest, then again it is common knowledge that this may  happen  in  a
    number of varieties of spoken English, though not in the standard kind.
    However, Professor Patrick's comments significantly leave out the words
    "in certain positions", which appear in the original SPRAKAB report  at
    this point. The examples given there are of a very specific kind, where
    an intervocalic 'r' is not pronounced, as  in  'during'  and  'period'.
    This is not such a well-known feature at all, and  Professor  Patrick's
    challenge to it as being diagnostic goes  no  further  than  a  general
    citation of two writers for the  proposition  that  "...  the  variable
    treatment of liquid sounds is a  widespread  feature  of  West  African
    languages and the Creole languages descended from them".

75. That is no more than I have accepted in  the  first  sentence  of  this
    paragraph, put into academic language and  related  to  the  particular
    group in question. I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  that  the  SPRAKAB
    analysts in this case, who were well  aware  they  were  comparing  the
    appellant's pronunciation, not with standard English, but  with  either
    the  Sierra  Leonean  or  Nigerian  versions,  were  not   capable   of
    recognizing the appellant's speech on this point as corresponding  with
    the latter, and not with the former.

76. Professor  Patrick's  third  comment  (about  the  appellant's  use  of
    aspirated [th]], instead of non-aspirated /t/) also significantly omits
    the original's "in certain positions". Again, if one takes the  trouble
    to look at the original report, some of the examples given  are  of  an
    aspirated initial 't', which may be  a  familiar  feature  of  standard
    English, noticeable for example when speakers try out their French.  On
    the other hand, some do not fall into this category at  all:  one  very
    noticeable one is the pronunciation of Freetown, the capital of  Sierra
    Leone, but no doubt a well-known place in Nigeria too. This is  notably
    different in SPRAKAB's phonetic rendition of  the  appellant's  speech;
    and it can hardly be supposed that there would have  been  any  mistake
    about his pronunciation of the name of what he says was his home town.

77. Taking into account the five phonological points noted by SPRAKAB which
    stand  uncontradicted  by  Professor  Patrick,  I  have  accepted   his
    challenge to only one out of eight points made by them  in  this  area.
    While of course my general view does not depend on any mere  score,  on
    all the evidence on this subject I  have  no  doubt  that  the  SPRAKAB
    analysts are correct when they say he "...  has  a  pronunciation  with
    certainty not found in any variety of English spoken in Sierra  Leone",
    and, in the case of the last point ([th] for /t/), is "... typical of a
    variety of English spoken in  Nigeria  and  Ghana."  SPRAKAB's  general
    comments end with the conclusion that the appellant speaks a variety of
    English found most likely in Nigeria or Ghana.



CONCLUSIONS

78. Issues  Having found that  in  2006  the  appellant  declared  himself,
    through solicitors, as returnable to  Nigeria,  and  in  2006,  to  the
    Nigerian High Commission, as a citizen of that  country,  and  that  in
    2009 he spoke English, at least from a phonological point of view,  not
    in any way found in Sierra  Leone,  but,  in  at  least  one  instance,
    typical of Nigeria, I now have to consider whether those  findings  are
    compatible with his own account, repeated to the Home  Office  and  the
    appellate authorities on many occasions, that he was born and  grew  up
    in Sierra Leone, and only went to Nigeria when he was  15,  staying  on
    for over ten years, but without having any further connexion with  that
    country.

79. The appellant's consistency in that account (overlooking what  he  said
    to the Nigerian High Commission) was strongly urged on his behalf by Mr
    Chirico, as is usually the case when  an  asylum-seeker  has  not  been
    inconsistent in accounts given over a period. Of course consistency  is
    in the historian's favour; but it ought to be recognized as  a  natural
    feature of people in  general  when  telling  a  true  story,  and  not
    something to marvel at in an asylum-seeker.

80. Mental health      In assessing the appellant's own motives for what he
    said when he did, as opposed to his way of talking, I need to  look  at
    the relevant evidence about his mental state. From his  patient  record
    for his second period in prison, that seems first to have  given  cause
    for concern on 12 September 2007: a registered mental health nurse  who
    saw him on 30 January  2008  found  him  rational,  but  frustrated  at
    remaining in immigration detention. However on 18 March 2008 a  genito-
    urinary surgeon who had seen him about something else  noted  that  his
    history showed he had been admitted to hospital in March  2007  because
    of a mental health breakdown, and that the appellant himself  had  told
    him he had been considered suicidal in April that year.

81. Perhaps as a result of what the surgeon had said, on  8  May  2008  the
    well-known  Professor  Cornelius  Katona  saw  the  appellant  at   the
    Colnbrook Removal Centre,  and  described  him  as  "pleasant  and  co-
    operative throughout his interview",  but  suffering  from  "depressive
    disorder with  psychotic  features"  and  PTSD  {post-traumatic  stress
    disorder].  In  September  and  October  that   year   two   consultant
    psychiatrists agreed that he was suffering from  mental  illness  which
    made it appropriate for him to be detained in  a  hospital  for  mental
    treatment. One (Dr Bolonna) agreed with Professor Katona's diagnosis of
    "depressive disorder with psychotic features"; the other (Dr  Grummitt)
    agreed he was psychotic, reporting 'hearing voices'.

82. The appellant  was  duly  admitted  to  hospital,  from  where  he  was
    discharged on 22 December 2008. The  discharge  report  noted  that  he
    acknowledged that his mental state had improved since he was  admitted:
    he was described as follows

       His mood is objectively more  reactive.  He  don't  have  any  active
       suicidal thoughts  or  plans.  He  was  able  to  think  clearly  and
       logically. There was no formal thought disorder or any delusions.  He
       still hears voices but they were less distressing now. His  attention
       and concentration has improved. He has good insight into  his  mental
       illness and has been compliant with his prescribed medication.

83. Further expressions of concern about the appellant's mental health,  on
    his return to detention, by a retired  GP  (Dr  Charmian  Goldwyn)  and
    others who saw him, including a consultant  forensic  psychiatrist  (Dr
    Rachel Daly) on 25 June 2009, led to a  visit  to  him  on  14  August,
    resulting in a report dated 8 October by Dr Sameer Sarkar, who holds an
    American diploma in psychiatry. Dr Sarkar says he did  not  do  a  full
    risk assessment, but noted "the hopelessness associated  with  infinite
    detention (and the length of it - some 21  months)".  While  Dr  Sarkar
    expressed concern for the appellant, and mentioned the appellant's  own
    worries about what he thought would happen to him, he did not give  any
    further opinion as to his lucidity or otherwise.

84. Conclusions  The main difficulty about the language diagnosis  evidence
    on its own is that the SPRAKAB analysts were unaware that the appellant
    had always claimed to have left Sierra Leone for Nigeria  when  he  was
    15; however the language diagnosis evidence does not stand on its  own.
    Dealing with that point, however, the  analysts  took  the  appellant's
    history as he gave it them, and at least  they  cannot  be  blamed  for
    working to a Home Office agenda on it.  I  should  have  welcomed  some
    expert evidence, from Professor Patrick or anyone else suitable,  about
    how far a 15-year old who goes to another country, where  the  official
    language is the same as his own, and spends about ten years  there  may
    be expected, not only to  take  on  the  speech  patterns  of  his  new
    country, but to lose those of his own.

85. Without such evidence, I simply have to do the best  I  can  to  assess
    what is before me in the light of common sense and common knowledge. On
    that basis, I still consider it remarkable that someone  who  lived  in
    Freetown for his first 15 years should so completely have taken on  the
    speech patterns of his new country as to pronounce even the name of his
    own home town according  to  them,  and  I  still  regard  the  SPRAKAB
    phonological evidence as going contrary to that version of events.

86. Abbot & Co's letter of 2006 does not of course go directly contrary  to
    that version, because it too has the appellant leaving Sierra Leone for
    Nigeria when he was 15: however, it  mentions  the  appellant's  mother
    being Nigerian, which is not something he has ever said anywhere  else.
    This is significant, because it was no doubt on that basis that he  was
    asserting in that letter that he could be returned  to  Nigeria.  While
    the contents of the letter are  not  otherwise  incompatible  with  the
    basis the appellant has given for his asylum and  human  rights  claim,
    relating to Sierra Leone, they are certainly compatible with his  being
    returnable to Nigeria.

87. What the appellant told the Nigerian High Commission in  2009  is  also
    not incompatible with that version of events, so long as he did have  a
    Nigerian mother (not having any other claim to that citizenship, so far
    as is known). It is possible that the appellant does come  from  Sierra
    Leone, but had a Nigerian mother, by right of whom he  might  (and,  in
    view of his acceptance as a citizen by the High Commission) would  more
    likely than not be entitled to Nigerian citizenship, and  through  whom
    he might have acquired early Nigerian speech-patterns.



88. However that is no more than speculation, because it has never been  in
    this appellant's interests to declare a Nigerian  mother,  except  when
    dealing with the  Nigerian  High  Commission.  I  have  considered  the
    possibility that he deliberately gave  them  a  false  account  on  two
    occasions (the first  time  through  Abbot  &  Co),  preferring  to  be
    returned to Nigeria,  rather  than  remain  in  custody  here;  but  is
    nevertheless a native of Sierra Leone, and not returnable  to  Nigeria.
    However, the appellant has disclaimed any memory of giving that account
    at all, and again  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  that  it  is  even
    reasonably likely he might have done so for that reason.

89. What I am not prepared to accept, for the reasons I have given, is  the
    appellant's own case, involving birth in Sierra  Leone  to  two  Sierra
    Leonean parents, with no other connexion with Nigeria beyond ten years'
    residence from the age of 15. Whether the standard of proof he  has  to
    meet on this point is the balance of probabilities, or merely by way of
    showing a reasonable likelihood (as to which see  3  -  4),  I  do  not
    accept that this appellant is not returnable to  Nigeria,  and  so  the
    condition precedent to his asylum and human rights claim, based on  the
    consequences of return to Sierra Leone, is not met.

Appeal dismissed



                               [pic]                           (a judge of
                                   the Upper Tribunal)


-----------------------
[1]   Creole might be described as the language of  transported  slaves  who
    had lost their own, and more particularly their descendants; while Krio
    is that spoken by  freed  slaves,  returned  to  their  own  continent,
    without being able to speak any language from Africa.
[2]   Professor Patrick refers to the same encyclopedia  as  before;  but  I
    can speak from several years' judicial experience in  a  country  where
    the local pidgin was the everyday language of the courts.
[3]   In this decision, as under the Interpretation Act 1889, the  masculine
    includes the feminine, unless the context otherwise requires.

