
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15332/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd September 2014                          |On 29th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr Ubaid Ali Khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Omotosho, promulgated on 4th June 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 28th May 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of Ubaid Ali  Khan.   The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    applied for,  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  7th
    November 1985.  He appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 23rd April 2013 refusing his application for a
    variation of leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under the points-based system.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant entered the UK as a student on 8th March  2005.   He  was
    granted a series of successive further grounds of leave to remain as  a
    student.  On 10th March 2010,  and  on  16th  June  2010  and  on  22nd
    September 2010, his applications for further leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student were refused.  However, on 13th November 2011,  his
    application for a student leave was  granted  until  10th  April  2011.
    This was then valid to 14th February 2013.  When on 12th December 2012,
    his application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
    was made this was then refused on 23rd April 2013.

 4. The basis of the refusal was that the Appellant had failed to provide a
    letter from a legal representative with respect to third-party support,
    as required by Appendix A.  He had also failed to provide  evidence  of
    his directorship of the company, which he  had  set  up,  in  the  form
    required, and there was no evidence that he had  sent  the  shareholder
    certificate as claimed.

The Judge's Findings

 5. At the hearing before  Judge  Omotosho,  the  representation  from  the
    Respondent Secretary of State was to the effect that the  appeal  could
    not succeed quite simply because the requirements  of  paragraph  245AA
    had not been met.

 6. For his part, Mr Bellara, of Counsel, submitted that  the  applications
    in this context have to be considered with commonsense and fairness and
    that if the caseworker in question had made a request for the requisite
    documents to be produced, they would have been  forthcoming.   Reliance
    was  placed  by  Mr  Bellara  upon  the  application   of   "evidential
    flexibility",  as  affirmed  by  the  Upper   Tribunal   in   Rodriguez
    (Flexibility policy) [2013] UKUT 00042.

 7. The judge applied  the  Upper  Tribunal's  determination  in  Rodriguez
    (Flexibility policy) [2013] 00042 and held that had  full  effect  been
    given  to  the  requirements  of  the  evidential  flexibility   policy
    document, and had a request been made  for  further  evidence,  in  the
    interests of fairness, then the  Appellant  would  have  been  able  to
    furnish  the  necessary  documentation.   The  judge  held   that   the
    discretion should have been exercised differently  in  accordance  with
    the Respondent's own flexibility policy (see paragraph 22).  The appeal
    was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application assert  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to give due  regard  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in
    Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2, which had overruled the  determination  of
    the Upper Tribunal in the same  case,  and  held  that  the  evidential
    flexibility  policy  is  not  "designed  to  give  an   applicant   the
    opportunity first to remedy any defect or inadequacy in the application
    or supporting documentation so as to save the application refusal after
    substantive consideration" (see paragraph 92).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on 6th August 2014 by the Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Kandola, appearing as Counsel on behalf of
    the Respondent Secretary of State, placed reliance upon  Rodriguez  and
    submitted that the judge had done precisely that  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Rodriguez had indicated was not open to the judge.  The judge
    had fallen into error only because he had  been  guided  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal determination in Rodriguez (Flexibility policy) [2013]  00042.
    The fact was that there was no flexibility open to the judge.  The only
    flexibility was in relation to those matters specifically so enumerated
    in the policy itself.  That policy did not state that a  document  that
    was "foreseeable" as being in existence could be requested.  Therefore,
    I should set aside the decision and dismiss the appeal.

11. For his part, Mr Bellara submitted that since  the  share  certificates
    were there (and this had been confirmed by Mr Kandola this  morning  as
    well) then the Secretary of State should properly have made  a  request
    for evidence of the directorship.  Secondly,  whilst  it  was  accepted
    that the legal representative's letter had not been sent, if one looked
    at the latest redraft of the evidential flexibility policy (promulgated
    in February 2014), which Mr Bellara handed up, it was clear that  there
    was a degree of flexibility open to the decision maker.

12. In reply, Mr Kandola  submitted  that  the  new  form  of  Rule  245AA,
    promulgated in February 2014,  is  at  odds  with  the  Rule  that  was
    applicable at the time (see Phelan at page 676).  It was right that the
    applicable law at the time of the decision had to be applied.   In  any
    event, the documentation with respect to the  shareholder  certificate,
    could only be properly requested, if it formed part of  a  sequence  of
    documents, where one was missing.  There was no requirement to  request
    documents that could be deemed "foreseeable".

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as  follows.   First,
    the judge erred in  being  guided  by  the  Tribunal  determination  in
    Rodriguez [2013] 00042.  The applicable  authority  was  the  Court  of
    Appeal judgment in Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2.  This  makes  it  quite
    clear that "requests for information should  not  be  speculative"  and
    that "there must be sufficient reasons to  believe  that  any  evidence
    requested existed".  Moreover, as far as evidential flexibility  policy
    is concerned, it is not "designed to give an applicant the  opportunity
    to first remedy any defect or inadequacy in the application ..."

14. In the instant case, the Appellant  had  simply  failed  to  provide  a
    required legal representative's letter, and the policy  did  not  cover
    this failure, as is now clear following the Court of Appeal's judgment.



15. Second, the Appellant also did not demonstrate he was the director of a
    UK company because he failed to provide a specified document such as to
    meet the requirements of Appendix A.  That omission also could  not  be
    rectified by having recourse  to  the  evidential  flexibility  policy.
    Accordingly, the judge fell into error.

Remaking the Decision

16. In remaking the decision, I have had regard  to  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons  that  I
    have set out above.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This appeal is dismissed.

18. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th September 2014

