
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15458/2014
                                                               IA/15462/2014
                                                               IA/15473/2014
                                                               IA/15482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 6th May 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                       Rhea Lachica (First Appellant)
                      rommel Lachica (Second Appellant)
                   Chino Angelo Lachica (Third Appellant)
                   Carlo Angelo Lachica (Fourth Appellant)
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. S. Kamal, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellants  are  all  citizens  of  the  Philippines.   The  first
    appellant was born on 26 October 1968 and the second  appellant  on  26
    October 1971.  They are husband and  wife  and  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants are their children born respectively on 9 February 1997  and
    18 January 2002.  No application has been previously made for anonymity
    and there is no reason for such an order to be made.

 2. They appealed against a decision of the respondent  on  14  March  2014
    refusing the first appellant's application for leave to remain with the
    other three appellants being dependent upon her appeal.

 3. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and  stayed
    for six months in 2003.  She re-entered in 2005, again  as  a  visitor,
    and then on 1 September 2006 returned with the  benefit  of  a  student
    visa valid until 31 October 2007.  Her husband joined her with a  valid
    visa in October 2008 and both their  children  in  January  2009.   The
    first appellant then applied for leave to remain as a student with  her
    spouse and two children and this was granted in 2011.

 4. The appeal hearing took place in Birmingham on 9 September 2014  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cheales who in a decision  promulgated
    on 30 September 2014 dismissed the appellants' appeals.

 5. The appellants could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    which the  judge  found,  at  paragraph  11  of  her  decision,  to  be
    recognised within the grounds of appeal.  She went on to conclude  that
    there were no arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  that
    were not recognised within the Immigration Rules themselves taking into
    account the evidence that she heard from the appellants.   The  nub  of
    that evidence was to the  effect  that  the  appellants  preferred  the
    lifestyle in the United Kingdom and wished to remain.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Mark Davies, but was subsequently granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Reeds on 12 February 2015.

 7. Her reasons for so granting were:-

         "1.  The grounds contend that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  an
             adjournment application  that  was  made  on  the  appellants'
             behalf; their  barrister  having  been  taken  ill  the  night
             before.  There is no reference in  the  determination  to  any
             application made for an adjournment  or  the  basis  of  that,
             however, there is a fax in the court file from the appellants'
             representatives seeking an adjournment on the basis  that  the
             barrister had been taken seriously ill.  As this is not  dealt
             with in the determination, nor is there any further  evidence,
             I consider that it is right to grant permission on the  ground
             but that the appellants must provide  support  in  respect  of
             this ground.

         2.   The grounds also assert that the judge failed to consider  the
             position of the two minor appellants aged 17 and 12  that  had
             been in the United Kingdom lawfully since 2008 and that  there
             was no consideration of Section 55 within the determination or
             the issue of whether it would be reasonable for them to return
             to  the  Philippines  in  the  light  of  their  prior  lawful
             residence, the stage they had reached in their  education  and
             their particular  circumstances.   The  minor  appellants  had
             provided statements and had given evidence and I consider that
             the grounds are arguable."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 8. Mr. Kamal referred me to an additional  appellants'  bundle  which  had
    been filed with the Tribunal for the purposes of today's  hearing.   No
    additional material, as envisaged by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds, in her
    grant, was placed before me.  Mr. Kamal told me that he had been  taken
    ill the night prior to the appellants' hearing and hence there had been
    a request for an adjournment.  There is no reference to this within the
    decision nor the Record of Proceedings.  There is on the Tribunal  file
    a fax dated 8 September asking for an adjournment on the basis that the
    appellants' barrister had been taken ill the night prior to hearing.

 9. Mr. Kamal also handed up two authorities being JO and  Others  (Section
    55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) and  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).
     He initially made submissions on the basis that I was  rehearing  this
    appeal.  I reminded him that my task was to give  consideration  as  to
    whether the judge materially erred in coming to the decision  that  she
    did.  He asserted that she had as the decision itself is devoid of  any
    reference to Section 55 and that in any event the judge should not have
    proceeded in his absence.

10. Mr. Clarke indicated from his file that there was an  application  made
    to adjourn but that it had been refused as it was  indicated  that  all
    facts within the appeal were not in dispute and accordingly  there  was
    no cross-examination of any  of  the  appellants  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The appeal hearing had accordingly been a fair one
    as the factual matrix was not in dispute.  The appeal was based on  the
    appellants' private lives and the judge had not  erred  as  Section  55
    duties along with Article 8 considerations  were  codified  within  the
    Immigration Rules.

11. Having been told that the facts were not in dispute I do not find  that
    the judge has materially erred as asserted.  The  appellants  were  not
    prejudiced in any way and the judge has taken proper account  of  their
    oral and written evidence along with the bundle of  evidence  filed  on
    their behalf.  The presence of the appellants' representative,  in  the
    circumstances of this particular appeal, would have made no  difference
    to its outcome.

12. The appellants could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The nub of their case was a private life claim based on, as the
    judge found at paragraph 14 of  her  decision,  a  preference  for  the
    lifestyle in the United Kingdom.

13. Whilst the judge does not specifically refer  to  Section  55  that  in
    itself is not a material error  as  she  has  taken  into  account  and
    balanced all the factors that needed to be considered when  considering
    issues touching upon Article 8.

14. Whilst I appreciate that the judge has not  made  reference  to  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 she has nonetheless dealt with all the issues  envisaged
    in Lord Bingham's five questions and subsumed within  her  analysis  of
    proportionality the issues that fell to be considered  in  relation  to
    the two minor appellants.

15. The appeal on the agreed factual matrix inevitably had to be  dismissed
    as  there  was  no  breach  of  the  appellants'  Article   8   rights.
    Accordingly, even if the judge has erred, and I find that she has  not,
    any such error cannot be said to be material.

Notice of Decision

16. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed        Date 5 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

