
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15815/2013
     IA/15819/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2013                           |On 13 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                TANIA MOSTAFA
                             MAHLIL MOSTAFA KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Mahbub, instructed by Universal Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Miss K Pal, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose allowing the appeals of  the
    appellants against her decision to refuse the First appellant leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The second appellant is the
    son of the first appellant and is her dependant.  I  will  continue  to
    refer to them as appellants despite that the appeal is by the Secretary
    of State.

2.   According to the notice of decision, the  documents  submitted  by  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of appendix  A  to  the  Rules.
    She had provided a contract which did not include contact  details  for
    the  other  party  involved.   She  had  provided  the  certificate  of
    incorporation for her  company,  but  not  a  current  printout  report
    including her full name, the date on which she was  appointed  and  the
    date on which the report was produced.  Further,  she  maintained  that
    she had funds in Jamuna Bank; that institution appeared on  a  list  in
    appendix B to  the  Rules,  of  banks  from  Bangladesh  that  did  not
    satisfactorily verify financial documents.  Her application was refused
    under paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules as she did not meet  the
    requirement at paragraph 245DD(b).   Under  this  paragraph  the  first
    appellant must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraphs 35 to 53 of
    Appendix A.  She was awarded no points.

3.   The judge found that the appellant's application did  not  fall  to  be
    refused on the basis that the letter provided by  Jamuna  Bank  Limited
    could not be used to meet the requirements of Appendix  A,  the  reason
    being that at the time the first appellant made  her  application,  the
    Immigration Rules did not preclude reliance on  funds  held  in  Jamuna
    Bank Limited.  This finding was not  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

4.   At the hearing before the judge  the  appellant  was  asked  about  the
    contract that she  had  submitted  which  did  not  show  the  client's
    landline or email number.  She said that the client  had  not  provided
    that information and she had not asked for it.  She had applied  for  a
    landline number for her business but it had not been received when  she
    made her application.  As  to  details  of  the  incorporation  of  her
    company, she said that her solicitor had  told  her  that  it  was  not
    mandatory to provide those details.

5.   At the  hearing  below  it  was  contended  by  the  appellant's  legal
    representative that the shortcomings in the contract document were such
    that it was in the wrong format  and  thus  the  Secretary  of  State's
    caseworker should have requested further information in accordance with
    the  provisions  of  subparagraph  245AA(b).   Further,  there  was   a
    discretion in subparagraph 245AA(d) to  disregard  the  fact  that  the
    document was in the wrong format.  The further contract that  had  been
    included in the documents for the appeal amounted to  a  correction  of
    the earlier document. Accordingly, Section 85A of the 2002 Act did  not
    preclude reference to it.

6.    It  was  also  contended  that  paragraph  41-SD  did  not  include  a
    requirement for the documentation sought by the Secretary of State.   A
    further document had been provided which, as regards Section 85A of the
    2002 Act, merely confirmed what had previously been asserted.

7.   The judge said that the appellant made her  application  on  the  basis
    that she was currently registered as a director of a  new  or  existing
    business.  Table 4 of Appendix A requires that such an  applicant  must
    have been so registered within the three months  immediately  prior  to
    the date of application.  According to her application,  the  appellant
    provided a printout of the Current Appointment  Report  from  Companies
    House; but no such printout appeared to have been submitted.  The first
    appellant did provide the certificate of incorporation of the  company,
    which did not make any reference to directors.  The judge rejected  the
    appellant's legal representative's  argument  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to rely on a printout that was provided for  the  purposes  of
    the appeal.  The judge found that Section 85A of the 2002  Act,  as  it
    applies to the appellant's application, provides that the Tribunal  may
    only consider evidence which was submitted in support of,  and  at  the
    time of making the application.  The exceptions to  that  Rule  do  not
    assist the appellant.  In his judgment, the appellant did  not  provide
    documentation to establish that she met the requirement of Table 4.

8.   The judge also found that there was a shortcoming  in  respect  of  the
    information contained in the contract that was submitted as it did  not
    give the client's  landline  phone  number  or  any  email  address  as
    required  by  subparagraph  41-SD(c)(iv)  of  appendix  A.   Again  the
    appellant sought to rely on further documents which were  provided  for
    the appeal, but the judge found  that  Section  85A  of  the  2002  Act
    precluded reliance on these documents.

9.   The judge  then  relied  on  Rodriguez  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that the Secretary of State was obliged to apply  her  policy
    in respect of evidential  flexibility  when  considering  applications.
    That policy was heralded in a letter from UKBA dated 19  May  2011  and
    specified provisions which were set  out  in  a  document  headed  "PBS
    Process Instruction", which was  appended  to  the  determination.   He
    noted that the latter document has now been superseded  by  a  guidance
    document, which is valid from 20 May 2013.  The judge said he  was  not
    referred to any earlier version of that guidance document.  However, in
    respect of the current guidance, the changes are described as including
    "obtaining additional information: --- third paragraph, examples  where
    additional evidence can be requested have now been limited to  specific
    types of cases".

10.  The judge said that in  Rodriguez  the  Upper  Tribunal  refer  to  the
    introduction of paragraph 245AA of the Rules, and expressed no view  on
    whether the policies identified in the determination had survived  that
    amendment to the Rules.  The judge said that the policy document in use
    at the relevant time  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  statement  of  the
    Secretary of State's policy.  He said that the policy as set out in the
    PBD Process Instruction required the  caseworker  to  consider  whether
    there was missing evidence.  If so, unless the  application  will  fall
    for refusal even if the missing information  were  provided,  the  next
    stage was to consider whether there was sufficient  reason  to  believe
    that the missing evidence existed.  In cases  of  uncertainty,  benefit
    should be given to the applicant.   If  the  caseworker,  or  a  senior
    colleague, had reasonable grounds to believe that the missing  evidence
    existed, the applicant should be asked to provide it.  The  judge  said
    on the evidence available to him, he had no reason to find  that  there
    was any relevant change in that policy before the date of decision  (in
    this case 23 April 2013).  The judge noted that  the  current  guidance
    document indicates that the limitation to specific types of  cases  was
    introduced on 20 May.

11.  In his judgment  there  was  sufficient  reason  to  believe  that  the
    missing  evidence  existed.   Since   the   respondent   provided   the
    certificate of incorporation of  her  company,  Companies  House  would
    necessarily have a record of the company's directors.  As no issue  was
    raised as to the existence of the client  identified  in  the  contract
    provided by the appellant, the client's contact details were likely  to
    be available on request.  Accordingly, since  he  had  found  that  the
    appellant's application  did  not  fall  for  refusal  because  of  her
    reliance  on  a  letter  from  Jamuna  Bank  Limited,  the   evidential
    flexibility policy required  that  she  be  requested  to  provide  the
    missing information.

12.  Accordingly the  judge  found  that  the  refusal  of  the  appellant's
    application was not in accordance with the law and to that  extent  the
    appeal should succeed.  He therefore allowed the appeal to  the  extent
    that the decisions to refuse the applications were  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

13.  The judge also allowed the appeals on human rights grounds to the  same
    extent.

14.  The grounds lodged by the respondent argued that  the  judge  erred  in
    applying the evidential flexibility policy  to  the  contract  document
    because this was not a case in which there was missing  evidence;  this
    was a case in which the evidence provided was defective.   Pursuant  to
    Appendix A, paragraph 41-SD(c)(iv) of the Rules, the  contract  had  to
    show the landline phone number and any email address.  The contract had
    been submitted but it did not do so.  The appellant  could  not  comply
    with the Rules by simply  producing  that  evidence  separately.   FtTJ
    Nicholson who granted permission said  that  given  the  terms  of  the
    Evidential Flexibility Policy as recorded by  the  judge  correctly  at
    paragraph 27, that ground was arguable.

15.  FtTJ Nicholson also said that if the decision  stood  to  be  dismissed
    under the immigration  rules  because  of  a  defect  in  the  evidence
    relating to the contract then it is arguable that the appeal should not
    have been allowed on the grounds that the decision was no in accordance
    with the law so far as the  evidence  relating  to  registration  as  a
    director was concerned, since that would have made no  difference.   It
    follows that if the judge did err in  relation  to  the  contract,  the
    judge also arguably erred in relation to article 8 when he  found  that
    the decision was unlawful under article 8.

16.  The respondent relied on  subparagraph  41-SD(c)(iv)  which  states  as
    follows:-

         "(iv)    One or more contracts showing trading.  If a  contract  is
             not an original the applicant  must  sign  each  page  of  the
             contract.  The contract must show:


             (i)  the applicant's name and the name of the business,


             (ii) the service provided by the applicant's business; and


             (iii)    the name of the other party or  parties  involved  in
                  the contract and their contact  details,  including  their
                  full address, postal code, landline phone number  and  any
                  email address."

17.  Miss Pal submitted that the judge had accepted  that  at  the  time  of
    submitting her  application,  the  respondent  had  failed  to  satisfy
    subparagraph (iii) of 41-SD(c)(iv).  The  judge  had  also  found  that
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act does not assist the applicant and that  the
    amended documentation provided at the hearing  could  not  support  the
    application after it had been made.   Furthermore,  the  appellant  had
    admitted  in  oral  evidence  that  at  the  time  she  submitted   the
    application the information requested did not  exist  because  she  had
    applied for it and had yet  to  receive  it.   In  the  light  of  this
    evidence, the application form submitted by the appellant was defective
    from the outset.

18.  Miss Pal submitted that the judge relied on Rodriguez  which  concluded
    that the Secretary of State was obliged to apply her policy in  respect
    of evidential flexibility when considering applications. She said  that
    following Rodriguez the Secretary of State incorporated the findings in
    Rodriguez  into  paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    This
    paragraph states as follows:

         "(a) Where part 6A or the Appendices referred to  in  Art.6A  state
             that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  UK  Border
             Agency will only consider documents that have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only  consider   documents
             submitted  after  the  application  where   subparagraph   (b)
             applies.


         (b)  The subparagraph applies if the applicant has submitted:


             (i)  a sequence of documents and some of the documents in  the
                  sequence had  been  omitted  (for  example,  if  one  bank
                  statement from a series is missing);


             (ii) a document in the wrong format; or


             (iii)    a document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                  document,


         the  UK  Border  Agency  will  contact   the   applicant   or   his
         representative in writing, and request the correct documents."

19.  Mr Mahbub tried desperately to bring the appellant within  subparagraph
    (i) and (ii) of 245AA  even  when  he  acknowledged  that  the  missing
    information was not part of a sequence of documents or that  it  was  a
    document in the wrong format.  He relied  on  Appendix  A  of  the  PBS
    Instruction Process (Annex A) which was appended to  the  determination
    in Rodriguez.  That instruction was dated July 2011.

20.  I accept that the judge corrected recorded the terms of the  Evidential
    Flexibility Policy at paragraph 27. However, in this case it was not  a
    question of the caseworker or  a  senior  colleague  having  reasonable
    grounds to believe that the missing evidence  existed  and  asking  the
    appellant to provide it.  The fact is  the  missing  evidence  did  not
    exist at the time she made her application.  The appellant herself said
    so in oral evidence. Accordingly, I find that the judge erred in law in
    not dismissing the appellant's appeal.

21.  I find that the appellant had submitted a defective  application.   The
    missing information was not information that could be  requested  under
    paragraph 245AA.

22.  I find that the judge erred in law  in  allowing  the  appeals  to  the
    extent that the decisions  to  refuse  the  applications  were  not  in
    accordance with the law and also erred in law in allowing  the  appeals
    on human rights grounds to the same extent.

23.  The judge's decision was tainted by error of law and should not  stand.



24.  I re-make the decision and dismiss the appeals.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

