
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA153162015
                                                                 IA153232015
                                                                 IA153252015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th May 2017                          |On 23rd May 2017                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Anjana shah
                                mr samir shah
                                    [s s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Malik of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Meah  promulgated  on  1  October
    2016, in which the appeals against her decision to refuse Mrs Shah  and
    her dependants leave to remain on the basis of private and family  life
    dated 1 April 2015 were allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8).  For ease I continue to refer to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mrs Shah  and
    her dependents as the Appellants and the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh, born on 10  February  1979,
    11 April 1971 and  [  ]  2003  respectively.   Anjana  Shah,  the  main
    Appellant, is the wife of Samir Shah and the mother of [SS].   The main
    Appellant was granted entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
    General Student and entered the United Kingdom on  13  September  2009,
    with leave to remain valid to 31 October 2011.  Further leave to remain
    on the same basis was granted  to  8  March  2016,  although  this  was
    subsequently  curtailed  to  end  on  16  February  2015.   The   other
    Appellants were dependent on her and were granted leave  to  remain  as
    dependents for the same periods.  On 13 February 2015,  the  Appellants
    made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the applications on 1 April 2015  on  the  basis
    that none  of  the  Appellants  could  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.
    Specifically, neither adult was a British Citizen, present and  settled
    in the United Kingdom, nor here  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
    protection such that the partner route was not available to  either  of
    them.  Neither of the adult Appellants were entitled to leave to remain
    under the parent route because neither had sole responsibility for  the
    third Appellant.  Similarly, the third Appellant could not satisfy  the
    requirements for a grant of leave  to  remain  under  the  child  route
    because of the refusal of leave to remain to his parents.

 4. In relation to private life, the adult Appellants were  not  considered
    to face any  very  significant  obstacles  to  their  reintegration  to
    Bangladesh, because they had spent the majority of their  lives  there,
    were familiar with the culture and spoke the language.  In relation  to
    the third Appellant, the requirements of paragraph 276ADE were not  met
    as he had not lived in the United Kingdom  continuously  for  at  least
    seven years and in any event it would not be unreasonable to expect him
    to return to his country of origin with his parents.

 5.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and in doing so took  into  account  her  duty  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  to
    consider the best interests of the third Appellant as a child.  It  was
    considered that the family would return to Bangladesh together and  the
    third Appellant would be able to continue his education there and  that
    he remained familiar with the culture.  There was  nothing  to  suggest
    that the adults would be unable to maintain and provide for  their  son
    on return.

 6. Judge Meah allowed the appeals in a decision promulgated on  1  October
    2016.  In respect  of  the  third  Appellant,  it  was  found  that  he
    satisfied the requirements set out in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules  as  he  had,  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  been
    continuously resident in the United Kingdom  for  seven  years  and  it
    would be unreasonable to expect him to leave and return to  Bangladesh.
    This is because there was no evidence that he could speak  the  Bengali
    language such that he would struggle on return at  a  Bengali  speaking
    school; he was well settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  having  spent  a
    critical part of his youth growing up here and was progressing well  in
    his education.

 7. Against that backdrop, that the third Appellant would be granted  leave
    to remain and if his parents were not, the family would be split, which
    would be contrary to the best interests of the child, Judge  Meah  went
    on to consider the remainder of the appeals  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  With reference to section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Act 2002 (the "2002  Act"),  he  found
    that the public  interest  in  removal  was  diminished  in  line  with
    subsections (2), (3) and (6) as the Appellants have always remained  in
    the United Kingdom lawfully (albeit with precarious status as a student
    and dependents), they have always supported themselves from  their  own
    funds and they all speak very good English.  In these circumstances the
    appeals were allowed under Article 8 on the basis that it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference of the adult Appellants' right to respect
    for private and family life in the United Kingdom to be removed.

The appeal

 8. The respondent appeals on four grounds as follows:

      i) that the First-Tier Tribunal materially adding law in finding  that
         the  third  Appellant  satisfy  the   requirements   of   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules because the relevant date to
         be a qualifying child is expressly the date of application and  not
         the date of hearing contrary to paragraph 8 of the decision;

     ii) that as the third Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
         Immigration Rules for the reasons in  ground  one,  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal was required to consider whether there were any compelling
         circumstances to warrant consideration of Article 8 outside of  the
         Immigration Rules, but failed to do so;

    iii) that the First-tier Tribunal failed to properly consider whether it
         be reasonable to expect the third Appellant  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom with his parents in accordance with section 117B(6) of  the
         2002 Act and failed to attach significant weight to the  fact  that
         all of the  Appellant's  immigration  status'  were  precarious  as
         required by subsection (5) of the same;

     iv) that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law  in  allowing
         the appeals of the adult Appellants on a freestanding  basis  given
         the flawed findings in respect of paragraph 276ADE.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  on  all
    grounds on 5 April 2017.

10. At the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer relied on all of the
    written grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  the  third  Appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules must fail because he had not, at the
    date of application, been continuously resident in the  United  Kingdom
    for seven years as expressly  required  by  paragraph  276ADE(1).   The
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in considering  the  circumstances  at
    the date of hearing and that error,  erroneously  allowing  one  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules, went on to infect  the  remainder  of  the
    decision to allow the adult Appellants' appeals on Article 8 grounds.

11. It was further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  give
    any consideration as  to  whether  there  were  compelling  factors  to
    consider Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules,  did  not  make  a
    full assessment of all of the circumstances of the family who would  be
    returning to Bangladesh together, nor  of  the  precariousness  of  the
    Appellants' leave in the United Kingdom for the purposes of  the  wider
    assessment required under section 117B of the 2002 Act.   Further,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's focus throughout the  determination  was  on  the
    third Appellant's education, but in accordance with AM  (S117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), that was not  a  trump  card.   It  was  however
    accepted that there was no appeal against the best interests assessment
    for  the  third  Appellant,  only  as  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    assessment on the reasonableness of his return to Bangladesh.

12. In response, Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision.  Although it was  accepted  that
    it was an error of law to allow  the  third  Appellant's  appeal  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules because at the date of
    application he had not been continuously resident in the United Kingdom
    for seven years, it was submitted that  it  was  not  material  because
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act required the same assessment of whether
    it was reasonable to require a child to leave  the  United  Kingdom  if
    they had been resident here continuously for seven years at the date of
    hearing.  There was no material difference to the  third  Appellant  in
    terms of a resulting grant of leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between his appeal being allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules  or  on
    human rights grounds.

13. Further, there was no error in the assessment of the best interests  of
    the third Appellant.  Although there was no express  reference  in  the
    decision to compelling circumstances, it is clear that  this  would  be
    satisfied if the family were to be split because one was successful  in
    his appeal and the adults were not.

Findings and reasons

14. The starting point in this appeal are  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration  Rules,  which  so  far  as  is  relevant,
    provide as follows:


    "the requirements to be met by an applicant to leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of private life in the UK that at the date of application,  the
    applicant;
       i) ...
      ii) ...
     iii) ...
     iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the  UK
         for at least seven years (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; ..."

15. As was accepted by Counsel for the Appellant at the hearing, it was  an
    error of law to consider the third Appellant's length of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom at the date of hearing for the purposes of paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules and to allow  his  appeal  on  that
    basis.  It is expressly specified in the rules that the  relevant  date
    for these purposes is the date of application for calculating length of
    residence.  At the date of the application for leave to  remain  on  13
    February 2015, the third Appellant had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
    for  less  than  five  years  and  therefore  could  not  satisfy   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain on
    the basis of private life and his appeal could not lawfully be  allowed
    for that reason.

16. I find it is a material error of law  to  allow  an  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules when an Appellant has not satisfied the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, even if the appeal may otherwise  be  allowed
    on human rights grounds for the same reason and/or following  the  same
    assessment  (which  I  deal  with  further  below)  because  there  are
    different consequences for an individual as to the type of  leave  they
    may be granted as a result and the route for any  future  applications.
    I allow the appeal on the first ground.  For these reasons,  this  part
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision must be set aside and  remade  so
    as to dismiss all of the appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
    also means that the third Appellant's appeal on  human  rights  grounds
    remains outstanding.

17. As to the second ground of appeal, although the First-tier Tribunal did
    not expressly set out any compelling circumstances or reasons as to why
    it went on to consider the appeal outside of the Immigration  Rules,  I
    do not consider the omission to amounts to a material error of law.  In
    a case where at the date of hearing, there was a  child  who  had  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for over seven years and  there
    was a finding that it would be in his best interests to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, it was clearly evident that this  was  the  case  where
    consideration of  Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    required.

18. I consider the third and fourth grounds of appeal together  which  both
    relate to whether the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in  law  in
    allowing the adult appeals under  Article  8,  with  reference  to  the
    factors set out in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

19. The First-tier Tribunal concluded,  by  reference  to  the  factors  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, that the Appellants  all  spoke  English,
    have supported themselves in the United  Kingdom  without  recourse  to
    public funds and that the third Appellant's return to Bangladesh  would
    be unreasonable, such that the public interest in removal was therefore
    diminished and it would constitute a disproportionate interference with
    their right to respect for private and family life under Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.   There  was  no  specific  or
    express assessment  of  reasonableness  for  the  purposes  of  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which states as follows:

    "(6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where -
    a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
       qualifying child, and
    b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United
       Kingdom."

20. It is the Respondent's case that this requires a wider assessment  than
    that in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) as to the reasonableness of expecting a
    child to leave the United  Kingdom,  involving  wider  public  interest
    factors and the situation of the adults and in this case that the leave
    to remain had been precarious.  Conversely, it is the Appellant's  case
    that there is no material error of law given  that  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness is materially the same in both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    of the Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

21. There is considerable support for the Appellants' submission from  Lord
    Justice Elias in MA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ  705  who  made  the  following  preliminary
    observations about paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules and
    section 117B(6) in paragraph 13:

    "... First, they  are  similarly  framed:  both  require  seven  years'
    residence  and  in  both  the  critical  question  is  whether  it   is
    unreasonable for the child to be expected to leave the UK.  Second, the
    concept of seven years' residence may not be  calculated  in  precisely
    the same way in the two provisions.  Rule 276ADE(1) states in terms  of
    the period must be assessed as at the date  of  application.   However,
    the Secretary of State conceded that as a result of  section  85(4)  of
    the 2002 Act, the relevant date for the purpose of section 117B is  the
    later date when the court is making a determination.  We have acted  on
    the assumption that this is correct.  Third, only the child  can  apply
    under rule  276ADE(1)(iv),  whereas  section  117B  is  concerned  with
    article 8 applications under which both the child and the  parents  can
    apply.  Fourth, rule 276ADE is concerned with applications made on  the
    basis of private life, whereas  claims  article  8  may  rely  on  both
    private and family life.  Fifth, it is in  my  judgement  a  legitimate
    assumption that the question whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave should be approached in the same way  in  each  context,
    and no party has sought contend otherwise."

22. Lord Justice Elias went on in MA (Pakistan) to hold that the concept of
    reasonableness required  regard  to  be  had  to  the  conduct  of  the
    applicant and any other matters relevant to the  public  interest,  but
    that where the seven year rule is satisfied, it is  a  factor  of  some
    weighing in favour of leave to remain to  be  granted.   This  in  turn
    relied on the reasoning in MM (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  450)  and  was  consistent  with  the
    analysis of the unduly harsh assessment in section 117C(5) of the  2002
    Act.  This strongly supports the need for a consistent approach  across
    the provisions and the only remaining issue is then whether the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  had  in  the  present  case  lawfully  undertaken   the
    assessment of reasonableness either pursuant to section 117B(6) of  the
    2002 Act or under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

23. In the present case, Judge Meah found that it  was  not  in  the  third
    Appellant's best interests to return to Bangladesh and that it was  not
    reasonable to expect the third Appellant to live there.   It  does  not
    automatically follow that leave must be granted  whenever  the  child's
    best interests are  in  favour  of  remaining  -  the  bests  interests
    assessment does not automatically resolve the  reasonableness  question
    (see paragraph 47 of MA (Pakistan)).  However, in paragraphs 24  to  27
    and 38 to 39, Judge Meah noted that there must usually be  very  strong
    reasons for a child to be expected to return to their country of origin
    if they have achieved seven years' residence in the UK  (as  reiterated
    in MA (Pakistan)) and found that there were none in  this  case.   This
    was because the Appellants have all  resided  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom since their arrival (albeit that  their  leave  to  remain  was
    precarious as it was for a  temporary  purpose)  and  have  no  adverse
    immigration history; they have  supported  themselves  from  their  own
    funds and they speak English well.

24. I find that in substance, there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of the adult Appellants  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (with reference to
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act) for the reasons given  by  Judge  Meah
    following an assessment of the reasonableness of  expecting  the  third
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom (albeit the assessment took place
    primarily in the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)).  That  assessment
    took into account and gave appropriate weight to all relevant  factors,
    including the best interests of the child, the length of his residence,
    the lack  of  any  adverse  immigration  history,  language  and  self-
    sufficiency of the Appellants.  In these circumstances, there  were  no
    powerful  reasons  or  significant   factors   which   outweighed   the
    significant weight  to  be  attached  to  the  third  Appellant's  long
    residence.

25. For the same substantive reasons, I would allow the  third  Appellant's
    appeal on  human  rights  grounds  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights.   It   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for family and private life  for
    him to be removed from the United Kingdom where it is not in  his  best
    interests to do so, it is unreasonable to do so and where his  parents'
    appeals have been allowed precisely on that basis.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law only in  allowing  the  third  Appellant's
appeal under the Immigration Rules.  As such it is necessary  to  set  aside
that part of the decision and to re-make the decision as follows.

The Appellants' appeals are dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The Appellants' appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity directions are made.



Signed   [pic]                  Date         19th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


