
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15235/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated  |
|On 18th July 2014                         |On 19th December 2014            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                PANCHALI RAY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER, GLASGOW AIRPORT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India.  She arrived at  Glasgow  airport
    on 13 May 2013,  holding  a  valid  Indian  passport  containing  entry
    clearance granted to her as a spouse.  She was refused admission.   She
    appealed.  Her appeal was heard by  Judge  P  Grant-Hutchinson  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and dismissed.  She now appeals,  with  permission,
    to this Tribunal.

 2. There  is  a  considerable  history  to  this  appeal.   The  appellant
    originally entered the United Kingdom in 2000  as  a  spouse  (not  the
    spouse of her present husband).  After the break down of her  marriage,
    she met Mr Marco Morana in about 2008.  She applied for leave to remain
    on the basis of her  relationship  with  him.    That  application  was
    apparently refused.  Part of the reason for the refusal appears to have
    been that she had used forged  documentation  in  connection  with  the
    application.  She was removed from the United Kingdom in January  2010.
    Mr Morana went to India and he and the appellant were married there  in
    June 2011.

 3. Mr Morana returned to the United  Kingdom,  and  the  appellant  sought
    entry clearance to join him.  Her application was refused by the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  She appealed, and, shortly before  the  appeal  was
    determined, the Entry Clearance Officer withdrew the  refusal  decision
    for reconsideration.  On reconsideration,  however,  the  decision  was
    unchanged.  The appellant appealed again.  Her appeal was heard  on  21
    August 2012 before Judge Kempton in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge
    Kempton concluded in favour of the appellant the  principal  matter  of
    dispute, which was whether there was a subsisting relationship  between
    the appellant and Mr Morana.  She therefore allowed  the  appeal.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer initiated further enquiries, but granted  entry
    clearance in April 2013 in pursuance of the judge's decision.

 4. Using that entry clearance,  the  appellant  embarked  for  the  United
    Kingdom.  On arrival she was interviewed.  Also interviewed  was  a  Mr
    Reza, whose baggage contained the  appellant's  handbag,  although  the
    appellant said she had only happened to run in to him at the airport in
    India.  Mr Morana was interviewed by telephone.   Immigration  Officers
    at various grades required for the making of such  decisions  concluded
    that the appellant and Mr Morana did not have a subsisting relationship
    of husband and wife.   The  appellant  was  issued  with  a  notice  of
    decision, which, so far as relevant, reads as follows:

         "You hold a current Spouse entry clearance but I am satisfied  that
         either false representations were employed or material  facts  were
         not  disclosed  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining   the   visa/entry
         clearance, or a change of circumstances since  it  was  issued  has
         removed the basis of your claim to admission.
         These being from the information available to me at this time, I do
         not believe your marriage to be genuinely subsisting.
         ...
         I  therefore  refuse  you  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom/I
         therefore  cancel  your  continuing  leave.   If  your  leave   was
         conferred by an entry clearance, this will also have the effect  of
         cancelling your entry clearance.
         ...."


 5. The appeal against that decision occupied two days of  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Evidence was taken from the appellant,  from  her
    husband, from Mr Reza, and from two Immigration  Officers.   The  judge
    concluded that, indeed, there was no  subsisting  relationship  between
    the appellant and Mr Morana, and therefore that the  appellant  had  no
    claim to admission.  The judge also dealt with a number of  allegations
    about the procedure adopted by the Immigration Officers.  He  concluded
    that nothing untoward had occurred.  There is now no challenge  against
    his findings in that respect.

 6. What is, however, challenged is  his  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
    substantive issue.  The primary complaint  is  that  he  misplaced  the
    burden of proof and in  other  respects  misunderstood  his  task.   In
    paragraph 18 of his determination he wrote as follows:

         "The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the standard of  proof
         is the balance of probabilities.  In determining this appeal  I  am
         not restricted to those facts and circumstances appertaining at the
         time of the decision appealed against."


 7. The issues raised by the grounds are as follows.  First, the burden  of
    proof of establishing either  false  representations  or  a  change  of
    circumstances is not  on  the  appellant:  it  is  on  the  respondent.
    Secondly, there is indeed a restriction on the circumstances which  may
    be considered in an  appeal  of  this  nature.   Thirdly,  the  refusal
    appeared to have been under paragraph 321 of the Statement  of  Changes
    in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended), whereas only paragraph  321A
    could have been applicable.  The judge therefore should have found that
    the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    otherwise not in accordance with the law.  Fourthly, it was not open to
    the judge to undermine the decision of Judge Kempton that the  marriage
    was subsisting.  Fifthly, the  judge  was  therefore  not  entitled  to
    consider afresh whether the  marriage  was  subsisting.   Sixthly,  the
    judge's conclusions on that issue were in any event speculative and not
    supported by the evidence.

 8. Following the grant of entry clearance to the appellant, the provisions
    of Articles 3(1) and 4(3) and (3A)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
    Enter and Remain) Order 2000 (SI 1161/2000) have  the  effect  that  on
    arrival in the United Kingdom, the  appellant  was  to  be  treated  as
    having been granted, before arrival, leave to enter for the  period  of
    validity of her entry clearance, in this case until 8 July  2016.   The
    Immigration Rules distinguish between the possibility of refusing leave
    to  enter  to  a  person  who  merely  has  entry  clearance,  and  the
    cancellation of a person's leave to enter which  is  in  force  on  his
    arrival.  The former is dealt with in  paragraph  321;  the  latter  in
    paragraph 321A.  Paragraph 321 is, for the reason just  indicated,  not
    relevant in the present case.  The material parts of paragraph 321A are
    as follows:

         "321A. The following grounds for the  cancellation  of  a  person's
         leave to enter or remain which is in force on his  arrival  in,  or
         whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply:
      1) there has been such a change in the circumstances of that  person's
         case, since the leave was given, that it should be cancelled; or
      2) false representations were made or false documents  were  submitted
         (whether or not material to the application, and whether or not  to
         the holder's knowledge), or material facts were not  disclosed,  in
         relation to the application  for  leave,  or  in  order  to  obtain
         documents from the Secretary of State or a third party required  in
         support of the application; or
         [There are four more possibilities, none  of  which  apply  to  the
         present case]."


 9. Paragraph 321 permits the refusal of leave to  enter  "only  where  the
    Immigration Officer is satisfied that" either the same circumstances as
    set out in paragraph 321A(2) apply, or "a change of circumstances since
    [entry clearance] was issued has removed  the  basis  of  the  holder's
    claim to admission"; there are again additional factors not relevant to
    the present appeal.

10. It is convenient to look first at the question whether either the terms
    of the notice issued to the appellant, or the treatment of  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal, was vitiated by failure to identify and
    apply the  correct  paragraph  of  the  rules.   Neither  paragraph  is
    specified in the decision itself, the terms of which we  have  set  out
    above.  The wording of the first paragraph of the notice is similar  to
    that in paragraph 321(ii), but is  not  inappropriate  for  a  decision
    under paragraph 321A(1).  The wording of the refusal, the closing words
    of the extract above, evidently invites a choice between the  words  on
    each side of the oblique stroke: but neither has  been  chosen  to  the
    exclusion of the other.  In his submissions, Mr Ndubuisi accepted  that
    the argument based on the form of the notice of decision was  in  truth
    limited to a complaint about the failure to strike out one or other  of
    those phrases.

11. If the failure to  make  a  clear  choice  between  paragraph  321  and
    paragraph 321A were, in the  circumstances  of  the  case,  capable  of
    making a real difference to the way in which the case  was  argued,  we
    should have little hesitation  in  finding  a  legal  error  in  either
    failing to specify which paragraph was applicable,  or  specifying  the
    wrong one.  But, in truth, there can be no such complaint here.  If the
    matter is subject to discussion at all (a question to which we return),
    the sole issue is whether the relationship between  the  appellant  and
    her husband was, at the date of her  use  of  the  entry  clearance,  a
    subsisting relationship of husband and wife.  If it was not, there  was
    simply no basis upon which she should have been admitted as  a  spouse.
    For these purposes the difference  in  the  wording  between  paragraph
    321(ii)  and  321A(1)  makes  no  difference:  the  cessation  of   the
    relationship is clearly a change of circumstances which  is  "such  ...
    that [the leave] should be cancelled".  No doubt it is  desirable  that
    decisions are made on a formally correct and detailed basis: but, here,
    the failure to do so had no perceptible impact upon  the  appellant  or
    upon the conduct and fairness of the appeal.   We  reject  the  grounds
    insofar as they are based on that point.

12. The next  question  for  consideration  is  the  extent  to  which  the
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  Mr  Morana  was  open   for
    determination at all, given that the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance had been determined by Judge Kempton in the appellant's
    favour.  It is right that  her  determination  should  be  regarded  as
    concluding the issues she determined.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to
    identify those issues.  The appeal before her was an appeal against the
    refusal of entry clearance.  The refusal was, as we have indicated, the
    second refusal.  It was dated 1 February 2012.  The appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal against that decision was governed by ss 85  and  85A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which  prevented
    reliance upon evidence of matters  after  the  date  of  the  decision.
    Judge Kempton's decision was accordingly a decision that the  appellant
    and Mr Morana had the subsisting relationship of husband and wife on  1
    February 2012.  It is not, and it could not be, a  decision  that  they
    had that relationship at any subsequent date.   It  clearly  cannot  be
    assumed that a couple who have such relationship on 1 February 2012 are
    to be regarded as necessarily having the same relationship  on  13  May
    2013.  On the other hand, it is clear that the force of Judge Kempton's
    determination reduces almost to  vanishing  point  the  possibility  of
    asserting that the parties were not in that relationship at the date of
    the refusal of entry clearance.  If it  should  be  that  they  are  no
    longer in that relationship, it  must  be  because  circumstances  have
    changed since 1 February 2012.

13. Such a change, if it has taken place, might have been before  or  after
    the issue of entry clearance.  That is because, in  the  present  case,
    there was a considerable interval between the original refusal, and the
    grant of entry clearance following the  appeal.   If  the  relationship
    ceased to be subsisting after 1 February 2012, but before the issue  of
    the present entry clearance, that is a change  of  circumstances  which
    should have been brought to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  attention
    before the present entry clearance was issued: failure to bring  it  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer's attention would,  we  are  confident,  be
    failure to disclose a material fact.  Clearly, nobody ought to think of
    accepting an entry clearance as  a  spouse,  even  after  a  successful
    appeal, if, by the time the entry clearance is issued, he or she is  no
    longer in a subsisting spousal relationship with the sponsor.  Thus,  a
    change of circumstances  in  that  period  would  merit  refusal  under
    paragraph 321A(2): the default would have  been  "in  relation  to  the
    application for leave", because it occurred before the application  was
    granted.  If, on the other hand, the circumstances changed between  the
    grant of entry clearance and its presentation  to  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, that would be  a  change  of  circumstances  since  the  entry
    clearance was issued,  and  would  merit  a  decision  under  paragraph
    321A(1).

14. Whichever of those two circumstances precisely is in play, again  makes
    no real difference in the context  of  this  appeal.   Judge  Kempton's
    decision was not, and could not be a decision about the relationship of
    the appellant and Mr Morana for all time.  Accepting  her  decision  as
    governing the position on 1 February 2012, it was clearly possible  for
    circumstances to have changed.  If circumstances had changed in the way
    alleged, a decision cancelling  the  leave  under  one  or  other  sub-
    paragraphs of paragraph 321A was clearly a possibility.

15. Further, the decision now under appeal is not a decision refusing entry
    clearance: it is, as set out in the  notice  of  decision,  a  decision
    which is treated as a refusal of leave to  enter.   That  provision  is
    contained in paragraph 2A(9) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.
     An appeal against a refusal of leave to enter is not governed by ss 85
    and 85A of the 2002 Act.  Neither the evidence that can be adduced, nor
    the issues to be determined are limited by the  date  of  the  decision
    under appeal.

16. For those reasons it was clearly  open  to  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  to
    consider whether there was a subsisting  relationship  of  husband  and
    wife between the appellant and Mr Morana at the time of the appellant's
    arrival in the United Kingdom.  He was entitled to look at that  matter
    on the basis of the evidence before him, with no restriction other than
    that  of  relevance.   The  question  was   essentially   whether   the
    relationship identified by Judge Kempton was current at the time of the
    appellant's arrival.

17. Neither we, nor Mrs O'Brien (who appeared for the respondent)  required
    any persuasion that the burden of proof in relation to the matters  set
    out in paragraph 321A lies on the respondent.  To the extent  that  the
    judge imposed the burden on the appellant, he made  an  error  of  law.
    Under these circumstances our next task, under s 12(2)(A) of  the  2007
    Act, is to decide whether his determination should be set aside.

18. The evidence  upon  which  the  respondent  relied  was  copious.   The
    appellant, when first questioned, said that her husband was  in  Spain:
    she later said that he was  in  Abu  Dhabi,  which  turned  out  to  be
    correct.  His evidence was that he was seeing his son there;  she  said
    he was doing a course  there.   She  did  not  know  the  name  of  his
    children, including the son he was visiting.  She did not know how long
    he was going to be away.  It is very unclear why she chose to travel at
    the date she did, given that her  husband  was  away  from  the  United
    Kingdom on her arrival.  She did not know her husband's  phone  number,
    despite claiming to be in regular contact with him.  She claimed not to
    have a telephone, indeed, although one was found in her handbag  in  Mr
    Reza's baggage.  That baggage also contained material showing a  number
    of payments through  Mr  Reza.   They  were  not  the  subject  of  any
    satisfactory explanation other than on the basis that they appeared  to
    be clear evidence of payments by the appellant, through Mr Reza, to  Mr
    Morana in connection with her immigration.  Telephone  interviews  with
    the  sponsor  were  unsatisfactory  because  they   were   interrupted,
    apparently by the sponsor, but it appears clear that  the  sponsor  was
    not able to give a consistent or accurate account of his wedding to the
    appellant, nor to explain the payments to or through Mr Reza.

19. Nor did the appellant provide remotely  satisfactory  explanations  for
    these difficulties.   Her  claimed  difficulty  with  the  language  of
    questioning cannot  sit  with  her  ability  to  understand  and  speak
    fluently when it suits her (she has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    over ten years).  And the  fact  that  there  have  been  virtually  no
    meetings between the appellant and the sponsor  since  their  marriage,
    (and that the appellant's present travel would  not  lead  directly  to
    meeting him), is essentially unexplained.

20. The judge concluded that the Immigration  Officers  who  gave  evidence
    before him were telling the truth, and that the appellant, her  husband
    and Mr Reza were not.  Those are assessments which to do not depend  on
    the placing on the burden of proof.  With or without those assessments,
    reading the evidence as we do, we consider it wholly inconceivable that
    a judge applying the burden of proof correctly would  have  come  to  a
    conclusion other than that the respondent had  established  that  there
    was  not,  at  the  date  of  the  appellant's  travel,  a   subsisting
    relationship of husband and wife between her and Mr Morana.   They  did
    not have anything approaching the commonalty of knowledge and interests
    of a married couple, and provided wholly  inadequate  explanations  for
    the difference in their accounts of the facts.

21. For these reasons we conclude that the judge's wrong assignment of  the
    burden of proof really makes no difference at all  to  the  outcome  of
    these proceedings.  The evidence as a whole makes  it  perfectly  clear
    that the appellant had no proper basis for  admission  as  Mr  Morana's
    wife.  Taking Judge Kempton's determination as the starting point, that
    shows that there had been a change in circumstances  since  1  February
    2012.  Whether that change took place before  or  after  the  issue  of
    entry clearance does not very much matter: in either case, the decision
    under  paragraph  321A  was  amply  merited  and,  in   our   judgment,
    inevitable.  It follows that this  appeal  must  be  dismissed  and  we
    dismiss it.
                                                                       [pic]


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 16 December 2014
