



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15123/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th November 2013                            |On 29th November 2013      |
|Prepared                                        |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                         mr franklyn osezele ayewoh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ayewoh, (in person)
For the Respondent:    Mr Steward, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Franklyn Osezele Ayewoh is a citizen of Nigeria born 19th
    November 1976. On 21st July 2011  the  Appellant  was  granted  limited
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 26th  February  2013  as  a
    Post-Study Student. On 25th February 2013 he applied for  variation  of
    his leave  to  remain.  By  a  decision  dated  16th  April  2013  that
    application was refused and a Section 47 removal notice was served.

 2. The Appellant appealed that decision. The  grounds  of  appeal  clearly
    stated that the Appellant claimed that the decision made on  16.04.2013
    was incompatible with his Article 8 ECHR rights to a private life.

 3. The appeal was dealt with on the papers, at the Appellant's request, by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas who in a determination promulgated  on
    28th August 2013, dismissed the appeal.

 4. I find that the Judge has erred in that determination in  that  he  has
    fundamentally overlooked the basis upon which the  appeal  fell  to  be
    determined. He  has  considered  the  Appellant's  position  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  only,  despite  stating  in  paragraph  1  of   the
    determination,

         "His application was refused on 26th April 2013 and he appeals that
         decision under Section  82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2006 and on human rights grounds".

    The determination contains no consideration of  the  main  ground  upon
    which the Appellant was appealing, namely Article 8 ECHR private life.

 5. Because the Judge misunderstood the basis on which he was  required  to
    determine the appeal, the parties have been denied  a  proper  hearing.
    For that reason, I have decided to send the appeal back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to  rehear  the  matter.  None  of  the
    findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thomas  are  preserved.  Mr
    Steward who appeared on behalf of the Respondent was in agreement  with
    this course of  action.  The  Appellant,  who  appeared  before  me  in
    Bradford, was unsure whether he wished  to  have  an  oral  hearing  or
    whether he was content for the matter to be reheard on  the  papers.  I
    explained that the rehearing would be on the papers unless he  informed
    the Tribunal Service that he wished to change it to  an  oral  hearing.
    The First-tier Tribunal will need to  fully  consider  the  grounds  of
    appeal, at the rehearing. The rehearing will take place at Bradford  as
    the Appellant now lives there.

DECISION

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    28th August 2013 is set aside. I direct that the appeal should be heard
    again in the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Thomas)  and  the  decision
    remade by that Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
