
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15907/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2014                               |On 11 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             IAN HOWARD MULLINGS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs, instructed by J McCarthy Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this case, the Secretary of State appeals a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Finch) promulgated on 10th March 2014 in which she
    allowed Mr Mullings' appeal against a refusal to grant his  application
    to regularise his immigration status on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. For convenience I refer to the parties  as  they  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 26th January 1968.

 4. The immigration history is complex.

 5. On 7th April 2001 he arrived as a visitor, accompanied by his son  Tyan
    Mullings, born on 29th October 1998, and was subsequently granted leave
    to remain as a student until 30th September 2007.  He then made an  in-
    time application to remain as a spouse of a British citizen, Goldie Ann
    Coats who was, then or subsequently, imprisoned for a serious  criminal
    conviction because   in 2013 the evidence was that at that time she had
    been in prison for some five years.

 6. In February 2009 the application was refused.

 7. On 17th March 2009, as the Appellant had not appealed he became  appeal
    rights exhausted and an overstayer.

 8. In 2009 and 2011, the Appellant made further  applications  to  remain,
    refusals of which   did not give rise to any appeal rights.

 9. On 4th July 2012, i.e. on the old rules, he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of ten  years'  residence  and  Article  8
    rights, and it is that application  which  forms  the  basis  of  these
    proceedings.

10. On 19th April 2013 the Respondent refused the application.

The Reasons for refusal

11. The decision is made  on  long  residence  grounds  with  reference  to
    276B(i)(a) on the basis that the Appellant could only show seven  years
    eleven months' lawful residency as opposed to the ten  years  required,
    and in the context of unlawful residence, required fourteen  years  and
    could only show twelve.

12. The decision is made on Human Rights grounds with reference to Appendix
    FM: the Appellant failed to meet the parent requirements because whilst
    the child Tyan lived with the Appellant some of the time he also had  a
    place of residence with his mother so that the Appellant did  not  have
    sole responsibility as required.

13.  The  Respondent  noted  that  the  Appellant  did  not  rely  on   his
    relationship with his estranged wife or any other partner.

14. In respect of the Appellant's private life  the  Respondent  considered
    paragraph  276ADE  and  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not   lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for twenty  years  and  had  social,
    cultural and  family  ties  with  Jamaica,  and  could  obtain  medical
    treatment in respect of  his  chronic  kidney  problems,  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim.

15. The Respondent concluded there was  no  evidence  which  justified  the
    Appellant remaining exceptionally outside of the Rules.

The Appeal

16. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   Judge  Finch  head
    evidence from the Appellant and his partner Ms Lawik.  The judge  found
    that both the Appellant and Ms Lawik were witnesses of truth  and  that
    their relationship was genuine and subsisting and of  a  character  and
    quality to engage Article 8.

17. The judge found that the reason that the couple  had  not  married  and
    were not cohabiting  was  because  of  Ms  Lawik's  position  that  the
    precarious immigration status of the Appellant  made  it  inappropriate
    because in the context of her  responsibilities,    with  five  of  her
    seven children, the eldest of whom is disabled as a  result  of  mental
    health problems and requiring her full-time care, living with  at  home
    with her.  The judge's reasoning makes it clear that she found that  to
    be an entirely reasonable and principled position. The judge found that
    the Appellant provided his British partner with considerable support in
    the context of the challenges of caring for the British children.   The
    unchallenged evidence was that the Appellant and Ms Lawik spend most of
    their time together. The judge clellary treated them as a family unit.

18. The judge gave particular and significant  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    relationship with the youngest child, Jymoyah, finding the Appellant to
    be being closely involved in her care at home, taking her to  and  from
    school regularly, as well as on outings  at  the  weekend.   The  judge
    found that the child, particularly in the context of having never known
    her natural father, had come to regard  the  Appellant  as  her  father
    figure.

19. The judge  found  the  relationships  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner's children was significant, and gave them weight in the  global
    assessment as to whether there was Private and Family life that engaged
    Article 8 ECHR.

20.  Taking  into  account  the  length  of  residence,   the   educational
    qualifications  obtained  the  Appellant's  involvement  in   a   small
    business, and the relationships with his partner  and  their  children,
    particularly the daughter Jymoyah, the judge found that  the  Appellant
    had established a family and private life here which engaged Article 8.



21. The judge noted that the British citizenship of the five children, and,
    finding the evidence showed  the  partner's  youngest  child  Jymoyah's
    interests as being significantly affected by the immigration  decision,
    considered her best interests as a primary consideration.  Taking  into
    account that she  has  no  contact  with  her  birth  father,  and  the
    Appellant's  involvement  in  her  life,  the  judge  found  that   the
    Appellant's removal would deprive her of a father  figure,  and  so  be
    contrary to her best interests.

22. The judge considered whether the British  partner  should  relocate  to
    Jamaica so as to preserve the family relationship  and  found  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect Ms Lawik to do so  bearing,  in  mind
    her citizenship and her family responsibilities.

23. The Appellant's son Tyan is still here, he has at times lived with  the
    Appellant. In February 2013 the Appellant's son's school confirmed that
    whilst Tyan's parents were living separately the child lived with  each
    of them at their different addresses. He  now  lives  with  his  mother
    only. There are no formal court orders. The judge found  that  although
    the relationship between the Appellant and his son had deteriorated, to
    the point that the son had not wanted to  see  his  father  since  July
    2013, it was none the less significant that the Appellant maintained  a
    parental role, still being in contact with his son's school,  and  also
    noted that the Appellant had had a  text  communication  from  his  son
    earlier in the year and was hopeful of rekindling contact.   The  judge
    found that to be a positive when considering the best interests of  the
    child.  The judge noted that in the context of paragraph  276ADE(4)  at
    the time of the Appellant's application in July 2012 his son would have
    had an entitlement under paragraph 276ADE(4) and would be  entitled  to
    remain.

24. The judge weighed the individual circumstances of the Appellant and the
    family against the competing public interest of removing those who have
    no entitlement to remain under the Immigration Rules, and found that on
    the facts of this case the individual rights of the  family  outweighed
    the   public   interest,   so   that   the   decision   constituted   a
    disproportionate interference with the respect to be accorded to  their
    family life under Article 8 ECHR.

25. It is against that decision that the Secretary of State now appeals  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

26. The application for  permission set out three grounds:

    (1)  The judge failed to find an arguable  case  that  there  are  good
         grounds for granting leave outside  of  the  Rules  on  account  of
         compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the  Rules,
         prior to engaging in an Article 8 analysis.

    (2)  The judge erred in finding that family life continued between  the
         Appellant and his son, given that contact between  them  ceased  in
         July 2013.

    (3)  The judge erred in finding the Appellant's  business  contribution
         to be a positive factor sufficient to outweigh the public  interest
         in immigration control.

27. Permission was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Chohan)  on
    23rd May 2014 because : referring to the case of Gulshan (Article  8  -
    new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640.

          "Whilst the judge considers the  appellant's  family  and  private
         life and conducts a proportionality exercise, however,  it  is  not
         clear  what  exactly  are  the  compelling  circumstances  in   the
         appellant's case.  In that respect, the judge may well have  fallen
         into error."





The Submissions

28. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Respondent adopted the grounds and  submitted
    that the judge had failed to consider whether there were  any  arguably
    good grounds for granting leave outside the Rules and that  in  reality
    there were no compelling circumstances based upon non-standard features
    of the Appellant's case which resulted in an unjustifiably harsh effect
    if the decision were upheld. The factual  finding  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's relationship with  his  son  was  not  sustainable  on  the
    evidence.  The Appellant's business contribution cannot be  a  positive
    factor sufficient to outweigh the public interest in light of the  case
    of  EU  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975  which  requires  a   unique,
    irreplaceable social  contribution  of  sufficient  significance  to  a
    community or the nation as a whole.

29. Mr Jacobs submitted that the  challenge was  essentially  a  perversity
    challenge which could not succeed and defended the  judge's  favourable
    decision under Article 8 on the basis that he fully took  into  account
    the public interest reflected in the Appellant's inability to meet  the
    requirements of the Rules but was entitled to conclude that  they  were
    outweighed by the particular circumstances of this  case  which  taking
    into account the primary consideration of the  best  interests  of  the
    child Jymoyah, the inability of the Appellant's partner to relocate  to
    Jamaica given the exceptionally compelling circumstances of all of  her
    five children who live with her but particularly the  eldest  for  whom
    she is a full-time carer.

My Consideration and Findings

30.  I begin by  considering  whether  the  judge  was  in  error  in  even
    assessing Article 8 ECHR as  averred  by  Mr  Tufan.   The  application
    predated the change in the rules, none the less the Judge at  paragraph
    10 reminds herself that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to remain under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  as  a
    partner or a parent.  The judge correctly self-directs at paragraph 11,
    setting out the case of MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  1192.  The
    case of MF reviews and confirms the jurisprudence,  including  that  of
    Gulshan. I am satisfied that unless it is shown that  his  decision  is
    inconsistent with correct self direction the failure to  make  specific
    reference to Gulshan is not a material error.

31. The substance of the case is, as identified in the grant of permission,
    whether or not in the Article 8 assessment  the  reasons  provided  for
    finding  the  decision  proportionate  are  sufficient  to  amount   to
    compelling circumstances which result in unduly  harsh  consequence.  I
    return to that assessment having considered the other  grounds  raised,
    because whilst it is clear that the grant of permission did not  accord
    them significant merit, permission was granted, and Mr Tufan relied, on
    all grounds and they are matters which have  potential  to  affect  the
    overall conclusions.

32. In respect of the ground to the point that the judge was  in  error  in
    finding family life existed between the Appellant and his son,  I  find
    that the judge was entitled to his conclusion.

      i) The judge did not ignore the fact that the son  no  longer  resided
         with the Appellant, or that they had  had  no  contact  since  July
         2013.  The judge accepted the evidence of the Appellant's  parental
         involvement in the context of contact with the school. He found the
         Appellant credible but in any event there  was  some  corroboration
         from  the  school.  The  judge  noted  there  had   been   a   text
         communication from the  son  earlier  in  the  year.   Taking  into
         account the biological  relationship,  and  noting  the  persuasive
         jurisprudence of Keegan v Ireland 18 EHRR 342 and  Berrehab  v  The
         Netherlands 11 EHRR 322,  the  judge  found  that  the  absence  of
         cohabitation,  in  the  context  of  a  relationship  involving   a
         biological son, who had lived with the Appellant from his birth  in
         1998 to 2001 when he  brought  him  to  the  United  Kingdom,  with
         continuing cohabitation on a full-time basis until 2007,  and  then
         on a part-time basis until 2013, the judge was entitled to conclude
         that the relatively recent position of the lack of contact was  not
         the determinative factor.  Family life is a matter  for  assessment
         and  judgement,  taking  into   account   the   entirety   of   the
         circumstances. The  Appellant's  son  is  a  minor.   The  parents'
         relationship had ended. In the context of the volatility of  family
         relationships and children in teenage years, the judge's conclusion
         is not perverse.

     ii) I find that the ground is in  any  event   misconceived  because  a
         full reading of the judge's decision makes  clear  that  whilst  he
         took into  account  the  evidence  of  the  relationship,  and  the
         aspirations of the Appellant in terms of its future, as well as the
         benefit to the son in the event that that came to fruition, it  was
         only a small part of the factual matrix of the  Appellant's  family
         and private life which led the judge to find that the threshold had
         been met for establishing that he had a  family  and  private  life
         deserving respect.

    iii) The judge was bound to take into  account  the  Appellant'  natural
         son's best  interests  as  a  child  affected  by  the  immigration
         decision. Indeed the respondent herself in the refusal assesses his
         best interests, with the implication that she did not  consider  it
         an irrelevant consideration, but one carrying  little  weight.  The
         inclusion of the factor as in the subsequent balancing exercise  as
         a relevant  consideration  is  unassailable.   The  weight,  absent
         perversity, to be attached to a particular factor in the  balancing
         exercise is for the judge hearing and seeing the  evidence,  absent
         perversity. The judge makes  it  plain  at  paragraph  24  that  he
         considers the rekindling of the relationship to be no more than  "a
         chance" and in the context of the whole decision it is  clear  that
         he does not accord the matter significant or  determinative  weight
         in the balancing exercise, as the respondent's grounds suggests.

33. I find that the  challenge  on  the  basis  of  the  treatment  of  the
    Appellant's son is not made out.

34. In respect of the Appellant's business interests  the  evidence  before
    the judge from the Appellant was that he had  been  economically  self-
    sufficient as a result of being able to run his  business  as  well  as
    being able to provide occasional employment  to  others  including  his
    partner's  son.   The  judge  concludes  that  the  circumstance  is  a
    positive.  However, contrary to the prominence of the factor  in  these
    grounds, it is clear that the judge did  not  find  the  issue  of  the
    business to be a determinative or tipping  factor  in  the  Appellant's
    case, but rather as one of many positive factors he took into  account.
    The judge has not given the  factor  such  significance  so  as  to  be
    perverse and so I find that the counting it in  the  balance  does  not
    give rise to any material error. I pause to note that the new statutory
    codification of Article 8 in the Immigration Act 2014 at  Section  117B
    Article 8, whilst not giving determinative weight to the issues, refers
    to the public interest being better served by those  who  are  able  to
    integrate into society because they can speak  English  and/or  because
    they are financially independent, so  as  to  be  a  lesser  burden  on
    taxpayers.

35. Returning to the ground given merit in the grant of permission,  namely
    the issue as to whether or not Article 8 is adequately covered  by  the
    rules or required  judicial  assessment  via  a  traditional  balancing
    exercise, the first point I note is that the grounds as drawn  fail  to
    take into account the judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  enjoys  a
    parental relationship with the British child Jymoyah, and  that  it  is
    not reasonable for her to relocate to Jamaica. That was  an  issue  not
    considered in the original refusal because it was a matter only  relied
    on in the appeal process. It is a  matter  which,  in  the  context  of
    positive findings as made by the judge, is given weight in Appendix FM.
     In addition the judge found that the  character  and  quality  of  the
    relationship between the  Appellant  and  the  child's  mother  carried
    significant weight. Again that was a relationship not assessed  by  the
    Respondent because it was only relied on in  the  appeal  process.  The
    judge had the benefit of hearing and seeing both the Appellant and  his
    partner give evidence.  The judge was impressed by  their  honesty  and
    found that  they  had  adopted  a  principled  and  laudable  stand  in
    connection with their decision to  postpone  marriage  because  of  the
    precariousness of the Appellant's immigration status.  The  judge  gave
    considerable  weight  to  the  character  and  quality  of  the  family
    relationships of the British citizen partner and the British child.

36. I find  that on the facts as found by the judge,  there is no merit  in
    the grounds contention that  her consideration of  Article  8  ECHR  is
    inconsistent with the  jurisprudence  of  requiring  identification  of
    arguable  compelling  circumstances.     In  this  case   the   judge's
    reasoning is consistent with the case law dealing with the  application
    of the Rules in Article 8 cases, including Gulshan,   so that any error
    in failing to refer to the case of Gulshan directly, or use the  phrase
    compelling circumstances or unduly harsh  consequences,   is  formulaic
    rather than substantive.

37. I can see no basis for concluding that  the  judge's  ultimate  finding
    that the decision was  disproportionate  was  perverse  or  irrational.
    Such a conclusion requires that no reasonable judge could have  reached
    those findings.  Perversity or irrationality is a "very high hurdle" to
    overcome and a "demanding concept" (see, R (Iran)  and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [11]).  Merely  to  disagree  with  the  finding
    comes nowhere near overcoming the "very high hurdle"  of  irrationality
    or perversity.  Indeed, as Carnwath LJ (as he  then  was)  observed  in
    Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [40] in relation to a challenge
    to a judge's finding that removal was disproportionate  on  the  ground
    that it was perverse:

         "The mere fact that one Tribunal  has  reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law ...".

38. For these reasons I reject the Respondent's contention that Judge Finch
    erred in law in allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.  The judge's decision was properly open to her.

Decision

39. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

40. Thus the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  respect
    of the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
