
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15542/2014
                                                               IA/15546/2014
                                                               IA/15551/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2016                             |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                            AA - first appellant
                            BB - second appellant
                             CC- third appellant
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss C Charton, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity has not been made hitherto in these proceedings.  However,
    in light of the age of the third appellant such an order is now made.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant and second
    appellant are partners and parents of the third appellant who was  born
    in the United Kingdom on 19 October 2010 and has Down's syndrome.

 3. They appealed against a decision of the respondent  dated  19  February
    2014 refusing to vary their leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
    against the decisions to remove them by way of directions under Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellants appealed that decision and a hearing  took  place  on  6
    November 2014 before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Callow.  At  that
    hearing evidence was heard and submissions made and the judge,  at  its
    conclusion, reserved his decision.  However, on  19  December  2014  he
    issued directions in the following terms:-
         "Background
         1.   AA (the first appellant) and BB  (the  second  appellant)  are
             partners.  They are the parents of CC (the third appellant).
         2.   The appellants' appeals were heard by me at  Taylor  House  on
             6 November 2014.  At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved
             my decision.
         3.   Subsequent  to  the  hearing  of  the  appeals  and  prior  to
             finalising my decision for promulgation it is in my opinion in
             the interests of justice for the hearing of the appeals to  be
             re-opened.  At the hearing:
             (a)  Reference was made  to  certain  JR  proceedings  and  in
                  respect of which a limited number of incomplete  documents
                  were filed;
             (b)  Reliance was  placed  on  the  respondent's  'Guidance  -
                  Specified application forms and procedures - version 11.1'
                  and a subsequent version (paras 6, 12 & 16 of the  grounds
                  of appeal);
             (c)   Reference  was  made  to  the  respondent's  policy   on
                  'Discretionary  Leave'  (paras  12  &  30  of  the   first
                  appellant's witness statement);
             (d)  Reliance was placed on the decision of R (SM) [2012] EWHC
                  1144 (Admin); [2013] WLR (D) 169;
             (e)  Since the hearing of  the  appeals  I  am  aware  of  the
                  decision in R (A) [2014] EWCA Civ  1334;  [2014]  WLR  (D)
                  435; and
             (f)  In the alternative reliance was placed Article  3  and  8
                  (Health).
         DIRECTIONS
         A.   An adjourned notice of hearing is to  be  issued  listing  the
             appeal to be heard on Monday 26 January 2015 at  Taylor  House
             at 10am.
         B.   The appellants must file and serve a supplementary  bundle  of
             documents five days before the date of the resumed hearing  of
             the appeals inclusive of:
             (a)  A copy of the Upper Tribunal's  determination  dismissing
                  the appellants' JR application;
             (b)  As  at  the  applicable  dates  copies  of  all  relevant
                  versions  of  the  respondent's  'Guidance   -   Specified
                  application  forms  and  procedures'   and   'Guidance   -
                  Discretionary  Leave'  issued  between  January  2011  and
                  February 2014.
         C.   The appellants are not required to attend the hearing, but are
             free to do so should they wish.
         D.   For reasons of  continuity  the  respondent  is  requested  to
             instruct Mr Bose to represent the respondent.  (Should he  not
             be available,  the  matter  must  nonetheless  proceed  to  be
             heard).
         E.   The representatives instructed to appear must be in a position
             to address the significance and weight to be attached  to  the
             said Guidance, the decision of R (A) and as to Article 3  &  8
             (Health) the cases of GS and EO (Article  3  -  Health  Cases)
             India [2012] UKUT 397 (IAC) and  Akhalu  (health  claim:  ECHR
             Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400  (IAC)  and  any  other  relevant
             decisions.
         J J Callow
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal"

 5. The appeal hearing was therefore resumed on 26 January 2015.

 6. Thereafter in a decision promulgated on 28  May  2015  the  appellants'
    appeals were dismissed on  Article  8  grounds.   The  judge  found  at
    paragraph 20 of his decision  that  the  respondent  erred  in  law  in
    considering the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Warr.  His reasons for so doing are dated 2 October 2015
    and state:-
         "The determination is a very lengthy and  careful  one.   The  full
         hearing took place in  November  and  the  decision  was  reserved.
         However the judge reopened matters, gave directions on 19  December
         2014  and  the  hearing  resumed  on  26  January  2015   and   the
         determination issued on 28 May 2015.
         The appellants appear  to  be  arguing  that  the  judge  erred  in
         requiring the appellants to adduce  evidence  of  the  respondent's
         policies in the particular circumstances of the case.
         The case is an unusual one and was plainly given  careful  scrutiny
         and it is no doubt in that context that the apparent delay  between
         the initial hearing and the date of the determination needs  to  be
         considered.
         There is potential scope for argument  raised  by  the  grounds  in
         respect of the procedures adopted in this case.  I do not limit the
         arguments to this aspect of the case however.  All the  grounds  of
         appeal may be argued.
         The expectations of the appellants should not be raised  unduly  by
         the grant of permission since, as First-tier Judge Davies observed,
         the determination is composed "with great care and precision"."

 8. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 9. Miss Charton relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal.   They
    are firstly that the judge failed to give any consideration to the fact
    that the respondent had repeatedly  compromised  the  position  of  the
    appellants and that this is against natural justice (delay),  that  the
    respondent failed to make a lawful decision and applied the wrong Rules
    and policies in place at the time of the application,  that  the  judge
    erred (in fact, law and procedure) by failing to apply the correct test
    to ascertain whether the appellants' claims can succeed  under  Article
    8, and that he failed to consider and have proper regard to  the  third
    appellant and his best interests.   Miss Charton  emphasised  that  in
    considering Article 8 the judge had failed to take account of the delay
    caused by the respondent's handling of the  application  and  to  apply
    relevant case law thereto.

10. Mr Melvin submitted that Judge Callow  directed  himself  appropriately
    and that his decision contained a comprehensive and  detailed  analysis
    of the position of all three appellants and particularly  that  of  the
    third appellant and his medical condition.  The judge was  entitled  to
    come to the conclusions that he did at paragraph 31 of his decision and
    that it had not been established that in all  the  circumstances  there
    was any exceptionality involved in the third appellant  being  returned
    to Nigeria and that the circumstances  found  did  not  meet  the  high
    threshold under Article 3.

11. Judge Warr granted permission to appeal on the basis of the "procedures
    adopted in  this  case"  but  did  not  limit  the  arguments  to  that
    particular aspect and accordingly all grounds were before me.

12. The nub of the first ground is that the judge failed to give sufficient
    weight to delays experienced by the  appellants  through  no  fault  of
    their own.  On any plain reading of the decision that is not the  case.
    The judge has set his conclusions into the context of the findings that
    he has made regarding the history of these appellants' applications  to
    the respondent.  The judge's directions for the  filing  of  additional
    evidence do not prejudice the appellants.  If  anything  they  afforded
    the appellants a further opportunity to pursue their case.

13. The second ground is flawed.  It submits  that  the  respondent  should
    have made her decision under the "old style" Article 8  principles  and
    policies in existence at the time of the application.  The respondent's
    decision is dated 19 February 2014 and does not fall within the  window
    between 9 July and 6 September 2012 and accordingly there is  no  error
    in the way the application, let alone the appeal, was approached.

14. The third ground maintains that the judge  failed  to  properly  assess
    this case "and the respondent's behaviour  throughout"  by  failing  to
    take into account the delay caused by the respondent in processing  the
    appellants' applications and the principles within the authority of  EB
    (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 4.  Again, on any  plain  reading  of  this
    decision that is simply not the  case.   The  judge  has  come  to  the
    conclusions  that  he  did  acknowledging  the  full  history  of   the
    appellants' applications and appeal.

15. Finally, it is suggested that the judge has erred in  his  approach  to
    the best interests of the third appellant with particular reference  to
    background evidence regarding children with Down's syndrome in Nigeria.
     It is suggested that the judge has failed to apply "anxious scrutiny".
     Again on any plain reading of this  decision  this  ground  can  quite
    simply not be sustained.  It is a decision which extends  to  22  pages
    where the judge has with great care  and  precision  analysed  all  the
    evidence and made findings based on it.  He has taken into account  the
    totality of the appellants' history of  dealings  with  the  respondent
    including that of delay.   There  is  a  clear  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to Article 8 and all the grounds are in fact no  more  than  a
    disagreement with findings which have been properly made and which  are
    legally adequate.

16. Whilst I recognise what is said in the reasons given by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Warr regarding the apparent delay between the initial hearing and
    the date of decision this was not an  issue  of  any  emphasis  in  the
    submissions of Miss Charton.  In any event whilst there is a  delay  by
    reason of the hearing being  concluded  on  26  January  2015  and  the
    decision not promulgated until 28 May 2015 there is nothing to  suggest
    that this is anything other than a thorough, careful and  compassionate
    analysis of the totality of the issues that Judge Callow faced.   There
    is no material before me to suggest that any of  the  three  appellants
    have been prejudiced by this delay.  The judge  has  given  cogent  and
    sustainable reasons for the decision  that  he  has  come  to  and  the
    grounds amount to no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  that  decision
    without identifying any material error of law whatsoever.

Conclusions

17. The remaking of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
    the making of an error of law.

18. I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 30 March 2016.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
