
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15972/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 November 2016                      |On 02 December 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 HINA NASIR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, of Counsel, instructed by SAJ Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
      been asked to make one and I see no public policy reason for doing  so
      and so none is made.

Background

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision refusing to vary  her  leave  to  remain  and  a  concomitant
      decision to remove her to Pakistan  contrary  to  section  47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 4 September 1991.  She
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 February 2013 with entry clearance
      conferring leave to enter as a Tier 4 Student Migrant until  1  August
      2014. On the day her leave was due to expire she applied to extend her
      leave to remain in the same category. On 13 April 2015 the  Respondent
      refused  the  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  essentially
      because the Appellant did not have a valid CAS assigned to  her  by  a
      licensed Tier 4 Sponsor.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.    The Appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana
      (hereafter "the Judge") on 11 May 2016. By  this  time  the  Appellant
      claimed to have established a relationship with a British citizen and,
      before the Judge the parties agreed that the sole issue to be  decided
      was  whether  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the   Appellant
      infringed Article 8 of the ECHR. Notwithstanding, during the course of
      the hearing it became apparent to the Judge  that  reliance  was  also
      being placed on the provisions of EX.1. of Appendix FM of  the  Rules.
      After hearing oral evidence from the Appellant  and  her  partner  the
      Judge dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 10 June  2016.
      The Judge did not accept the Appellant had established a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with her partner [26] or that  they  had  been
      living together for two years. The  Judge  concluded  the  Appellant's
      relationship with a married man with  four  children  was  a  ruse  to
      enable her to remain in the UK.

5.     The  Judge  noted  there  was  no  tenancy  agreement  supportive  of
      cohabitation  and  referred  to  a  general  lack   of   documentation
      supportive of the relationship. The  Judge  rejected  the  Appellant's
      explanation that she had been unable to obtain evidence given  to  her
      previous solicitor because it was not credible "that  a  solicitor  in
      this country would not give the appellant her documents and  that  the
      appellant  who  is  currently  represented,  would  not  have  made  a
      complaint against this solicitor" [21]. The Judge further  noted  that
      the Appellant gave her address as  her  aunt's  address  and  not  the
      address she claimed to live at with her partner which was a commercial
      building, and there was no  documentary  evidence  that  there  was  a
      studio flat in that building [22]. The Judge noted that there  was  no
      documentary evidence supportive of the Appellant's claim that an  Imam
      would not marry her as a Sunni Muslim  to  her  Ahmadi  partner  in  a
      mosque unless she converted and further noted the absence of  evidence
      to show the partner was  going  through  a  divorce  [23].  The  Judge
      further considered that it was not credible the Appellant lived with a
      very strict aunt yet was able to  live  away  from  the  house  during
      weekdays. The Judge also noted that the  Appellant's  claim  that  she
      could not return to Pakistan because she was living  with  a  man  and
      thus at risk from her family was  belatedly  raised  at  the  hearing.



6.    For these reasons the Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  not
      established a family life, and that any  private  life  would  not  be
      prejudiced by a sufficiently grave interference to render her  removal
      disproportionate contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Grounds of Application

7.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal  on  27  June  2016  on  the
      basis that the Judge erred in law essentially on the grounds that  she
      failed to take material matters into account; committed a  mistake  of
      fact; reached inadequately reasoned findings and failed to  take  note
      of the Upper Tribunal's Country Guidance in respect of the persecutory
      treatment metered out to followers of the Ahmadi faith; supportive  of
      the claim that the Appellant and partner would  not  be  permitted  to
      marry in a mosque.

Permission to Appeal

8.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  J  M
      Hollingworth on 14 October 2016 on all grounds.

Error of Law

9.    At the  hearing  both  representatives  made  submissions.  Mr  Walker
      conceded that the Judge materially erred in law at [22].  In  view  of
      that concession which was rightly  made  and,  for  other  reasons,  I
      announced my decision that the Judge erred in law and I set aside  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal. As the parties were in  agreement
      that the decision could not stand it is not necessary to traverse  all
      the Grounds of Appeal or set out my reasons in detail but I briefly do
      so below.

10.   There is no challenge to the Judge's decision  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. The focus of the Appellant's challenge relates to  the  Judge's
      decision under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  and,  in  particular,  to  her
      credibility  findings  in  relation  to  whether  the  Appellant   had
      established a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  her  partner.
      While the Judge gave reasons for finding that the relationship was not
      genuine I find that they are infected by legal  error  and  materially
      so.

11.   Firstly, there is a contradiction at [20] where the Judge  begins  her
      assessment of the evidence by stating that there  was  no  documentary
      evidence of a tenancy agreement. It is not clear why the Judge  formed
      that view because she follows this by referring to a tenancy agreement
      of 23 November 2015. That tenancy agreement is in the joint  names  of
      the Appellant and her partner and is in respect of a residential  flat
      situated behind [~] Martin Way: see page 14 of the Appellant's bundle.



12.   At [22] the Judge referred to it  being  established  at  the  hearing
      that the address the Appellant claimed to live at with her partner was
      a commercial  building  and  went  on  to  state  that  there  was  no
      documentary evidence that there was a studio flat  in  that  building.
      The only reference to a commercial building is what the Judge noted at
      [16] from the evidence of the partner when it was put to him in cross-
      examination that  the  address  where  they  claimed  to  live  was  a
      commercial building. However, the Judge recorded the response as being
      that the witness said that they lived in a studio flat. The evidential
      basis for the Judge's  conclusion  that  it  was  established  at  the
      hearing that the address given  was  a  commercial  building  is  thus
      unclear. It is apparent that the evidence documentary or otherwise did
      not support that conclusion and it is plain that no consideration  was
      given to the terms  of  the  tenancy  agreement  that  stipulated  the
      letting was residential and was a property "behind [~] Martin Way".

13.   The Appellant's evidence was that she hired a person  namely  Mohammed
      Usman who posed as a lawyer and informed her that he had submitted her
      documents to the Home Office and had informed the Court of her Grounds
      of Appeal. The Appellant stated that she had sought  advice  from  her
      current representatives who after correspondence from the Home  Office
      and the Court informed her that none of her documents or said  grounds
      had been submitted and that Mr Usman was not even a lawyer and did not
      belong to any firm. That evidence is set out  in  the  course  of  the
      Appellant's written testimony.

14.   At [21] the Judge rejected the explanation  provided  for  a  lack  of
      documents as not credible because she did not accept that a  solicitor
      in this country would not give the Appellant her  documents  and  that
      the Appellant who was currently represented  would  not  have  made  a
      complaint against that solicitor. In reaching that conclusion  however
      the Judge failed to make any findings in relation to  the  Appellant's
      written evidence as to Mr Usman  before  proceeding  to  draw  adverse
      credibility conclusions in respect  of  the  Appellant.  Clearly,  the
      explanation warranted consideration given the Judge's  concern  as  to
      the lack of documentation and her reference to a  "solicitor"  appears
      to  indicate  that  she  failed  to  take  on  board  the  Appellant's
      explanation that she was dealing with a bogus individual.

15.   That error I find dovetails into the Judge's conclusion at  [24]  that
      the Appellant's  claim  that  she  is  at  risk  in  Pakistan  was  an
      afterthought not made until  the  hearing  in  order  to  counter  the
      suggestion that she could make an entry clearance  application.  I  am
      satisfied that the Judge erred in  the  footing  for  this  conclusion
      given the potential elision between the absence of clear  findings  as
      to the distinction between a solicitor and a man posing as a solicitor
      and the impact of that upon the presentation of the Appellant's case.

16.   The above errors I find were central to the Judge's assessment of  the
      genuine  nature  of  the  relationship  which  was  made  without  any
      consideration of the background and substance of the relationship. For
      all these reasons I find that the Judge's assessment of  the  evidence
      is materially  flawed  and  her  credibility  findings  cannot  stand.
      Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





Disposal

17.   Both parties invited the Tribunal to remit the matter  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade. By paragraph 7.2  of  the
      relevant practice statement for appeals on or after 25 September 2012,
      I must be satisfied that:

      "... the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is
      such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2  it  is
      appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

18.   In all the circumstances, given that fresh findings of fact will  have
      to made, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

19.   The decision involved the making of an error on a point of law and  is
set aside.

20.   The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
      before a Judge other than Judge Chana.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Dated: 30 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

