
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
IA/15027/2014

                                            IA/15032/2014

                                            IA/15034/2014

                                            IA/15039/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 24 April 2015                         |On 27 April 2015          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                           (1) Mrs MARIA GLAZUNOVA
                         (2) Master MIKHAIL GLAZUNOV
                            (3) Mr IGOR PODKOVKO
                           (4) Dr MIKHAIL GLAZUNOV
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel (instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    The Appellants in these linked cases  appealed  with  permission
           granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  on  10  February  2015
           against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan
           who had dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the  Secretary
           of State's decisions dated 14  March  2014  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 8 August 2014.  The Appellants are  nationals  of
           Russia, who had applied for further leave to remain in Tier 1 as
           an Entrepreneur Migrant and as his dependants.  This was refused
           and removal  directions  were  made  under  section  47  of  the
           Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


      2.    It was accepted before Judge Chohan  that  the  Appellants  were
           unable to  satisfy  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,  and  the
           hearing accordingly proceeded on the basis that  the  Appellants
           were entitled to leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of  the
           Immigration Rules and on Article 8  ECHR  family  life  grounds.
           Judge Chohan found as a fact that the Appellants had acquired 10
           years'  continuous   lawful   residence   (see   [10]   of   the
           determination) but  that  they  could  not  vary  their  current
           application.

      3.    Judge Keki? considered it arguable that Judge Chohan  had  erred
           in her approach  and  that  the  relevant  fact  was  10  years'
           continuous lawful residence.  It  was  also  arguable  that  the
           judge had materially erred in her approach to Article 8 ECHR.


      4.    The Respondent had initially  opposed  the  onwards  appeal,  by
           notice under rule 24 in the  form  of  a  letter  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal dated 27 February 2015.  However, following  discussion
           between Mr Miah for  the  Appellants  and  Mr  Kandola  for  the
           Respondent  before  the  substantive  onwards   appeal   hearing
           commenced, it was accepted on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
           that there were material errors of law in the determination.  It
           was accepted that the judge had confused the restrictions on the
           Points Based System with the 10 year continuous lawful residence
           claim which had been raised.  It was accepted that the decisions
           had to be returned to the Secretary of State for the  discretion
           under paragraph 276B to be exercised.


      5.    The tribunal agreed with the concession  which  had  been  made.
           Unfortunately the judge failed to notice that  the  Respondent's
           refusal decisions had  incorporated  section  120,  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  notices,  which  entitled  and
           indeed required the Appellants to state  any  other  grounds  on
           which they claimed to be able to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
           They had done so by the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
           and so the judge had to consider that issue as far  as  she  was
           able to do so.  The judge's finding that  10  years'  continuous
           lawful residence had been achieved by  the  Appellants  was  not
           challenged, but the judge's finding that the point could not  be
           raised before her was  wrong.   The  judge's  finding  that  the
           Appellants had achieved 10 years' continuous lawful residence in
           the United Kingdom by the date of the hearing on 25 June 2014 is
           accordingly preserved.  Her determination is otherwise set aside
           for error of law and is remade as follows.


      6.    The relevant rule is in the following terms:


           Requirements for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  ground  of
           long residence in the United Kingdom
           276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
           leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in  the  United
           Kingdom are that:
           (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence
           in the United Kingdom; or
           (b) he has had at least 14 years  continuous  residence  in  the
           United Kingdom, excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom
           following service of notice of liability to removal or notice of
           a decision to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8  to
           10A, or 12 to 14, of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971  or
           section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 Act, or  of  a
           notice of intention to deport him from the United Kingdom; and
           (ii) having regard to the public interest there are  no  reasons
           why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave
           to remain on the ground of long residence, taking  into  account
           his:
           (a) age; and
           (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
           (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations
           and employment record; and
           (d) domestic circumstances; and
           (e) previous criminal record and the nature of  any  offence  of
           which the person has been convicted; and
           (f) compassionate circumstances; and
           (g) any representations received on the person's behalf; and
           (iii) the applicant has  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English
           language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom, unless he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over  at
           the time he makes his application.


      7.    Current Home Office Guidance (dated 17 October 2014), page 11 of
           53, states that any period of lawful continuous  leave  suffices
           for paragraph 276B, including leave available by virtue  of  the
           operation of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  Thus if as
           here  the  tribunal  were  satisfied  that  the  Appellants  had
           completed  10  years'  lawful  residence  by   virtue   of   the
           application of section 3C, the appropriate course is  to  return
           the case to the Secretary of State for fresh decisions  on  that
           basis to be taken,  since  there  is  a  discretion  yet  to  be
           exercised.


      8.    Paragraph 276C shows that there is a discretion under  paragraph
           276B, which is reviewable by the tribunal  pursuant  to  Section
           86(3)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
           Furthermore,  there  is  also  a  further  relevant   discretion
           available under Chapter 18 of  the  IDIs,  which  has  not  been
           exercised.
      9.    The cases in which the tribunal should exercise  its  discretion
           before the relevant discretion under the Immigration  Rules  has
           first been exercised by the Secretary of State  are  rare,  even
           where as  here  every  potential  test  appears  to  favour  the
           Appellants.  The tribunal finds as at the date  of  the  hearing
           that the Respondent's decisions are not  or  are  no  longer  in
           accordance with the law, albeit inadvertently, and  so  must  be
           revisited in accordance with the finding that the Appellants had
           achieved 10 years' continuous lawful  residence  in  the  United
           Kingdom by the date  of  the  hearing  on  25  June  2014.   The
           discretion available under the Immigration Rules and  IDIs  must
           be exercised by the primary decision maker on that  basis.   The
           Appellants' appeals are allowed to that extent.
      10.   In those circumstances, it is not necessary for the tribunal  to
           examine the Appellants' Article 8 ECHR claims, not least because
           even if the tribunal found in the Appellants' favour  (which  is
           certainly possible on the facts), the result  would  only  be  a
           form of limited leave to remain and so would not necessarily  be
           of value to the Appellants.
      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.   The Appellants' appeals are allowed.


      The following decision is substituted:


      The appeals are allowed to the limited extent  that  the  Respondent's
      decisions were not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  applications
      remain  outstanding  before  the  Respondent,  awaiting  fresh  lawful
      decisions on the basis that the Appellants  have  achieved  10  years'
      continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeals have been allowed but on the basis of new facts and  to  a
      limited extent.  Fee awards are not appropriate.


      Signed
                                        Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
