
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15031/2015
                                                IA/15037/2015, IA/15042/2015
                                                               IA/15045/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2016                           |On 11 October 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DD
                                     YD
                                     KD
                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
                    Solicitors


ANONYMITY
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  orders
otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof
shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Respondents  herein.    This
prohibition  applies   to,   amongst   others,   all   parties   and   their
representatives.

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                   (Delivered orally on 7 September 2016)

    Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD")  is  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal and I shall refer to the 'D' family as the  claimants  herein.
    The claimants are all Indian nationals.  The first  two  claimants  are
    married and are the parents of the third and fourth claimants, who were
    born in February 1994 and October 2002 respectively.

 2. On 20 February 2012 each of the claimants made a  human  rights  claim,
    having originally entered the country on 1  November  2006  with  visit
    visas expiring in June 2007.  Those human rights claims were eventually
    rejected by the SSHD in a composite decision of 30 March 2015, the SSHD
    having earlier agreed to reconsider previous refusal decisions.  On the
    same date the SSHD issued a notice of liability of removal in  relation
    to each of the claimants.

    First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. The claimants appealed the Secretary of State's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) and the appeals were heard on the same occasion  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Price.

 4. The FtT allowed each of the appeals  on  human  rights  grounds,  in  a
    composite decision promulgated on 29 February 2016.   In  summary,  the
    FtT allowed the fourth claimant's appeal under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    of the Immigration Rules, and the first, second  and  third  claimants'
    appeals outside the Immigration Rules, on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 5. In coming to its conclusions in relation to the fourth claimant the FtT
    said as follows:

         "43. ... applying the relevant law to the established facts I  find
             that the decision of the respondent appealed against is not in
             accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration  Rules.
             The respondent accepts that the fourth appellant  has  resided
             in the UK  continuously  for  seven  years  at  the  date  the
             respondent reconsidered the appellant's application  following
             the successful judicial review claim.  This issue  is  not  in
             dispute between the parties.

         44.  The issue  in  dispute  in  respect  of  this  aspect  of  the
             Immigration Rules is that it is not unreasonable to expect the
             third appellant who fulfils paragraph 276ADE to leave  the  UK
             with his family.  I do not agree with the respondent.  I  find
             as a fact that the fourth appellant has an established private
             life in the UK.  It would be entirely unreasonable for him  to
             live in India, where he has no cultural ties, no  relationship
             with extended family members  and  limited  knowledge  of  the
             language.  I am required to have regard to Section 55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and particularly
             the case of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 ...

         45.  I have also had regard to paragraph 20 and paragraph 44 of the
             same judgment which held that  children  should  not  be  held
             responsible for the conduct  of  their  parents.   The  fourth
             appellant cannot be blamed for his  parents'  failure  not  to
             regularise their stay in the UK  at  an  earlier  date.   This
             factor cannot be weighed against him.

         46.  The fourth appellant is 12  years  old  at  the  date  of  the
             impugned decision.  He is no longer simply  inward-looking  to
             his parents.  The fourth appellant is fully dependent upon his
             parents  financially  and  emotionally   but   he   has   also
             established ties with his peers within school and will be less
             adaptable to change.  I find that it would not  be  reasonable
             for him to return with his family to India.

         47.  I accept that the removal of the  fourth  appellant  from  his
             home would  be  detrimental  to  his  physical,  intellectual,
             emotional, social and behavioural development.  I accept  that
             the avoidance of disruption to his education is  in  his  best
             interests and this factor should be given the most weight.

         48.  I find that the decision of the respondent dated 30 March 2015
             is not in accordance with the law.  I allow the appeal of  the
             fourth appellant on this basis."

    Decision and Discussion

 6. The FtT was clearly in error in allowing the fourth  claimant's  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules, for the reasons highlighted
    by Judge Pedro in his grant of permission. The fourth  claimant  cannot
    meet the requirements of such Rules because, as  of  the  date  of  the
    application to the SSHD, he had not been living in the UK for 7  years.
    This is determinative of the consideration under  the  rule.  The  fact
    that he had done so by the time of the SSHD's decision, and the  appeal
    before the FtT, is irrelevant to the consideration under this rule.

 7. Whilst this was accepted by Mr Malik he nevertheless asserted that  the
    FtT's decision should remain standing. This submission was  underpinned
    by the assertion that the aforementioned error was immaterial.  It  was
    said that this was so because  the  same  analysis  is  required  under
    section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  as  is  required  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules, save that the accrual of  the  relevant  7-
    year period need not have occurred by the time of the application under
    section 117B(6), in contrast with the position under para 276ADE. It is
    sufficient under section 117B(6)  for  the  fourth  appellant  to  have
    remained in the UK for 7 years prior to the date of the FtT's decision.
    It was asserted, therefore, that the FtT would inevitably have  allowed
    the appeal outside the Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds,  on  the
    same basis that it allowed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

 8. Whilst Mr Malik is correct  in  his  analysis  of  differences  in  the
    respective requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the  Rules  and
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, he is not  correct  in  his  assertion
    that the aforementioned error, made by  the  FtT  in  its  analysis  of
    paragraph 276ADE, is immaterial.

 9. Contrary to  the  assertion  made  by  Mr  Malik  there  are  different
    considerations in play as between paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules and
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. In particular consideration under  the
    latter provision entails the additional factor of the Immigration Rules
    not having been met by the claimant.  That cannot, for obvious reasons,
    be a feature of a consideration under paragraph  276ADE.  Consequently,
    there will always be  an  additional  matter  for  consideration  under
    section 117B(6) that  weighs  in  favour  of  the  public  interest  of
    removal, which is  not  present  in  a  consideration  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) the Rules.

10. In any event, even if I am  wrong  in  what  I  say  above,  the  FtT's
    decision made in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of  the  Rules  is
    legally flawed for other reasons.

11. First, the FtT did not consider the fourth  claimant's  appeal  on  the
    basis that the first and second claimants would  be  removed  to  India
    with the fourth claimant; contrary to the correct  approach  identified
    by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

12. Second, it is clear when reading paragraphs  43  to  48  of  the  FtT's
    decision as a whole, and in particular paragraph 45 thereof,  that  the
    FtT considered the issue of whether it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    fourth claimant to leave the United Kingdom as an exercise  constrained
    to the circumstances of the fourth claimant. It did not,  for  example,
    consider the wider context  of  the  overall  analysis  of  the  public
    interest, including the conduct of the  fourth  claimant's  parents  in
    remaining in the UK without leave. In this  regard  FtT's  approach  is
    unlawful, being inconsistent with the correct  approach  identified  by
    the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  and  in
    particular paragraphs 13, 45 and 47 thereof.

13. For the reasons set out above I set aside the FtT's decision.

14. Given the extent of the further  fact  finding  exercise  necessary  to
    determine the appeal, and in particular that  relating  to  whether  it
    would be reasonable to require the fourth claimant to leave the  United
    Kingdom, I conclude that the appropriate forum for the continuation  of
    this appeal is the FtT. I therefore remit the appeal to the FtT for the
    appeals to be decided afresh. The parties did not express  disagreement
    with this approach.

Notice of Decision

The FtT's decision contains  an  error  of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
outcome of the appeal and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for reconsideration de novo.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
