
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA152802013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2016                            |On 13 June 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             bassey moses bassey
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Corben, Counsel, instructed by St. Valchikwe
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) We see no need for and do not make an order  restricting  reporting  of
    this Decision.

 2) The respondent in this appeal, hereinafter "the claimant", is a citizen
    of Nigeria who appealed  successfully  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  a
    decision of the appellant, hereinafter "the Secretary of State", on  22
    April 2013 to refuse him leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under the points-based system.   The  Secretary  of  State  was
    given permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State's appeal succeeded before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Judge was found to have erred in law and the  decision  set  aside  and
    remade by the Upper Tribunal. It dismissed the appeal.

 3) The Secretary  of  State  further  appealed.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was
    required to determine two grounds of appeal but  only  determined  one.
    It was agreed before the Court of Appeal that the ground it  determined
    it determined wrongly and the claimant should have  succeeded  on  that
    point.  It followed that it was essential  to  determine  properly  the
    second ground.

 4) By consent the Court of Appeal ordered that:

         "The matter be remitted to the Upper Tribunal  of  the  Immigration
         and Asylum Chamber for a hearing, pursuant to  Section  14  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, limited to whether  the
         [claimant] can satisfy the detailed specific  requirements  in  the
         Rules  as  further  described  in   paragraph   18(G)(2)   of   the
         determination of the Upper Tribunal dated 3 March 2014".

 5) We set out below the full terms of ground 2 as recorded in paragraph 18
    of the Determination and Reasons:

 6) "Ground 2:   On  the  evidence  submitted  with  the  application,  the
    [claimant]  had  failed  to  satisfy  a  number  of  detailed  specific
    requirements in the  Rules,  namely  (i)  a  letter  from  a  financial
    institution holding the relevant funds confirming the amount  available
    to the applicant and specifically  naming  him;  and  (ii)  a  contract
    incorporating the applicant's name, the evidential  flexibility  policy
    having no application."

 7) It is, we find, alarmingly easy in cases under the points-based  system
    for the Tribunal to confuse firstly, any informed reader and, secondly,
    itself by slavishly setting out exacting Rules identified by  a  series
    of numbers and letters in the system at which, although usually logical
    can often perplex.

 8) There was  a  clear  measure  of  agreement  between  the  parties  and
    accordingly we have decided not to set  out  every  relevant  point  in
    great detail.

 9) The Rules required the claimant to show on one document that he had the
    prescribed sum of money for investment in the United Kingdom.   It  may
    be that the claimant did have sufficient money but that could  only  be
    deduced confidently by reading three documents and so the evidence  did
    not satisfy the Rules.  Similarly, contrary to the requirements of  the
    Rules, he did not have  a  written  contract  identifying  him  as  the
    contracting party. He appeared to be acting behind the corporate  veil.
    He may well have been planning to engage in a lawful  activity  but  he
    did not present his evidence in a compliant way.

10) There was really no argument to be made to say that the documents  that
    were provided did meet the strict requirements of the Rules.  By simple
    inspection they do not.  Further it was not properly arguable that  the
    evidential flexibility policy in force at the relevant time obliged the
    Secretary of State to make further enquiries.

11) Mr Corben argued that the Secretary of State had  changed  her  polices
    and if  the  policies  presently  in  force  were  in  force  when  the
    application was made the application would have succeeded.  We  see  no
    need to decide that point in this appeal but we  incline  to  the  view
    that he is correct.

12) Mr Corben argued that the Secretary of State had not made her  policies
    more generous as an act of  unnecessary  benevolence  but  because  the
    other policies were so strict that they did not comply with the  common
    law requirements of fairness.  The Secretary of State did not discharge
    her common law obligation to act fairly by relying on a policy if  that
    policy was inherently unfair.

13) Whilst that may well be a correct statement of law we cannot agree that
    it is relevant in this case.

14) The plain fact is that the strict requirements of the  Rules  were  not
    met and there was  nothing  unfair  about  their  requirements  or  the
    practical operation of the policy.  That the  Secretary  of  State  has
    since loosened the requirements of the Rules  might  suggest  that  she
    thought the Rules were unsatisfactory but that  is  entirely  different
    from an admission that they were unfair and neither is it  evidence  of
    the same.   The Secretary of State is perfectly entitled  to  prescribe
    strict requirements.   She  has  to  consider  many  factors  including
    devising a system that is workable.  If the applicant had organised his
    affairs to satisfy the requirements of the Rules the application  would
    have  succeeded.  If  he  cannot  organise  his  affairs  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules his application cannot succeed.  If he  could
    have done but did not then it is no doubt  personally  frustrating  but
    that does not make the scheme unfair. It really is as simple as that.

15)  If  follows  that  although  we  appreciate   Mr   Corben's   measured
    persistence, we cannot agree with his submissions.

16) It follows that we must and do  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    second ground is made out.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  could  not  have
    decided properly on the evidence that the claimant met the requirements
    of the Rules. The application was  properly  refused.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal should have dismissed the appeal and we substitute a  decision
    to that effect.

17) We say additionally  that  at  the  start  of  the  hearing  there  was
    discussion about the proper progress of the appeal because the claimant
    may well (we put it no higher than that) be qualified to remain on  the
    basis of his long residence in the United  Kingdom.   Having  discussed
    the case with us Mr Corben decided not to make an application to  amend
    his grounds of appeal.   We  are  however  happy  to  confirm  that  in
    dismissing the claimant's appeal we make no criticism of  the  claimant
    beyond saying that he  made  an  application  that  could  not  succeed
    because he did not satisfy the exact requirements of the Rules.

18) We also indicated that we should, in all the circumstances,  promulgate
    our decision quickly and that we have done.

    Notice of Decision

19) The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed.  We
    set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated  10 June 2016                  |

