
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15843/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                               GAGANDEEP SINGH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Shamzuzzoha, Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by Mr Gagandeep Singh against the decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
         decision to refuse his application for leave to remain as a Tier  4
         (General) Student  and  to  remove  him  from  the  UK  by  way  of
         directions pursuant to section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
         Nationality Act 2006.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) we do not make  an  anonymity  order.   No
         order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and there were no  issues
         before us that might require such an order.

    Background

      3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 30 May 1987.   He  came
         to the United Kingdom on 17 September 2005 as a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student under the Points Based System with leave to remain until 31
         January 2009.  The papers indicate that his leave was  subsequently
         extended to enable him to complete his course and that he was  then
         granted post-study work  leave  for  a  period  of  2  years.   The
         appellant then made a further in-time  application  on  29  October
         2013 for leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  to  enable  him  to
         complete a diploma in strategic management.

      4. The respondent's refusal letter dated 26  March  2014  refused  the
         application on the grounds that the appellant was not in possession
         of a valid Confirmation of Acceptance Studies (CAS)  and  that  the
         appellant had not been awarded points for  maintenance  because  he
         had not submitted a valid CAS.  The application  was  also  refused
         under paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules as the  appellant
         was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules,  the
         General Grounds of Refusal.  The refusal letter indicated that  the
         appellant   had   submitted    a    bank    statement,    reference
         3417000109937088 and that 'these documents have been  confirmed  as
         false by the issuing authority.'

      5. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Robinson  on  17
         November  2014.   In  relation   to   the   CAS   the   appellant's
         representative referred to the practice where a  student  would  be
         given 60 days to 'regularise his stay or leave the UK',  in  effect
         an opportunity to find  a  new  sponsor.   However  the  respondent
         indicated that the  fundamental  reason  why  the  application  was
         refused was the submission of a false document.  The  judge,  in  a
         decision promulgated  on  26  November  2014,  concluded  that  the
         respondent provided strong evidence in the  form  of  two  Document
         Verification Reports indicating that appropriate queries were  made
         about  the  documents  in  question.   The  judge  found  that  the
         conclusions of the reports were based on  standard  procedures  and
         found no fault with them.  The judge  was  of  the  view  that  the
         further evidence, in the form of two further  letters  from  Punjab
         National Bank,  was  unreliable.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
         appellant did submit false documents in support of his  application
         and that these were  material  to  his  application  for  leave  to
         remain.  The judge dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules
         and under Article 8.

      6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the  basis
         that the judge failed to apply the immigration rules appropriately;
         that the judge  was  wrong  in  assessing  the  engagement  of  the
         Appellant's  human  rights   and   the   proportionality   of   the
         respondent's refusal decision; and that  the  judge  was  wrong  in
         assessing the genuineness of the two bank letters submitted by  the
         appellant for the appeal and in particular the judge was  incorrect
         to find that there was no branch address or telephone number in the
         letters.  It was argued that this was an error  in  material  facts
         which  taken  into  proper  consideration  could  have  led  to   a
         conclusion that the documents were genuine.  Permission  to  appeal
         was granted on 5 May 2015.  The judge granting  permission  was  of
         the view that there was  an  arguable  single  issue  of  merit  in
         relation to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to the
         letters purportedly provided from Punjab National Bank in 2014.

    Ground 1

      7. There was no substantive argument before  us  in  relation  to  any
         claimed failure  by  the  judge  to  apply  the  immigration  rules
         appropriately. Having satisfied  himself  that  the  appellant  had
         submitted false documents in support of the application  which  for
         the reasons set out below, at Ground 2, we find  was  a  conclusion
         open to the judge, the judge properly dismissed  the  appeal  under
         paragraph 322(1A) and under the  points  based  system,  paragraphs
         245ZX(a) and (c) of the immigration rules.   We  do  not  find  any
         merit in this ground.

    Ground 2

      8. Again, although we pointed out to Mr Shamzuzzoha that this was  the
         only ground on which permission was based, there was  initially  no
         substantive argument made in relation  to  the  additional  letters
         purportedly provided by Punjab National Bank.   The  thrust  of  Mr
         Shamzuzzoha's argument was that it is for the Home Office to  prove
         with cogent evidence that any alleged deception has  occurred.   Mr
         Shamzuzzoha rehearsed the  arguments  made  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal that the two document  verification  reports  (DVRs)  were
         contradictory.

      9. It was Mr Shamzuzzoha's contention that whereas the first DVR dated
         21 January  2014  clearly  stated  in  the  'information  verified'
         section that the name and account  number  provided  (for  Sarbjeet
         Kaur, the appellant's mother) were false, the second DVR  dated  27
         January 2014 did not  state  this  in  the  'information  verified'
         section but rather in the comments box.  Mr  Shamzuzzoha  therefore
         argued that the two DVRs were contradictory.

     10. Although it was Mr Shamzuzzoha's submission  that  the  second  DVR
         confirmed the existence of the appellant's account and the balance,
         as we indicated to Mr Shamzuzzoha at the hearing we  did  not  find
         this to be the case.  The second DVR in our findings  set  out  the
         claimed details of the account, including the  claimed  balance  at
         the 'information provided' section.  The fact  that  the  verifying
         officer within  the  Document  Centre  Exception  at  the  Identity
         Resolution Unit, left the  'information  verified'  section  blank,
         instead stating in the 'comments'  section  as  follows:  'False  -
         checks  with  issuing  body  confirm  documents  are   false   (see
         attachment).  Third party confirmation received on  22/1/14',  does
         not, in our findings, make the two  DVRs  contradictory.   We  note
         that the first  DVR  clearly  sets  out  that  the  account  number
         provided for the appellant's mother does not exist but  that  there
         is another account in the name of the appellant's mother,  Sarbjeet
         Kaur w/o Balraj Singh with a balance of Rs 2,502.  The DVR  records
         the Entry Clearance Assistant  as  calling  the  number  given  and
         speaking to an individual who confirmed that his contact number had
         been misused and that  he  did  not  know  anyone  with  the  names
         Sarbjeet Kaur or Balraj Singh.

     11. Having considered all the evidence the judge went on to make  clear
         findings, at paragraphs 30 to  34,  including  that  there  was  no
         discrepancy between the two reports and that the conclusions of the
         two DVRs were 'based on standard procedures and  I  find  no  fault
         with them'.  Those were findings that were  properly  open  to  the
         judge on the evidence before him.

     12.  In  his  reply  to  the  presenting  officer's   submissions,   Mr
         Shamzuzzoha sought to criticise the judge's findings  at  paragraph
         28 of the decision and reasons in  relation  to  two  further  bank
         letters purportedly provided by the Punjab National Bank.  Although
         permission to appeal was granted on this basis we find no merit  in
         this argument.

     13. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  point  to  the  bank
         stamps, contrary to the findings of the judge, containing a  number
         dedicated to the specific  branch  of  the  Punjab  Bank  and  that
         'although are a bit blurry, have the name Rayaa which can  be  read
         and that is the  Branch  that  issued  the  letters'.   However  Mr
         Shamzuzzoha conceded that the paper was of poor quality  and  given
         the blurry nature of the stamps we are of the view that it is  very
         difficult to make out any details.  Even if, therefore,  the  judge
         was mistaken in relation to the appearance of  a  branch  name  and
         number, we are satisfied that any such error is not material and we
         note the judge made a number of other  criticisms  of  the  letters
         including the lack  of  a  letter  heading  and  the  lack  of  any
         confirmation of the bank balances. It was clearly open to the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge to find, as he did at paragraph  31,  that  the
         two  additional  letters  allegedly  written  by  the   bank   were
         unsatisfactory.

     14. We did not find any error of fact that would amount to an error  on
         a point of law which required the decision to be  set  aside.   The
         second ground of appeal therefore has no merit in our findings.

    Ground 3

     15. In relation to Article 8,  Mr  Shamzuzzoha  relied  on  CDS  Brazil
         [2010] UKUT 00305 and submitted that the appellant had  established
         a private life in the UK as a student.  Although that may  well  be
         the case we are guided by Patel & Others v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 which reminds that Article 8  is
         not a 'general dispensing power' and that 'the  opportunity  for  a
         promising student to complete his course in this  country,  however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8'.   We have also been guided by  Nasim  and  others
         (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) which confirmed that Article  8
         has limited utility in private life cases that are far removed from
         the 'protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity'.

     16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge therefore made findings properly open
         to him at paragraph 35 of the decision and reasons, in finding that
         the appeal could not succeed on the  facts  before  him:  including
         that the appellant had previously completed a course  but  had  not
         started his second course; that the  financial  documents  used  in
         support  of  that  application  were  false;  that  there  was   no
         indication that he had the funds to engage in further studies;  and
         that his family life in India where he has a home to return to; and
         that he completed the course  and  obtained  the  qualification  he
         sought when he originally entered the UK.

    Decision:

     17. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.



Signed:     Dated:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

