
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15555/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 28 November 2016                           |On 16th January 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mrs Gloria Egbe Lennon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent (Mrs Lennon):    Mr T Ojo, Solicitor, of CW Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar, which was promulgated on 6 July 2016
    following a hearing at Taylor House on  10  June  2016.   For  ease  of
    reference I shall throughout this decision refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and
    to Mrs Lennon, who was the original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria who was born on 13 December 1978.
     She entered this country on 14 August 2010 with leave  to  remain  for
    six months as a visitor but she overstayed.  Then, on 8 May  2014,  she
    applied for leave to remain on the basis that her removal would  be  in
    breach of her rights under Article 8.  That application was refused  on
    17 July 2014 with no right of  appeal.   Further  representations  were
    made but on 1 April 2015 the respondent made a decision to  refuse  the
    application and also made removal directions under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The claimant appealed against this decision and, as already noted,  her
    appeal  succeeded  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ghaffar.    The
    Secretary of State now appeals with leave given by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley, on 27 October 2016, against this decision.

 4. The facts can be set out relatively briefly.   As  already  noted,  the
    claimant remained without leave after visiting but she  had  previously
    visited this country in 2006 and had made subsequent visits during  the
    course of which she says she entered into a relationship with one David
    Innes as a result of which she became pregnant.  Her son, Dominion, was
    born on 15 August 2008.  She claims that he is the son of Mr Innes, who
    is a British citizen, and is accordingly a British citizen but this has
    not been established.  She says that Mr Innes  has  been  uncooperative
    and has not assisted her in establishing paternity, but it would at all
    times have been open to her to have  sought  to  have  a  DNA  test  to
    establish paternity, which she has not done.  Accordingly, for  present
    purposes she has not established that her son is a British citizen  and
    therefore he cannot be treated as such.

 5. Subsequently the appellant has married one  Martin  Lennon,  who  is  a
    British citizen and is apparently close to retirement age  and  working
    and she now claims that her removal would be in breach of her Article 8
    rights and also that of her son.  She claims that  her  son  treats  Mr
    Lennon as his father and that it would not be feasible for  him  to  go
    with her to Nigeria because instead of having a job here  he  would  be
    destitute in Nigeria.  The judge found that  there  would  be  no  very
    significant obstacles to the claimant returning to Nigeria and that  in
    those circumstances her appeal had to fail under the Rules.  He  stated
    that he had given little weight to  the  relationship  with  Mr  Lennon
    having had regard to Section 117B(4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, which provides that:

         "Little weight should be given to -

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully",

    which of course was the case here.

 6. It is not suggested before me that any  of  the  requirements  set  out
    within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) to (vi) are satisfied and indeed Mr Ojo
    accepted that they were not and  so  the  only  basis  upon  which  the
    application could be granted outside the Rules is  if  there  was  some
    factor so compelling that  exceptionally  permission  should  be  given
    outside the Rules.  Although at paragraph 20 of the decision the  judge
    states that "I  find  that  on  the  facts  of  this  case,  there  are
    exceptional circumstances which require me to consider the human rights
    of the appellant and her family outside the Immigration Rules", Mr  Ojo
    accepts, as he has to, that nowhere within the decision does the  judge
    say what these exceptional factors are.  His decision to this effect is
    wholly unreasoned and for this reason  it  is  unsustainable.   It  was
    incumbent upon the judge if he were to make a finding to this effect to
    state what was exceptional about this case which he has not  done.   It
    follows that the decision cannot stand but must be  set  aside  because
    the failure adequately to explain his reasoning is  a  material  error.
    In these circumstances the  appellant's  case  has  not  properly  been
    considered and it is therefore appropriate to  remit  it  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that it can be reheard before another judge  but
    not Judge Ghaffar.  I accordingly find as follows:



Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ghaffar  is  set  aside   as
containing a material error of law and the appeal will be remitted  back  to
the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be reheard by  any  judge
other than Judge Ghaffar.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 24 December 2016


