
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15507/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On19 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               PEARLYN WRIGHT
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji (counsel) instructed by ASR Legal,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Stott promulgated  on  18  June  2014,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 23 September  1955  and  is  a  national  of
Jamaica. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor on  1st  June  2002,  and
has remained in the UK since then. On 17 March 2014 the Secretary  of  State
refused the Appellant's application for a certificate of entitlement to  the
right of abode in terms of s.10 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Stott  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 1st December 2014 Upper  Tribunal
Judge Chalkley gave permission to appeal stating

    "I believe that there may be merit in the argument that the First  tier
    Tribunal judge erred at paragraphs 20, 21 and 23 of  the  determination
    ..."

The Hearing

6.    Mr Jafferji, for the appellant, adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
told me that the Judge had made a material error of law  in  his  assessment
of the terms of the Jamaican Independence Act  1962,  and  the  effect  that
that 1962 Act had on the citizenship of the appellant  and  her  father.  He
referred me to the Jamaican Independence Act 1962, sections 2 & 8, and  told
me the appellant was a citizen of the UK & colonies  (CUKC),  and  that  the
appellant retained [her] status at the time the  Jamaican  independence.  He
argued that paragraphs [21] [22] and [23] of the  decision  are  tainted  by
material  errors  of  law  because  the  appellant's  nationality  and   her
entitlement to a certificate of the right of abode is not dependent  on  the
British  Nationality  Act  1981.  He  asked  me  to  allow  the  appeal  and
substitute a decision in favour of the appellant.

7.    Ms Johnstone, for the respondent, relied on the  reasons  for  refusal
letter and noted that not all directions made when permission to appeal  was
granted on 1  December  2014  have  been  followed.   She  argued  that  the
appellant's father did not retain CUKC simply because he continued  to  live
in the UK after Jamaican independence. She  told  me  that  the  conclusions
drawn by the Judge are well within the range  of  conclusions  open  to  the
Judge on the evidence placed before him, and  that  the  decision  does  not
contain an error of law material or otherwise. She urged me to  dismiss  the
appeal.

Analysis

8.    There is no dispute about the facts in this case.  The  appellant  was
born in Jamaica in 1955 and so was a citizen  of  the  UK  and  colonies  at
birth. The appellant's father came  to  the  UK  in  1958  travelling  on  a
British Jamaican passport, and then remained  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's
father was registered as a  British  citizen  in  December  1988.   In  1962
CUKC's became Jamaican citizens because of the operation of section 2(2)  of
the Jamaican independence act 1962.

9.    The fulcrum of this case is  consideration  of  [22]  &  [23]  of  the
decision. It is there that the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  and  her
father lost their status as British subjects and became  Jamaican  nationals
because of the operation of the Jamaican Independence Act 1962. At [22]  the
Judge found that neither the appellant, nor her father, nor her  grandfather
were born in the UK and therefore none of them had a right  of  abode  under
the 1971 act.

10.   The second  ground  of  appeal  argues  that  the  appellant's  father
enjoyed a right of abode in terms of section 2(1)(c) of the Immigration  Act
1971. Taken at its highest that  argument  does  not  assist  the  appellant
because it still leaves the question  of  whether  or  not  her  father  had
become a Jamaican national in 1962. The 1971 Act could not  create  a  right
of abode for the appellant, so that the central finding at [22]  is  correct
in law.

11.   Counsel  [for]  the  appellant  helpfully  produced  an  extract  from
Fransman's British Nationality Law. At pages 639 & 640 the author  considers
who became Jamaican nationals as a result of the 1962 Act and the  automatic
loss of CUKC status. The general rule is set out in  Fransman  at  page  639
and in section 2(2) of the 1962  act.  Jamaican  citizenship  was  conferred
upon persons who prior to independence have become  CUKC  by  birth  in  the
colony. The general rule set out in the 1962 act is that CUKC's on 6  August
1962 became citizens of Jamaica &, on the same date, ceased to be a CUKC.

12.   The determinative issue in  this  case  is  the  appellant's  father's
status in 1962. The fact  that  the  appellant's  father  became  a  British
citizen in 1988 is irrelevant. The evidence before the Judge indicates  that
in 1962 the appellant's father was in the UK  as  a  CUKC.  The  appellant's
father may never have returned to Jamaica, but he did not  fall  within  the
exceptions set out in section 2 or section 8 of the 1962 act. The weight  of
evidence before the First-tier led the Judge to the conclusion that in  1962
the appellant's father became a Jamaican national.

13.    Having  considered  the  relevant  statutory  provisions  the   Judge
summarises his findings at [24] and [25]. In essence, the Judge  found  that
because the appellant does not establish that her  father  had  a  right  of
abode between 1962 and 1988 the appellant cannot succeed. That is a  finding
which was open to the Judge to make. The grounds of appeal arguing that  the
Judge has misinterpreted the law.

14.   Despite the fact that clear directions were made on  1  December  2014
the appellant chooses not  to  produce  annotated  copies  of  the  relevant
legislation; the appellant chooses not to produce  evidence  to  demonstrate
whether or not  the  appellant's  father  became  registered  as  a  British
citizen in 1988 as a result of the length of his residence in the UK.  As  a
result, I have the evidence which was placed before the First-tier  Tribunal
only. Having carefully considered the evidence and  submissions  I  come  to
the conclusion that the grounds of appeal  amount  to  little  more  than  a
disagreement with the facts as the Judge found  them  to  be.  I  find  that
there is no error in the fact-finding process, and there is no substance  in
the arguments advanced in the grounds of appeal that the  Judge  misdirected
himself in law.

15.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

16.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
him. He carefully records the submissions that were  made  and  then,  after
correctly directing himself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to him to reach.

17.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

18.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

19.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
