

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: IA/15819/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Determination issued       |
|On March 6, 2015                     | On March 9, 2015           |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR YAKUB OLAITAN OLANIGAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

Appellant   Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Amin (Solicitor)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of citizen of Nigeria and applied on January
    28, 2014 for a residence card as the former husband of an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights  pursuant  to  Regulations  10(5),  10(6)  and
    15(1)(f) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The respondent considered his application but refused it on  March  24,
    2014. There was no consideration under article 8 ECHR  and  no  removal
    direction was issued.

 4. The appellant appealed on April 1, 2014, under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    2006 Regulations.

 5. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Fitzgibbon  QC
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on November 14, 2014 and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 27, 2014 he refused the  appeal  under
    the 2006 Regulations but allowed the appeal on article 8  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on December 2, 2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by dealing with the article 8 claim in circumstances
    where no application had been formally made.

 7. On January 14, 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchinson
    gave permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that  the
    FtTJ had erred.

 8. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant was in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 9. Ms Everett submitted the FtTJ had erred  in  two  areas.  Firstly,  she
    submitted that the FtTJ had no jurisdiction  to  decide  an  article  8
    appeal but even if I found he did, she submitted that  the  FtTJ  erred
    because he failed to consider  the  appellant's  failure  to  meet  the
    Regulations or his precarious status when dealing with proportionality.




10. With regard to the first point Ms Everett argued no section 120  notice
    (one stop notice) had been issued and in such circumstances the grounds
    of appeal must be linked to the application before the  Tribunal.  This
    was an appeal on EEA issues and article 8 issues were not a part of the
    decision. This was an appeal under the  2006  Regulations  and  as  the
    refusal letter pointed out if  the  appellant  wished  to  argue  human
    rights then he would have to submit an application on the correct  form
    and with the correct fee. She submitted the FtTJ erred in dealing  with
    the article 8 appeal.

11. With regard to the second ground of appeal  Ms  Everett  submitted  the
    FtTJ had regard to all the issues advanced on  the  appellant's  behalf
    but no regard had been had to the fact his status had  been  precarious
    ever since he and his wife separated in 2011. The  FtTJ  was  wrong  to
    find the appellant had an expectation  he  would  be  allowed  to  stay
    because he was only here for such period as his  spouse  exercised  her
    treaty rights.


12. Mr Amin submitted there was no error on either ground and relied on the
    Rule 24 response filed (undated). The FtTJ explained in paragraph  [12]
    of his determination why he was able to consider the article 8  appeal.
    He explained it was his duty to consider the article 8  appeal  because
    Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations encouraged  family  life.  Whilst
    there had not been a section 120 notice in this case the respondent was
    at risk of removal  if  his  appeal  failed  and  the  Tribunal  should
    consider all rights of appeal. With regard  to  the  second  ground  of
    appeal Mr Amin submitted the FtTJ considered all  the  pertinent  facts
    and reached a finding open to him. There was no error in law.

13. I reserved my decision after hearing these submissions.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

14. It is common ground that the Secretary of State did not serve with  the
    Notice of Immigration Decision a notice pursuant to section 120 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which is a requirement for
    a person to state his reasons for wishing to enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, any grounds on which he should be permitted to enter or
    remain in the United Kingdom, and any grounds on which he should not be
    removed from or required to leave the United Kingdom.


15. In the current appeal before me  the  FtTJ  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction in paragraph [12]  of  his  determination.  He  noted  the
    appellant had not applied under article  8  but  had  done  so  in  his
    grounds of appeal. The FtTJ then noted that the provisions of  GEN  1.9
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules provided that for  family  life
    claims the requirement to make a valid application will not apply  when
    article 8 is raised in an appeal. However,  he  noted  that  this  only
    applied to family life claims and not private claims but he  felt  able
    to extend it to private life as this was consistent with the "one stop"
    policy and the decision of JM v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1402.  He  also
    placed  reliance  on  an   unreported   decision   of   Fateh   Bouzidi
    (IA/05937/2012).

16. Dealing with the unreported decision I am satisfied  no  weight  should
    have been placed on this because there is no evidence  that  there  had
    been any compliance with Guidance Note 2011  No  2  and  in  particular
    paragraph [4] which states "...By the terms of the  Senior  President's
    Practice Direction 11 unreported decisions of the Chamber  may  not  be
    cited as authority without permission of the judge that  will  only  be
    granted sparingly where there is good reason to do so."

17. I indicated to Mr Amin during his submissions that he needed to explain
    why he believed the FtTJ was entitled to deal with the article 8  claim
    and whether a section 120 notice was required.

18. I referred him to the Court of Appeal decision  of  Lamichhane  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 260 in which the Court posed  the  question,  "May  the
    Tribunal consider additional grounds advanced by  an  appellant  if  no
    section 120 notice has been served, and if so is it under a duty to  do
    so?" The Court of Appeal answered that question as follows-

         "41.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  Secretary   of   State's
         contentions as to the effect of section 85(2) are well-founded, and
         an appellant on whom no section 120 notice has been served may  not
         raise before the Tribunal any ground for  the  grant  of  leave  to
         remain different from that which was the subject of the decision of
         the Secretary of State appealed against.  The  answer  to  question
         above is No."

    The Court went on to find at paragraph [43]-


         "In my  view,  section  85(2)  is  a  statutory  extension  of  the
         jurisdiction of the Tribunal in cases in which  there  has  been  a
         statement made by the appellant under section 120.  It follows that
         the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider or  to  rule  on  'any
         matter ... which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
         section 84(1) against the decision appealed against' if  there  has
         been no section 120 notice, and therefore no statement  under  that
         section.  This conclusion is consonant with my conclusion as to the
         effect of section 96(1) as it now is.  If  it  were  otherwise,  an
         appellant might not know whether he could raise any new  ground  in
         his appeal until the hearing of his appeal, and the test in section
         96(1)(c) becomes unworkable."


19. In this appeal Ms Everett argued that because no section 120 notice had
    been served he  could  not  raise  additional  grounds  of  appeal  and
    therefore the only ground of appeal  open  to  him  was  under  section
    84(1)(d) of the 2002 Act which allowed a right  of  appeal  where  "the
    appellant is an EEA national or a  member  of  the  family  of  an  EEA
    national and the decision breaches the  appellant's  rights  under  the
    Community Treaties in respect of entry to or residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom."


20. In response, Mr Amin submitted that following the decision  of  JM  the
    Tribunal had to deal with any ground raised. However, the  decision  of
    JM can perhaps be distinguished from Lamichhane because no section  120
    notice was issued in the latter case whereas in the former case such  a
    notice was issued.

21. I have also considered the effect of Section 86(2) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 because this states:

         "The Tribunal must determine -

      a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or not  by  virtue
         of section 85(1)), and

      b) any matter which section 85 requires it to consider."

22. However, this presupposes the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear such  a
    ground of appeal. By way of analogy, the right of appeal on visit visas
    was removed except on human rights grounds. I pose the question, "Would
    the Tribunal consider grounds of appeal under the Immigration Rules  if
    they were raised in the grounds of appeal?" The answer is of course  no
    so why should the Tribunal consider grounds  that  cannot  be  advanced
    especially when the Court of Appeal has  indicated  grounds  of  appeal
    cannot be expanded beyond the application itself.


23. Ms Everett further submitted the appellant was at no risk  of  removal.
    He had applied for a residence  card.  This  card,  if  granted,  would
    confirm his legal status to remain. If his application failed there was
    no removal direction in place. In fact, the refusal letter advised  the
    appellant where he could make an article 8 claim. Ms Everett  submitted
    that even if an article 8  claim  could  be  made  there  would  be  no
    interference because he was not at risk of removal. Mr  Amin  countered
    this argument and submitted the appellant had no basis  to  remain  and
    therefore his right to remain would be at risk and there  would  be  an
    interference with his right to remain here.

24. Having considered the arguments put forward today I  am  satisfied  the
    FtTJ erred in considering the  article  8  claim.  The  appellant  only
    applied for a residence card. The refusal of that application  did  not
    carry a removal decision or any risk of removal. There was  no  section
    120 notice issued and as the Court of Appeal made clear  in  Lamichhane
    without such a notice  the  Tribunal  should  only  deal  with  grounds
    arising out of the application. Neither family nor  private  life  flow
    from an application under Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations.

25. The arguments advanced by Ms Everett are  persuasive  on  both  levels.
    Firstly, I distinguish JM from this appeal because in that  case  there
    was a section 120 notice whereas in this appeal there is not. The Court
    of Appeal, whilst not dealing with a human rights claim, made it  clear
    that unless there is such a notice  then  the  grounds  of  appeal  are
    limited. Secondly, even if there is jurisdiction to consider article  8
    applying the test set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027 I
    am satisfied that there is no interference  because  there  is  nothing
    preventing the appellant continuing to live here.

26. I find that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to deal with the article 8
    grounds of  appeal  and  I  set  aside  that  decision.  There  was  no
    jurisdiction to hear the human rights appeal so I  do  not  propose  to
    address Ms Everett's second ground of appeal.


    DECISION


27. There was a material error. There  was  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    article 8 appeal and I set aside that  decision.  The  effect  of  this
    decision is the appellant's appeal remains  dismissed  under  the  2006
    Regulations and it remains open to him to make an article 8 application
    to the appropriate body.


28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I reverse the original  fee  decision  and  I
make no fee award


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




