
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15300/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2015                       |On 22 July 2015                      |
|Prepared 6 June 2015                 |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY
              DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PROFESSOR N M HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     NU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Cartwright
King
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Pakistan,  date  of  birth  3  May  1979,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to refuse a  residence  card
    with reference to Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

2.   The refusal was on the basis that the Appellant had failed to  show  on
    a balance of probabilities that he was in a durable  relationship  with
    an EEA national (Lithuanian citizen) GJ.

3.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    (the judge) who on 27 October 2014 dismissed his appeal under both  the
    2006 Regulations 2006 and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   On 23 January 2015 I found that the judge had made an error of law  and
    for the reasons set out in a decision of that  date  decided  that  the
    original Tribunal decision could not stand and the matter would have to
    be remade.  It therefore arises that the judge set out  a  particularly
    significant contradiction arising in the evidence of the Appellant  and
    his claimed partner over when and how they met, where it took place and
    to a degree the presence or otherwise of the EEA national's parents  in
    the tale of the events.  It does not appear following the directions  I
    gave that any further evidence relating  to  the  durable  relationship
    between the Appellant and his  partner,  the  EEA  national,  has  been
    produced particularly from either of the EEA national's parents who are
    present and living in the United Kingdom whether as to their  knowledge
    of the relationship as claimed or the extent to which they have contact
    with the EEA national and her children.  There is a child by  a  former
    relationship which is in the process of divorce and a child born to the
    Appellant and the EEA national.

5.   Those parents did not attend the hearing and  we  were  told  that  was
    because they were at work.  No statement had been taken  from  them  in
    connection with their recollection of the events or  their  involvement
    in their grandchildren's development.

6.   There is nothing from any friends by way of statements  or  letters  of
    support  concerning  their  knowledge  of  the  relationship  and   its
    character.   Instead, there is a letter of a Mr GO and Mrs BG of [ - ],
    Peterborough, although the spelling of Mr O's name changes in the short
    document, and states

         "I can confirm that we know Mr NU and GJ and  their  two  children.
         We have known them  for  the  past  year  and  they  are  our  good
         neighbours.

         I can confirm they both live together at [ - ], Peterborough  since
         January 2013.

         Yours faithfully."

7.   There is a letter in manuscript from BS of [ - ],  Peterborough,  which
    states:

         "To whom it may concern.

         I can confirm I have known Mr NU, Mrs GJ. They are both hardworking
         people and are of good carture [sic], and they both live at [ -  ],
         Peterborough [ - ].

         Please if you want any more  information  about  them  then  please
         phone me on ... ....

         Signed

         Mr BS, RICS"

    And a copy of his driving licence is provided  with  a  photograph  and
    confirming his date of birth as 3 May 1948 in England.

8.   Since Miss J has been in the United Kingdom since  about  2006/2007  it
    is perhaps surprising that there are no friends of hers  who  speak  to
    knowledge of her or her relationship  with  the  Appellant.   Similarly
    there is none from friends of the Appellant.  The evidence particularly
    relied upon by the Appellant we summarise as follows.

9.   First, there is the birth certificate of  the  child  M  in  which  the
    Appellant is identified as the father of the child and Miss  J  as  the
    mother.   Secondly,  there  is  the  documentation  which   shows   the
    Appellant's bank statements relating to the [Peterborough] address  and
    similarly such banking documentation in the  EEA  national's  Miss  J's
    name.  There are utility bills and phone bills again which  show  their
    respective names as customers of the relevant company.  There are joint
    tenancy agreements in the  names  of  the  Appellant  and  Miss  J  for
    [Peterborough address] for the years  from  January  2013  and  January
    2014.  There are employment details concerning Miss J's  pay  and  HMRC
    documents, again for Miss J.  There is a letter written jointly to  the
    Appellant and Miss J dated 27 November 2013 confirming  that  Miss  J's
    daughter, M, date of birth 2  January  2007,  had  been  attending  [A]
    Primary School since March 2013.  There is a letter from HMRC dated  31
    October 2013 addressed to the Appellant and Miss J concerning  a  child
    tax credit award for 2013 - 2014 to Miss J.

10.  There is no material challenge to the issue that Miss J is a  qualified
    person who has been exercising treaty rights.  It is clear  that  there
    was a break in employment when she was on maternity leave but no  issue
    is taken with that.

11.  Also provided are photographs of the Appellant  and  Miss  J  with  the
    children, a statement from Miss J dated  7  April  2015  in  which  she
    confirms their continuing relationship and in particular she  seeks  to
    explain the confusion of her evidence before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hollingworth on the basis of her being  nervous  and  flustered,  being
    unprepared for the questions of the kind that were raised. A  statement
    of the Appellant of 7 April 2015 confirms his durable relationship with
    Miss J and confirms his understanding that  Miss  J  was  confused  and
    upset at the hearing before the judge and  confirming  his  involvement
    along with Miss J in the care of M.

12.  Additional  documents  provided  show  amongst  other  things  a  joint
    application for housing to  Peterborough  City  Council.   In  addition
    there was documentation from Anglian Water which was a  joint  bill  in
    the names of the Appellant and Miss J together with payment details and
    documentation from  the  Halifax  Building  Society  addressed  to  the
    Appellant, council tax bills for [Peterborough  address]  addressed  to
    Miss J together with some mobile phone bills relating to the Appellant.



13.  In addition there is a translation of an email  said  to  be  from  the
    Appellant to a  Miss  M  which  is  translated  as  an  application  to
    terminate by agreement a marriage between Miss J and Mr RJ to bring  to
    an end a marriage registered on 4 November 2005, but it appears  to  be
    an unsigned document and simply a form of terms  proposed  for  divorce
    based on the irretrievable breakdown of  the  marriage.   It  does  not
    appear to contain any terms in relation to custody or control of M.

14.  Mr Melvin submitted that the previous history of applications  made  on
    the basis of a relationship with another Lithuanian  national  in  2011
    and 2012 suggested to  the  respondent  that  those  were  not  genuine
    applications  and  the  fact  they  were  not  appealed   against   was
    significant.   The  Appellant  asserts  that  the  first   failed   for
    insufficient evidence being provided and the second application was not
    pursued because by then his partnership with Miss K had broken down and
    they were no longer together.

15.  It was submitted that that  previous  history  of  applications  raised
    doubts about the reliability of the Appellant and him being prepared to
    follow any steps in order to remain in the UK.

16.  Mr Melvin submitted  that  in  effect  documents  produced  where  they
    resided  at  the  same  address  or  indeed  the  reference  from   the
    neighbours, the fact was that there was nothing to show that they  were
    in a durable relationship so much as sharing accommodation.  Mr  Melvin
    submitted that there were no independent witnesses or statements  which
    confirmed that the Appellant and Miss J are  anything  other  than  two
    adults sharing accommodation.  Indeed he argued  that  the  absence  of
    evidence, for example from the family of J, for I infer that  from  the
    Appellant with whose family Miss J is in contact indicated  that  there
    should  be  substantial  doubts  as  to  any  weight  to  the   claimed
    relationship and  the  evidence  fell  short  of  being  sufficient  to
    establish the durable relationship.  Mr Melvin accepts that  the  child
    is registered in the name of the Appellant and Miss J.

17.  We note the photographs and whilst of course things can be  posed,  and
    therefore there must be some qualification on the weight to be given to
    them, but they seem to us natural and to that extent we give them  some
    weight.

18.  We take into account that the burden of proof always remains  with  the
    Appellant to show that he is in a durable relationship and  it  is  not
    for the Respondent to prove that it is not.  Accordingly, whilst it  is
    certainly open to UKBA to make home visits, which they regularly do  in
    other cases, particularly where there is an assertion of parties living
    together, we draw no adverse inferences against either the Appellant or
    indeed the Respondent that no such visits have taken place.    We  have
    also taken into account that the original statements of  the  Appellant
    and Miss J are extraordinarily brief and barely touch upon the  issues.
    We do not know why those statements were  so  brief  and  contained  so
    little explanation of events and it is fair  to  say  even  the  latest
    statements are terse.

19.  For reasons previously given we do not think that Article  8  falls  to
    be considered.  The Appellant sought a residence permit, not  leave  to
    remain on some other completely different basis relating to  Article  8
    of the ECHR.   Similarly  if  steps  are  being  taken  to  remove  the
    Appellant he is on notice that a further decision would be  made  which
    would attract a right of appeal.

20.  Accordingly we do not think it is necessary in these  circumstances  to
    address either Sections 117A or 117B nor  to  traverse  the  issues  of
    Section 55 of the BCIA 2009 bearing in mind we have so little  evidence
    relating to the children's best interests.

21.  We find having weighed up the evidence that looked  at  in  the  round,
    despite the deficiencies that have been  pointed  out  and/or  we  have
    identified, the Appellant has done enough  to  show  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that he  and  Miss  J  are  in  a  durable  relationship.
    Accordingly we consider the appropriate course to allow the appeal  for
    the matter needs to be considered with reference to Regulation 17(4) of
    the 2006 Regulations  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   No  exercise  of
    discretion has been  considered  and  there  has  been  no  justiciable
    decision on that basis. In the light of the case  of  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
    meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340 as also illustrated  in  the  case  of
    Ukus [2012] UKUT 307, the exercise of discretion is a  matter  for  the
    Respondent.

Notice of Decision

22.  The Original Tribunal's decision is set aside.  The following  decision
    is substituted. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter  is
    returned to the Secretary  of  State  for  further  consideration  with
    reference to Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

Anonymity

23.  Given the age of the Appellant  and  Miss  J's  children  an  anonymity
    order is appropriate and necessary.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 17 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
