
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15830/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 1st August 2016                              |On 13th September 2016     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                 SANTOSH [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mbariti, Solicitor of Cross Border Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

 1. On 13th June 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nightingale  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Colyer in which he dismissed the appeal against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse leave to remain  as  either  a
    partner or a parent in accordance with the provisions of Appendix FM of
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds  applying  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.




    Error on a point of law

 2. Judge Nightingale noted that, in summary, the  grounds  of  application
    alleged that the judge erred by  failing  to  take  into  consideration
    Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    particularly having regard to  the  two  children  of  the  appellant's
    partner.  It was also contended that the judge  applied  a  restrictive
    definition of "parental relationship".

 3. Permission was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that,  at
    paragraph  90,  the  judge  took  into  account  an  irrelevant  matter
    concerning the children attending a state  school  when  assessing  the
    children's relationship with the appellant.  Further,  it  was  thought
    arguable that the judge had failed to apply the relevant considerations
    in Section 117B y assessing "parental  relationship"  in  a  restricted
    manner rather than  following  the  guidance  set  out  in  R  (On  the
    application of RK) (Section  117B(6);  "parental  relationship"  (IJR))
    [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC).

 4. The grounds contended that the judge had found that the  appellant  was
    not in a parental relationship  because  he  was  not  married  to  the
    children's mother and his relationship with her and  her  two  children
    had no "legal status".  Reference is made to paragraph 42 of R (On  the
    application of RK) which emphasised that, whether  a  person  is  in  a
    parental  relationship  with  a  child,  depends  on   the   individual
    circumstances of  the  case,  the  court  accepting  that  it  was  not
    necessary for an individual to have parental responsibility in law  for
    there to exist a parental relationship.

 5. The grounds also make reference to the  conclusions  of  the  judge  in
    paragraph 90.  It is contended that the judge was wrong to  find  that,
    because both children were in receipt of  free  education,  meant  that
    there would be a financial burden on the state when free education  was
    available to the two British children.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Mbariti confirmed that he relied  upon  the
    grounds.  He pointed out that the respondent had acknowledged that  the
    judge had only considered the point referred to in paragraph 90 of  his
    decision.  The main point was that the judge had  only  used  a  narrow
    definition of parental relationship when finding against the  appellant
    and had failed altogether to consider Section 117B(vi).   The  parental
    relationship issue by simply finding, in paragraph  45,  that,  as  the
    appellant was not married to the children's mother, there was no "legal
    status" in respect of his alleged relationship with her two children.

 7. Mr Mbariti also made reference  to  the  Rule  24  response  which,  at
    paragraph 5, suggested that the judge  had  been  right  to  take  into
    consideration that the appellant was not named in  a  child  protection
    plan agreed between Social Services and the children's natural  father.
    He emphasised that, on page 86 of the appellant's bundle, it was  shown
    that the plan preceded the appellant's cohabitation with  his  sponsor.
    That was the reason for the appellant not being mentioned.

 8. Mr McVeety suggested that the latter point made by Mr Mbariti could  be
    ignored as the appellant had claimed to be in a  partnership  with  the
    sponsor even if not living together at the time of the order.  He  also
    drew attention to the letter from the children's  school  showing  that
    the appellant had picked up the children since January 2012.

 9. He then referred to paragraphs 61 and 62  of  the  decision  which,  he
    thought, showed that the judge had decided that the appellant  was  not
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his sponsor but simply  a
    lodger in her home.

10. As to the nature of the parental relationship Mr McVeety also submitted
    that, when read in full, R (On the application of RK) did not show that
    such a relationship could have existed in this case.  Thus, the  appeal
    could not have succeeded under Section  117B(6).   Whilst  he  conceded
    that the judge had not specifically referred to Section 117B he thought
    its provisions were implicit in the findings.

11. In conclusion Mr Mbariti argued  that  the  appellant  had  not  had  a
    meaningful relationship with his sponsor when the child protection plan
    was agreed.  He emphasised that the judge should have  found  that  the
    appellant had stepped into the shoes  of  a  parent  by  replacing  the
    children's father.  He believed that the decision should be re-made.

Conclusions

12. The two main issues in this appeal were the nature of the  relationship
    between the appellant and his claimed partner and  the  nature  of  his
    relationship with her children.  I conclude that there  are  errors  of
    law in relation to the judge's approach and conclusions  on  these  two
    matters.  My reasons follow.

13. Although the decision of this experienced judge  is  comprehensive  and
    detailed his conclusion as to the nature of  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and  his  claimed  partner  is  not  at  all  clear.   At
    paragraph 62 he appears to decide that the appellant is simply a lodger
    with his alleged partner  and  nothing  more.   Certainly  the  factors
    examined in preceding paragraphs suggest that the judge did not  accept
    that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   However,
    confusingly, he appears to have been content to regard all the  parties
    as having a family life together for the purpose  of  consideration  of
    proportionality  issues.   A  clear,  unambiguous,  decision  on   this
    essential issue was required but is absent from the decision.

14. As to the nature of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    claimed partner's children the judge's reasoning is to  be  found  from
    paragraph 65 onwards and then, generally,  in  relation  to  Article  8
    issues from paragraph 92 onwards.  Whilst the judge is prepared to find
    that the appellant has limited family and private life with his claimed
    partner and her children, there is no specific decision  about  whether
    or not the appellant had a parental relationship with  those  children.
    It was essential for the judge to reach a conclusion on that matter  as
    the existence of a "parental relationship" is required for the  purpose
    of the Immigration Rules (for example, EX.1.) and also consideration of
    human rights issues outside those Rules (Section 117B(vi) of  the  2002
    Act).  It is not at all clear that the judge ever applied his  mind  to
    this term and certainly there is no reference to the  guidance  of  the
    Upper Tribunal on the meaning of the term in R (On the  application  of
    RK).  Thus, it cannot be said  that  the  judge  approached  the  issue
    correctly or applied the relevant  legal  guidance.   Certainly,  I  am
    unable to conclude that, when considering Article 8 issues outside  the
    Immigration Rules, the judge applied the provisions of Section 117B  by
    implication even if not by direct reference.

15. Since the judge did not reach clear and cogently reasoned  findings  on
    the relationship issues, it  follows  that  his  consideration  of  the
    relevant law applicable to those issues was  also  flawed.   These  are
    material errors on points of law  such  that  the  decision  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh with the benefit
    of oral evidence.  This accords with  the  Practice  Statement  of  the
    Senior President of Tribunals dated 25th September  2012  at  paragraph
    7.2(b).

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested or directed by the First-tier Tribunal  nor  did
I consider one appropriate for the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

16. The remitted decision will be heard by the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
    at either Nottingham or Stoke on a date to be specified by the Resident
    Judge.

17. The remitted hearing should not take place before Judge Colyer.

18. No interpreter will be provided for the hearing unless the  appellant's
    representatives indicate to the contrary.

19. The time estimate for the hearing is two and a half hours.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt              13th September 2016

