

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA / 15269 / 2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 December 2016                    |On 04 January 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |



                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Bunyarit Sritharanon                              |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, of Counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Flynn
    who (in a decision promulgated on 18 May 2016 following a hearing on  8
    April 2016) dismissed his appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    of 1 April 2015 to refuse his application of 17 October 2014 for  leave
    to remain under para 276ADE of HC 395 as amended.

 2. As at the date of the decision, para 276ADE(1) read as follows:


            276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
          to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at
          the date of application, the applicant:


            (i)   does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and


            (ii)  has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and


            (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


            (iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
             the UK for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


            (v)   is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
             at least half of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


            (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK

      (my emphasis)

 3. In granting  permission,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson
    considered it arguable  that  the  finding  of  Judge  Flynn  that  the
    appellant had lived in the United Kingdom continuously  since  February
    1998 "was inconsistent with his dismissal of the appeal under paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), particularly as such a finding would bring the appellant
    within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)".

 4. The appellant's evidence was that he arrived in the United  Kingdom  on
    14 February 1996. Even on the basis of the finding of Judge Flynn  that
    he has lived in the United Kingdom continuously since  then,  he  could
    not  satisfy  the  minimum  20-year  residence  requirement   in   para
    276ADE(1)(iii) as at the date of his application.  This is no doubt the
    reason why Mr Kannangara, Counsel who appeared before  Judge  Flynn  on
    behalf of the appellant, conceded that the appellant could not  satisfy
    the requirements of para 276ADE(1) either on the grounds of  20  years'
    residence at the date of application or under para  276ADE(1)(vi),  see
    para 25 of the decision of Judge Flynn.

 5. The mere fact that the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for 20
    years does not mean that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration in Thailand.

 6. At the hearing before me, Mr Bellara advanced  the  submission  in  the
    written grounds that, given that the appellant had lived in the  United
    Kingdom continuously for a period of 20 years as at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, the judge should have allowed the appeal.  He  submitted  that
    the fact that the appellant had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of 20 years as at the date of the hearing before  the
    judge was "relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision"  and  that,
    accordingly, the judge should have taken into account the  evidence  of
    his further residence, between  the  date  following  the  day  of  the
    appellant's application and the date of the hearing, pursuant to  85(4)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal decisions in LX (effect of section  85(4)  -  2002
    Act)  China  [2005]  UKAIT  00157  and  L  (post   decision   evidence,
    directions, appealability) Gambia [2005] UKAIT 00085.

 7. I have no hesitation in rejecting Mr Bellara's submission which, in  my
    judgement, is misconceived. In relation  to  para  276ADE(1)(iii),  the
    issue was whether the  appellant  had  completed  20-years'  continuous
    residence as at the date of his application. That was the substance  of
    the decision in relation to para 276ADE(1). Thus, any further period of
    residence between the day following the date of his application and the
    date of the hearing was not relevant to the substance of  the  decision
    to refuse his application under para 276ADE(1)(iii).

 8. As I said earlier, it does not follow, from  the  mere  fact  that  the
    appellant had, by the date  of  the  hearing,  completed  20  years  of
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom, that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration in Thailand. In  any  event,
    this issue was also conceded before Judge Flynn. It  was  improper  for
    the grounds to  advance  the  arguments  advanced  without  making  any
    attempt to explain why the appellant should be  permitted  to  distance
    himself from the concession made on his behalf by experienced Counsel.

 9. For all of the above reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of Judge
    Flynn did not involve the making of any error on a point  of  law.  The
    appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]

Signed                                             Date:  3 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
