
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15583/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th November 2014              |On 23rd December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                         MR ABIODUN ADEKUNLE ISMAILA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  was
    allowed by a First-tier Tribunal Judge in a  determination  promulgated
    on 22nd January 2014.  The Secretary of State applied for permission to
    appeal and, in due  course,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  8th
    October 2014, the Upper Tribunal found that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained a material error of law.  That decision was set
    aside and directions given to enable it to be re-made before me, in the
    Upper Tribunal.

2.   In setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I found  that
    favourable findings of fact made by the judge, regarding submission  of
    a service contract with the appellant's application for  leave  in  the
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) category and  the  genuineness  of  the  business
    arrangements he had with Mona Agencies, were to be preserved.  In issue
    was the second ground of refusal,  regarding  the  appellant's  claimed
    membership  of  Institute  for  Small  Business  and   Entrepreneurship
    ("ISBE").

3.    In  refusing  the  appellant's  application  and  making  the  adverse
    immigration decisions, the Secretary of State found, in  this  context,
    that  he  had  provided  no  evidence  of  business  activity.   As  an
    alternative to the submission of business advertisements, it  was  open
    to the appellant to provide evidence of membership of a trade  body  or
    association.  The judge found  that  bank  statements  accompanied  the
    application, which was made on 28th January 2013 and that a  membership
    fee for ISBE was debited from the  appellant's  account  the  following
    day, on 29th January 2013.  She found that  the  appellant  would  have
    been in a position to submit evidence of membership,  if  it  had  been
    requested by the Secretary of State.

4.   Mr Aghayere provided a skeleton argument in support of the  appellant's
    case and several documents, including what was described as "a  further
    letter dated 27th October 2014 from ISBE confirming  (the  appellant's)
    membership with  them  since  28th  January  2013"  and  two  invoices,
    regarding membership subscriptions, dated 28th  January  2013  and  2nd
    March 2014.  Mr Bramble handed up a copy of the  version  of  paragraph
    245AA of the Immigration Rules in force as at the date of  decision  on
    21st April 2013.

5.   Mr Aghayere said that  there  was  ample  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant was a member of ISBE, as at the  date  of  decision  on  21st
    April 2013.  Page 4 of the supplementary bundle,  a  letter  from  ISBE
    dated 27th October 2014, confirmed that he  became  a  member  on  28th
    January 2013 and was still a member.  At  pages  5  and  6  there  were
    supporting documents, consisting of invoices sent to him.  Pages  7  to
    10 of the supplementary bundle showed e-mail correspondence from  ISBE,
    again confirming the appellant's membership in  2013  and  2014.    The
    documents showed membership at the date of application and at the  date
    of decision.  The appellant sought to rely on paragraph  245AA  of  the
    rules and evidential flexibility.  It was clear that the  Secretary  of
    State had a discretion to contact an applicant for leave, in  order  to
    request correct documents.  This appeared at paragraph 245AA(b) of  the
    rules.

6.   In addition, the appellant relied upon Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in  September  2009  with
    leave as a student.  He then became a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.
     In his five years here, he had  established  a  strong  private  life,
    through his studies and work or business  activities.   To  refuse  him
    further leave due to "minor issues of documentation" would be harsh and
    unreasonable and breach the appellant's Article 8 rights.  Reliance was
    placed upon UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975 and section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act, introduced by section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014.   That
    statutory provision  fell  to  be  applied  in  the  re-making  of  the
    decision.  The appellant's value to the community was a factor  telling
    in his favour and made him suitable for a grant of leave.

7.   Mr Bramble said that the Secretary of State did not  dispute  that  the
    appellant was a member of ISBE but the important question  was  whether
    his  application  for  leave  was  accompanied  by  any   evidence   or
    information showing this.  Appendix A of the rules,  at  paragraph  41-
    SD(c)(iii)(4) showed that  personal  registration  with  a  trade  body
    linked to an applicant's occupation was required  in  relation  to  the
    provisions contained in (d) in Table 4.  The rules required evidence of
    this to accompany the application.

8.   Turning to the version of paragraph 245AA in effect at the date of  the
    adverse decisions, in order to come within scope  the  appellant  would
    have to show that his documents  fell  within  sub-paragraph  (b).   In
    other words, where the rules required documents to have been  submitted
    with the application,  the  Secretary  of  State  would  only  consider
    documents submitted afterwards if firstly, in a sequence of  documents,
    some in the sequence were omitted (an  example  being  a  missing  bank
    statement from a series), secondly, a document was in the wrong  format
    or thirdly, a document was a copy and not an original item.   In  those
    circumstances the Secretary of State might contact  the  applicant  and
    request the correct documents.  Paragraph 245AA made it clear, in  sub-
    paragraph (c), that the Secretary of State would not request  documents
    where a specified document was  not  submitted  or  where  it  was  not
    anticipated that addressing the omission or error  would  lead  to  the
    grant of leave.  The  appellant's  difficulty  was  that  none  of  the
    evidence he provided with the application suggested that he had  become
    a member of the trade body.  The  missing  documents,  in  other  words
    documents showing membership of ISBE, were not in scope.  The Secretary
    of State's obligations were clear and she had not fallen  foul  of  her
    own policy.

9.   The appellant relied  on  Thakur  and  common  law  fairness  but  that
    principle had no application here.  The appellant could not  show  that
    he was disadvantaged by any failure on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to deal with his application  in  a  different  way,  perhaps  by
    contacting him after receiving it.  There  was  no  evidence  submitted
    with the application that the appellant was a member of ISBE or putting
    the Secretary of State on notice.  The application was properly refused
    under paragraph 245DD of the rules  and  under  41-SD(7)(iii)(c)(4)  of
    Appendix A.

10.  So far as Article 8 was concerned, the appellant arrived in 2009  as  a
    student.  He could not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.
    There was nothing to suggest any family life established  here  and  so
    Appendix FM was of no application.  So far as section 117B of the  2002
    Act was concerned, the appellant had clearly  been  present  here  with
    limited leave and the Secretary of State did not suggest  that  he  had
    been a drain on resources.   However,  Article  8  was  not  a  general
    dispensing power, as the Supreme Court made clear in Patel [2013]  UKSC
    72.  The appellant had spent time here with limited leave but there was
    nothing to show any particularly weighty ties,  even  though  he  might
    well have engaged in community activities.  There was nothing  to  show
    sufficient interference with his private life, outweighing  the  public
    interest in removal.  He could not  succeed  under  Article  8,  either
    under the rules or outside them.  Guidance given by the Upper  Tribunal
    in Nasim was also of application.

11.  Mr Aghayere said, in response,  that  the  appellant's  case  was  that
    although  he  did  not  provide  evidence  of   membership   with   his
    application, he did provide a bank statement which showed a debit entry
    recording payment of a subscription  for  ISBE.   As  at  the  date  of
    application, the Secretary of State was  informed  of  his  membership,
    albeit not directly, through the bank statement.  The subscription came
    out of his account on the day his application was submitted or the  day
    afterwards.  In all probability, he would not have been able to provide
    a  letter  confirming  membership  at  that  time.   Nonetheless,   the
    Secretary of State was put on notice of his membership and all she  had
    to do was request further documents to confirm the position.

12.  It might also be argued that sending in  the  bank  statement,  showing
    the debit entry, amounted to the submission of a document in the  wrong
    format, so that the Secretary of State ought then  to  have  approached
    the appellant for evidence of membership in the correct format.  It was
    clear that paragraph 245AA was of application by means of sub-paragraph
    (d).  If a document were submitted in the wrong format or in copy form,
    that  paragraph  provided  that  the  application  might   be   granted
    exceptionally, providing the UK Border Agency was  satisfied  that  the
    specified documents were  genuine  and  the  applicant  met  all  other
    requirements.  The appellant's bank statements had not been  questioned
    and the other requirements were met.

13.  In the Article 8 context, reliance was indeed placed  on  Thakur.   The
    principle of fairness should not be applied in any rigid way.  In  this
    case, it must  have  appeared  to  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    appellant might have been a member of ISBE, on the basis  of  his  bank
    statement.  Common sense would have required the Secretary of State  to
    seek other evidence.  The five years spent in the United Kingdom by the
    appellant, his  Master's  degree,  his  hard  work  and  his  community
    activities ought not  to  be  ignored.   In  his  applications  to  the
    Secretary of State, his private life ties and immigration history would
    have been known to the respondent.  Although he did not rely on  family
    life, he had built up links and ties through his  education,  work  and
    his residence here.  It would infringe his right  to  respect  for  his
    private life to refuse his application by reason of a minor failure  to
    produce the  documents.   UE  (Nigeria)  showed  that  benefit  to  the
    community might weigh in the balance.  The  appellant  also  relied  on
    section 117B of the 2002 Act.  The appellant applied  on  28th  January
    2013 and his ISBE membership pack came through on 11th  February  2013.
    That was when he received it.  At page 8 of  the  supplementary  bundle
    was an e-mail, bearing that date, confirming his membership.  The  more
    recent letter from ISBE confirmed that his  membership  began  on  28th
    January 2013.

Findings and Conclusions

14.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellant to prove  the  facts
    and matters he relies upon and the standard  of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.  The appellant has the benefit  of  preserved
    findings of fact, as noted at the beginning of this  determination  and
    in the determination promulgated on 8th  October  2014,  in  which  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  set  aside.   So  far  as  the
    Immigration Rules are  concerned,  the  remaining  issue  concerns  the
    requirement that the appellant provide  evidence  of  membership  of  a
    trade association with his application, as an alternative to  providing
    business advertisements.

15.  In this context,  the  appellant  relies  on  the  bank  statements  he
    submitted, which record a debit in the sum of �65 on 29th January 2013,
    the transaction appearing as "Institute for Smal CD7430".  His case  is
    that the application of paragraph 245AA of the rules and considerations
    of general fairness, as considered by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Thakur,
    combine to show firstly, that the Secretary of State was on  notice  of
    his membership of the trade association and, secondly, that her  policy
    and fairness required her to approach the  appellant  to  seek  further
    evidence.

16.  The chronology is far from clear.  The  Secretary  of  State's  reasons
    letter referred to the application as having been made on 28th  January
    2013 and the First-tier Tribunal Judge  recorded  that  same  date,  at
    paragraph 3 of her determination.  The copy  application  form  in  the
    evidence shows that it was completed on 26th January and  the  date  of
    posting on the first page is illegible.  At first sight, an application
    made on 28th January 2013  would  be  most  unlikely  to  include  bank
    statements recording a transaction at a later date, even a  transaction
    apparently made only one day later than receipt  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Be that as  it  may,  evidence  contained  in  the  appellant's
    supplementary  bundle  shows  that  ISBE  recorded  his  membership  as
    beginning on 28th January 2013.

17.  However, I am unable to accept Mr Aghayere's submission that  the  bank
    statement was sufficient to put the Secretary of State on notice of the
    appellant's membership or that it amounted, indirectly, to evidence  of
    his membership.  There is absolutely nothing in the bank statement,  or
    in the description of the particular transaction, to suggest  that  the
    debit related to payment of a membership fee.  The description  of  the
    entry is, in itself, perfectly consistent  with  a  different  type  of
    transaction entirely, perhaps the purchase of material or settlement of
    an invoice.  By the time the appellant received his membership pack, on
    11th February 2013, the ISBE was in a position to welcome him as a  new
    member but the bank statement does not suggest membership  at  all  and
    the passage of time between 29th January and 11th  February,  when  his
    membership was confirmed,  strongly  suggests  that  an  administrative
    process of some sort was in play between those dates, albeit one  that,
    when completed, led to confirmation of  membership  from  28th  January
    2013.

18   Turning to paragraph 245AA, the bank statements were  simply  that  and
    manifestly not a sequence of documents where one has been omitted.  Nor
    was the particular statement containing the debit entry a  document  in
    the wrong format and, although it may have been a copy rather  than  an
    original, submission of the original would  have  made  no  difference.
    What was missing was evidence of membership of ISBE, which falls within
    paragraph 245AA(c) of  the  rules.   Evidence  of  membership,  had  it
    existed, would have been a specified document which was not  submitted.
    It was not submitted because it was not available on 28th January 2013,
    or the day afterwards, when the debit entry appeared.  The Secretary of
    State was under no obligation, in terms of her policy, to approach  the
    appellant or  to  request  it.   The  requirements  of  the  rules,  in
    paragraph 41-SD(7)(iii)(c)(4) were not met.

19.  I accept Mr Bramble's submission that Thakur is of no assistance  here.
     There is nothing to suggest that the Secretary of  State  acted  in  a
    procedurally unfair way in declining  to  approach  the  appellant  for
    evidence of membership as  the  bank  statement  was  not,  in  itself,
    evidence of such membership and fell short of  putting  her  on  notice
    that she ought to make further enquiries.  There was no scope  for  the
    application of any evidential flexibility policy.  Although the duty to
    act fairly applies  in  general  terms  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    functions, the points-based system puts a premium on predictability and
    there is no unfairness in requiring an applicant  to  submit  with  his
    application all of the evidence  necessary  to  demonstrate  compliance
    with the rules: Alam [2012] EWCA Civ 960.  The Secretary of  State  was
    obliged to  do  no  more  and  no  less  than  decide  the  appellant's
    application for leave in the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) category fairly  and
    in accordance with the rules and the general law and she did  precisely
    that, giving reasons in April 2013 for the decisions to refuse to  vary
    leave and to remove the appellant.

20.  So far as Article 8 is concerned, there is no need to  doubt  that  the
    appellant  may  well  have  made  friendships  and  associations,   and
    established a private life, since he arrived here in September 2009  as
    a student.  The witness statement he made in December 2013 contains  no
    detail of any particular ties.  The Secretary of State found  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the rules were not met,  not  least
    because of the appellant's relatively recent arrival  and  it  has  not
    been suggested by him at any stage that he  has  established  a  family
    life here.  The failure to  comply  with  the  rules  is  not  properly
    described as a "near miss", but even if it  were,  this  does  not  add
    weight to his Article 8 case: Patel [2013] UKSC 72.  The proper  focus,
    as explained in Nasim [2014] UKUT 00025, is on the  real  substance  of
    ties established here and there is a paucity of evidence in this regard
    in this particular case.  The appellant's ties  have  been  established
    during periods of limited leave and, as in Nasim, Article 8 has limited
    utility in this case, as the appellant's circumstances  are  closer  to
    the "fuzzy penumbra" of  Article  8,  rather  than  its  core  area  of
    operation.  There is no reason to doubt Mr Aghayere's  submission  that
    the appellant has been involved in community activities  and  that  his
    presence has been beneficial in this context but the judgment in UE  is
    of only very limited assistance, taking into  account  the  failure  to
    meet the requirements of the rules, the appellant's  relatively  recent
    arrival and the fact that any ties have been established during periods
    of limited leave.  I have taken into account section 117B of  the  2002
    Act, but find that it adds little to the appellant's case.  Mr  Bramble
    correctly did not seek to suggest that the appellant has been  a  drain
    on public finances.   The appellant is able to speak  English  and  the
    evidence suggests that he is financially  independent.     I  have  had
    regard to the public  interest  considerations  which  appear  in  that
    section.

21.  Overall, the appellant has relatively little of real substance  to  put
    in the balance against the Secretary of State's case that  there  is  a
    strong public interest in the maintenance of immigration  controls,  in
    the interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom.   The
    failure to meet the requirements of  the  rules  adds  weight  to  that
    public interest.  The appellant has not shown that the factors  falling
    in his favour outweigh it.   He  cannot  succeed  under  Article  8  as
    encapsulated in the rules and he cannot succeed under Article 8 outside
    the rules, where the proportionality issue is "more at large",  as  the
    points-based system rules do not amount to a complete code:  MM  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985.

22.  In summary, the appellant cannot show  that  the  requirements  of  the
    rules have been met or that the Secretary of State was obliged to allow
    him an opportunity, in accordance with the  rules  or  her  policy,  to
    provide further evidence in support  of  his  application.   He  cannot
    succeed under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  At the end  of
    the hearing, however, the Tribunal returned to the date  on  which  the
    two immigration decisions were made,  21st  April  2013.   This  was  a
    little over two weeks before Section 52 of the  Crime  and  Courts  Act
    2013 came into  force  and  so  the  Secretary  of  State  was  unable,
    lawfully, to make the Section 47 removal decision on the same  occasion
    as the decision to refuse to vary the appellant's  leave.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge made no mention of the Section 47 removal  decision
    in her determination.  In  re-making  the  decision,  and  noting  that
    neither representative disagreed with this course, I conclude that  the
    appeal should be allowed in relation to that decision, as it was not in
    accordance with the law.  The appellant succeeds to that limited extent
    and it follows that, so far, the Secretary of  State  has  not  made  a
    lawful removal decision against him.

Decision

The appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave is dismissed.

The appeal against the Section 47 removal decision is allowed.

Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no order on this occasion.



Signed        Date 4th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I  have  dismissed  the  appeal   on   all   the   grounds   advanced   and,
notwithstanding success in relation to the Section 47  removal  decision,  I
make no fee award.



Signed        Date 4th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

