
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30th January 2015                          |On 12th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Samuel of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal McAll (the judge) promulgated on 18th June 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on 22nd October 1986.

 4. The Claimant applied for a derivative residence card by  submitting  an
    application form dated 2nd September 2013, accompanied by a  letter  of
    the same date from Afric who were his  legal  representatives  at  that
    time.  The letter contained submissions that in addition to, or in  the
    alternative to being granted a derivative residence card, the  Claimant
    should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom based upon his family
    and private life under Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The application was refused by letter dated 15th  March  2014  and  the
    Respondent issued a Notice of Immigration Decision of  the  same  date,
    indicating that the application had  been  refused  with  reference  to
    regulations 15A(4A), (7)(b), and 18A(1)(b) of the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the  2006  regulations).   In  giving
    reasons for refusal the Secretary of State noted that  the  application
    was based upon the fact that the Claimant was the joint  primary  carer
    of his son IK who is a British citizen, together with his  partner  DT.
    Because DT had leave to remain in the United Kingdom she is  an  exempt
    person under the regulations.  Therefore the  Claimant  did  not  share
    equally the responsibility for his son's care with another  person  who
    is not an exempt person.  The application was also refused  as  it  was
    not accepted that IK would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom if
    the Appellant had to leave, as he could continue to live with  DT  with
    whom he lived at present.

 6. The Secretary of State did not  consider  the  Article  8  application,
    taking the view that if the Claimant wished  to  rely  upon  family  or
    private life established in the United  Kingdom,  provisions  were  now
    included in the Immigration Rules for individuals seeking to remain  on
    that basis, and a separate charged application would need to be made.

 7. The Claimant appealed contending in brief summary that he was  entitled
    to a derivative residence card, and  that  the  decision  breached  his
    Article 8 rights.

 8. The Claimant did not request an oral hearing, and therefore the  appeal
    was determined on the papers.  The judge found that  the  Claimant  was
    not entitled to a derivative residence card for the  reasons  given  by
    the Secretary of State.  The judge went on to consider Article 8  under
    the provisions of the Immigration Rules, those being  paragraph  276ADE
    in relation to private life, and Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family
    life, and found that the Claimant could not satisfy the requirements of
    those rules.

 9. The judge then went on to consider Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules taking the view that he was entitled to do so even  though  there
    was no removal decision, by following  the  principles  in  JM  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1402, and by referring to the Upper  Tribunal  decision
    Ahmed [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC).  The judge went on to allow  the  appeal
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

10. This caused the Secretary of State to apply for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal on a jurisdictional point, contending that the judge
    was not entitled to consider Article 8, and had materially erred in  so
    doing.

11. I set out below paragraphs 3 and 4 of the application for permission;

         "3.  Insofar as is relevant paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of the  2006
             regulations provides:

             The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act  have
             effect in relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the
             First-tier Tribunal  as  if  it  were  an  appeal  against  an
             immigration decision under section 82(1) of that Act:

             section 84(1), except paragraphs (a) and (f);

             sections 85 to 87.

         4.   Consequently all s84 grounds of appeal are admissible  in  EEA
             appeals except that an Appellant cannot plead the  Immigration
             Rules 84(1)(a) or the exercise of discretion  84(1)(f).   This
             is however subject to s85 of the 2002 Act which provides

             (2)  if an Appellant under section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
                  under section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any  matter
                  raised in the statement  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
                  appeal of a kind  listed  in  section  84(1)  against  the
                  decision appealed against.

             (3)  sub-section (2) applies to a statement made under section
                  120 whether the statement was made  before  or  after  the
                  appeal was commenced."

12. The Secretary of State placed reliance upon Lamichhane  v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 260 and in particular referred to paragraph 43  which  is  set
    out below;

         "43. In my view, section 85(2) is  a  statutory  extension  of  the
             jurisdiction of the Tribunal in cases in which there has  been
             a statement made by  the  appellant  under  section  120.   It
             follows that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  consider  or
             to rule on 'any matter  ...  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1) against the  decision
             appealed against' if there has been no section 120 notice, and
             therefore no statement under that section.  This conclusion is
             consonant with my conclusion as to the effect of section 96(1)
             as it now is.  If it were otherwise, an  appellant  might  not
             know whether he could raise any new ground in his appeal until
             the hearing of his appeal, and the test  in  section  96(1)(c)
             becomes unworkable."

13. In the current appeal the Secretary of State  argued  that  because  no
    section 120 notice had been served upon the  Appellant,  he  could  not
    make a section 120 statement, and therefore the only ground  of  appeal
    open to him was section 84(1)(d) which is;

         "(d) that the appellant is an EEA  national  or  a  member  of  the
             family of an  EEA  national  and  the  decision  breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in respect  of
             entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;"

14. It was contended that this  appeal  could  be  distinguished  from  JM,
    because in that decision a section 120 notice had been served.  It  was
    argued that Lamichhane was authority to confirm that the fact that  the
    Secretary of State did not advance a jurisdictional point to the First-
    tier Tribunal was immaterial.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ford in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that Judge  McAll  may  have  erred  in  not  fully
         considering whether a  relevant  s120  notice  was  served  by  the
         Secretary of State and if  so  whether  a  relevant  statement  was
         served in response and if so  whether  human  rights  grounds  were
         raised in that statement.

         There is an arguable material error of law."

16. Following the grant of permission the Claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.

17. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

18. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Samuel indicated that he had only
    received instructions the evening before the hearing, although  he  was
    ready to proceed, and provided written submissions dated  29th  January
    2015, together with the opinion of  Advocate  General  Sharpston  dated
    30th September 2010, and an unreported determination prepared by Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Baird promulgated on 15th September 2014.

19. Mr Bramble made an application for the hearing to be  adjourned  as  he
    understood  that  there  were  other  cases  involving  residence  card
    applications and Article 8, which were pending, and which  were  to  be
    decided in the future by a Presidential panel.   Mr  Bramble  submitted
    directions made by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker dated 22nd  January  2015
    in a separate case, but which indicated that the issue of Article 8 and
    residence card applications were to be considered  in  the  future.   I
    asked Mr Bramble whether the particular jurisdictional point raised  by
    the Secretary of State in  this  appeal  was  to  be  considered  by  a
    Presidential panel, and Mr Bramble believed that it was but  could  not
    specifically confirm this.

20. Mr Samuel did not oppose the adjournment application but  advised  that
    his client would not wish to be joined in to a case to be decided by  a
    Presidential panel for financial reasons, but would not object to  this
    case being stayed until a Presidential panel had made a decision.  This
    was on the proviso that the jurisdictional point raised here, was to be
    considered by the panel.

21. I retired to consider the application.  When  the  hearing  resumed,  I
    indicated that I had been unable to confirm that the  point  raised  by
    the Secretary of State as to jurisdiction, was going to  be  considered
    by a Presidential panel, and that as far as I could ascertain, no  date
    had been fixed for a panel hearing.  I therefore decided  that  it  was
    appropriate to proceed and hear submissions, and therefore refused  the
    adjournment application.

Submissions

22. Mr Bramble relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission  to  appeal.   I  was  asked  to  find  that  JM  could   be
    distinguished, as a section 120 notice had been served  in  that  case,
    and that  involved  an  appeal  where  removal  could  be  regarded  as
    imminent, which was not the case here, and I was  asked  to  find  that
    Lamichhane was conclusive authority to confirm that because  a  section
    120 notice had not been  served  in  this  appeal,  the  judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider Article 8.

23. Mr Samuel relied upon his written  submissions  and  pointed  out  that
    human rights had been raised in the application  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, and therefore a section 120 notice or statement would  not  have
    added anything, because human rights had already  been  raised  in  the
    application.  Mr Samuel accepted that the determination of Judge  Baird
    did not assist as it was not on point, and it was  contended  that  the
    judge was correct to deal with Article 8 as he did.

24. Mr Samuel relied upon European law pointing out that Articles 20 and 21
    of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European  Union  were  relevant
    and had direct effect.   In  addition  Article  7  of  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union provides for the  same  rights
    as Article 8 of the 1950  Convention,  and  that  to  seek  to  exclude
    Article 8, and thereby Article 7 of the  Charter  in  interpreting  the
    rights of those seeking to establish an EEA right of residence would be
    an impermissible limitation on the interpretation of the Treaty rights.

25. Mr Samuel submitted that the judge had effectively implemented  EU  law
    by considering Article 8 in conjunction with the 2006 EEA  regulations,
    and had not materially erred in law.

26. Mr Bramble disagreed that the Secretary of State's position contravened
    European law.  I was asked to note that the judge  had  considered  the
    Article 8 rights of the Appellant, a non-EEA national.  The Appellant's
    son is a British citizen and has the right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as does his mother, the Appellant's partner.  As there were no
    removal directions, and removal was not imminent, and  no  section  120
    notice had been served, I was asked to  conclude  that  the  judge  had
    erred in considering Article 8.

27. Mr Samuel responded briefly by submitting that in relation to Zambrano,
    that Advocate General Sharpston had  found  that  Article  8  could  be
    considered on a free-standing  basis.   Mr  Bramble  did  not  wish  to
    respond further.

28. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

29. It is common ground that the Secretary of State did not serve with  the
    Notice of Immigration Decision a notice pursuant to section 120 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which is a requirement for
    a person to state his reasons for wishing to enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, any grounds on which he should be permitted to enter or
    remain in the United Kingdom, and any grounds on which he should not be
    removed from or required to leave the United Kingdom.

30. At first sight it would appear that a different conclusion was  reached
    by the Court of Appeal in JM, from that reached in Lamichhane which  is
    the later decision.  Neither of those cases related to  an  application
    made under the 2006 regulations.   Although  Lamichhane  is  the  later
    decision, there is no reference within it to JM.

31. The Court of Appeal in Lamichhane were not  considering  human  rights,
    but were considering an Appellant's  claim  raised  in  his  Notice  of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that although his application to  the
    Secretary of State had  been  for  leave  to  remain  based  upon  long
    residence, the Tribunal should have considered his claim to remain as a
    Tier 4 Student, because that had been raised in his appeal.

32. JM involved consideration of a variation of leave application and  Laws
    LJ stated at paragraph 28;

         "28. The short, but important, position is that once a human rights
             point is properly before the AIT, they  are  obliged  to  deal
             with it.  That is consonant  with  the  general  jurisprudence
             relating to the obligations of public bodies under  the  Human
             Rights Act and seems to me to be  the  proper  result  of  the
             construction of the relevant provisions."

33. However, in my view, the grounds prepared by  the  Secretary  of  State
    make a valid point, in that it is clear from paragraph 23 of JM that  a
    section 120 notice was served in that case, whereas such a  notice  was
    not served in Lamichhane.  Therefore I accept that it  is  possible  to
    distinguish JM on that ground.

34. I have also considered section 86(2) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 which is set out below;

    The Tribunal must determine -

    (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or not by  virtue
         of section 85(1)), and

    (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.

35. Although the above section states that a  Tribunal  must  consider  any
    matter raised as a ground of  appeal,  this  must  be  subject  to  the
    proviso,  that  a  Tribunal  must  consider  any  ground  that  it  has
    jurisdiction to consider, and that is the point raised by the Secretary
    of State in this appeal, and therefore section 86(2) does  not  provide
    an answer, as to whether the judge erred in law in considering  Article
    8.

36. I have also considered the Upper  Tribunal  decision  Ahmed  which  was
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.   This  decision  was  published
    after Lamichhane, and demonstrates the Secretary of State taking a very
    different position to that adopted in this appeal.

37. Ahmed involved a third country woman with  two  EEA  national  children
    seeking rights of residence in the United Kingdom following her divorce
    from an EEA national.  The Secretary of State's representative made the
    submission which is set out in paragraph 43;

         "43. Mr Deller submitted that although the  decision  at  issue  in
             this case - refusal of a permanent residence card - was not  a
             removal decision, it would appear, on JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA
             Civ 1402 principles, that the  Tribunal  should  consider  the
             case on the basis that a putative consequence of  the  refusal
             decision is that the Respondent would proceed  to  direct  her
             removal to Pakistan."

38. The Upper Tribunal in Ahmed, found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred, inter alia, in respect of its treatment of Article 8, by failing
    to take into account key relevant factors when conducting the Article 8
    balancing exercise.  The First-tier Tribunal decision was set aside and
    remade by the Upper Tribunal, and allowed under Article 8.   There  was
    no mention of Lamichhane in the Upper Tribunal decision, although it is
    not clear from the determination  whether  a  section  120  notice  was
    served.  Therefore I conclude that Ahmed does not provide a  definitive
    answer to the jurisdictional issue raised by the Secretary of State  in
    this appeal.

39. Lamichhane appears unequivocal in providing an answer to the  following
    question;

         "(c) May the Tribunal consider additional grounds  advanced  by  an
             appellant if no section 120 notice has been served, and if  so
             is it under a duty to do so?"

40. The answer is given by Stanley Burnton LJ in paragraph 41 which is  set
    out below;

         "41.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  Secretary   of   State's
             contentions as to  the  effect  of  section  85(2)  are  well-
             founded, and an appellant on whom no section  120  notice  has
             been served may not raise before the Tribunal any  ground  for
             the grant of leave to remain different from that which was the
             subject of the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  appealed
             against.  The answer to question (c) above is No."

41. In considering the issues  raised  in  Lamichhane  Stanley  Burnton  LJ
    recorded at paragraph 45

         "45. In Sapkota, Jackson LJ said, with feeling:

             '127.    I regret that this area of immigration  law  has  now
                  become an impenetrable  jungle  of  intertwined  statutory
                  provisions and judicial decisions, with  the  result  that
                  reasonable differences of opinion (such  as  that  between
                  Aikens LJ and Arden LJ) are now perfectly possible.  There
                  is  an  acute  need  for  simplification  so   that   both
                  immigrants and Immigration Officers  may  have  a  clearer
                  understanding of their responsibilities and rights'

             In  my  judgment,  if  anything  Jackson  LJ  understated  the
             problems.  I could easily have reached contrary conclusions in
             this case, and given respectable reasons for doing so.   There
             is an urgent need for a simply stated and  clear  codification
             of  statute  law   and   immigration   rights,   restrictions,
             administrative procedures and appeals."

42. There is force in the arguments put forward by the Secretary  of  State
    in the appeal that I am considering, but the question in Lamichhane was
    whether the Tribunal may consider additional  grounds  advanced  by  an
    Appellant if no section 120 notice was served.  The  Claimant  in  this
    appeal made an application for a  derivative  residence  card  on  form
    DRF1, but also, at the same time, made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.   The  letter  from  his
    legal representatives, which submitted the applications, was a  lengthy
    letter running to just over eight pages.  That letter  makes  it  clear
    from page 3 until the conclusion, that the Claimant was  seeking  leave
    to remain in reliance upon Article 8, and it was  submitted  that  this
    application should be considered in addition to, or as  an  alternative
    to, the application for a derivative residence card.

43. The Secretary of State's decision dated 15th  March  2014  refused  the
    residence card application, and acknowledged the application made under
    Article 8, but declined to deal with  it,  unless  a  separate  charged
    application was made, because Article 8 was now  contained  within  the
    Immigration Rules.  GEN1.9(a)(iii) of Appendix  FM  provides  that  the
    requirement to make a valid application will not apply when an  Article
    8 claim is raised in an appeal.  The appeal entered by the Claimant  to
    the First-tier Tribunal was made without legal representation, and  the
    grounds are contained in a letter dated 27th March 2014.  Article 8  is
    specifically raised as a Ground of Appeal.

44. The judge dismissed the appeal under the  2006  regulations,  and  then
    considered the Immigration Rules dealing with private and family  life,
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.  That would  seem  to  be  an  error,
    because paragraph 5 of the Immigration Rules provides that  save  where
    expressly indicated, the Immigration Rules  do  not  apply  to  persons
    entitled to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  by  virtue  of  the
    provisions of the 2006 regulations.  However the error  in  considering
    the Immigration Rules is not material,  as  the  appeal  was  dismissed
    under the rules.

45. The judge then went on to allow the appeal, having considered Article 8
    outside the rules.  I am not persuaded that  he  erred  in  law  in  so
    doing, even though no section 120 notice was served.  This is because I
    find that Lamichhane is authority which confirms that in the absence of
    a section 120 notice, the Tribunal may not consider additional  grounds
    advanced by an Appellant in an appeal.  In this case, the Claimant  did
    not advance additional grounds in his appeal.  His initial  application
    to the Secretary of State was to be granted a derivative residence card
    and/or be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, under Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention.  He is not therefore raising  a  ground  that  was
    different to that contained in his application.

46. For that reason I conclude that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    considering Article 8, and on the  facts  of  this  particular  appeal,
    Lamichhane is not authority to confirm that the judge should  not  have
    considered Article 8.  The challenge made to the determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal by the Secretary of State related  to  jurisdiction
    only, and there was  no  challenge  to  the  adequacy  of  the  judge's
    consideration of Article 8, and therefore as I find that the  Secretary
    of  State's  jurisdictional  point   fails,   I   conclude   that   the
    determination must stand.

Notice of Decision

I find there is no material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  That decision therefore stands and the appeal  of  the  Secretary
of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal made  an  anonymity  direction  because  the  appeal
involved consideration of the best interests of children.  I  continue  that
order pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.  This order is to remain in place unless or until  this  Tribunal,  or
any  other  appropriate  Court,  directs  otherwise.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Claimant  or  any
member of his family.  Failure to comply with this  direction  could  amount
to a contempt of court.



Signed                              Date 5th February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, so does the decision  not
to make a fee award.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
