
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 7th August 2015                   |on 18th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                              MR MOHAMMAD IQBAL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

              THE  SECRETRARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Kadola, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant claimed asylum on 7  August  1995  and  his  claim  was
       refused the following year. He subsequently absconded. On 7 July 2012
       he applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
       residence. His application was refused on 4 March 2014.

    2. Because his application was  submitted  before  the  changes  to  the
       immigration rules effective from the 9th July 2012 it was  considered
       under paragraph 276 B (i) (a) and (b). This provides  that  a  person
       seeking indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  long  residence
       must show at least 10 years continuous lawful residence or  at  least
       14 years continuous residence and there is no reason why it would  be
       undesirable to grant indefinite leave. Regard was to be  had  to  the
       person's  circumstances.  There  was  also  a  requirement  to   have
       sufficient knowledge of the English language and about  life  in  the
       United Kingdom, save for those under the age of  18  or  aged  65  or
       over. The appellant's lawful residence ended on 15  July  1986  when,
       having been granted temporary admission, he  failed  to  report.  The
       respondent concluded insufficient evidence had been provided that  he
       had resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  continuously  to  satisfy  the
       necessary 14 your route.

The First Tier.

    3. His appeal was heard before First-tier Judge Miles on 10 March  2015.
       The judge heard from the appellant and his wife  and  documents  were
       supplied to show his presence. At paragraph 16 of  the  decision  the
       judge accepted that since his initial entry in  August  1995  he  had
       lived continuously in the United Kingdom, albeit without leave.

    4. The decision at paragraph 17 indicates at hearing  the  judge  raised
       the issue of the English language requirement. The  judge  refers  to
       the appellant relying upon an ESOL entry  1  level  certificate.  The
       judge stated:

           "... In my judgement that certificate does  not  deal  with  the
           knowledge about life in the United  Kingdom  requirement  which,
           from my own  research  clearly  applied  at  the  time  of  this
           application. Accordingly therefore and  despite  my  finding  in
           favour of the appellant with regard  to  having  established  14
           years  continuous  residence.  I  am  not  satisfied  that   his
           application satisfy the requirements of rule  276B  (iv)  Hc395,
           and therefore his appeal cannot succeed under the rule."

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  it  was  arguable  the
       judge erred  in  finding  the  ESOL  certificate  did  not  meet  the
       requirements at the date of application. This had not been raised  by
       the respondent, with the judge referring to `my own research' without
       specifying what that was.

The Upper Tribunal

    6. At hearing, Mr Coleman provided me with a Home Office statement dated
       April  2013  dealing  with  changes  to  the  requirements   in   the
       immigration rules from October 2013 in relation to the  knowledge  of
       language and life in  the  United  Kingdom  (KoLL)  requirement.   It
       states that those who have applied before 28 October 2013  will  have
       satisfied the KoLL requirement by either passing the life in  the  UK
       test or by taking an ESOL qualification (probably at  a  level  below
       B1).This  would  not  be  sufficient  should  they  later  apply  for
       naturalisation.

    7. Mr. Kadola was able to provide the archived version of  the  relevant
       immigration  rule  covering  14  June  2012  to  8  July  2012,   the
       appellant's application having been made on 7  July  2012.  Paragraph
       276B sets out the requirements to be  met  for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain on the ground of long residence. Paragraph 276B (b) refers  to
       having had at least 14 years continuous residence. Paragraph  276B(f)
       requires that regard to be had to representations made on  behalf  of
       an applicant and goes on to state:

           '(iv) the applicant has  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English
           language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom unless he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or  over  at
           the time he makes his application appellant.'

       I was then referred to paragraph 33 B of the immigration rules  which
       deals with satisfying the requirement of knowledge  of  language  and
       life in the United Kingdom. It states as follows:

           'A person has sufficient knowledge of the English  language  and
           sufficient knowledge about life in the United  Kingdom  for  the
           purpose of an application for indefinite leave to  remain  under
           these rules (unless paragraph 33 BA applies) if -

                (a)    i)  he  has  attended  and  ESO  well  course  at  an
                accredited college ;

                    ii) the course use teaching materials derived  from  the
                    document,  entitled  "citizenship  materials  for   ESOL
                    Learners"(ISBN 1-84478-5424);

                    iii).  He  has   demonstrated   relevant   progress   in
                    accordance with paragraph 33F : and

                    iv). he has attained a relevant qualification;'

    8. Mr. Kadola accepted that the appellant met all of these requirements.
       He pointed out that 33B (b) was not met. However, if paragraph 33B is
       considered in its entirety it is clear that the use of `or' after (a)
       (b) and (c) is a disjunctive. As he meets paragraph 33 B (a) he meets
       the knowledge of the English language and life in the United  Kingdom
       requirement for the purposes of application for indefinite  leave  to
       remain.

    9. Mr. Kadola provided me with a copy of the unreported decision of  the
       President and Vice President cited as IA/25958/2013. Paragraph  3  of
       the decision refers to the use of ESOL  certificates  and  refers  to
       paragraph 33B of the immigration rules from when this was  originally
       introduced on 2 April  2007,  as  amended  from  7  April  2010.   It
       replicates the original regulation.

   10. I conclude that First-tier Judge Miles materially erred at  paragraph
       17 of the  decision  in  finding  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
       knowledge about life in United  Kingdom  requirement  with  his  ESOL
       entry one certificate. Consequently, the decision cannot stand. There
       being no remaining areas in dispute I remake  the  decision  allowing
       the appeal.

Decision

The First-tier decision contains a material error of law and  cannot  stand.
I remake the decision allowing the appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



Fee

The appellant paid an appeal fee and no fee  award  could  be  made  by  the
First-tier Judge because he had lost  his  appeal.  The  appellant  has  now
succeeded effectively on the  same  evidence  available  to  the  First-tier
Judge. I asked the representatives for submissions on my power  in  relation
to fees but neither could assist.  This was considered in Singh (fee  award:
ancillary decision) [2013]  UKUT  00179  (IAC).  The  Upper  Tribunal  there
concluded  that  it  had  no  jurisdiction  in  relation  to   fee   awards.
Consequently, I cannot change that aspect of the decision.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

