
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15319/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 19 February 2015                  |On 20 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS HOROJA SALLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel (instructed by DV
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  on  15  January  2015
         against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid  who  had
         allowed the Respondent's appeal against the  Appellant's  decisions
         dated 6 March 2014 to refuse  to  grant  the  Respondent  leave  to
         remain outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  to  remove  her.   The
         decision was promulgated on 28 November 2014.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Gambia, born on 17  March  1981.
         She had entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  on  20  December
         2001, with leave to enter valid until 20 June 2002.  The  Appellant
         thereafter remained in the United Kingdom  without  leave.   On  15
         September 2009 the Respondent  made  her  application  for  further
         leave to remain, which was refused on 6 March 2014.

    3.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted by Judge Parkes because he considered that it
         was arguable that  the  judge  had  failed  to  show  that  he  had
         considered the relevant Immigration Rules or had  applied  sections
         117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  when
         considering the public interest in the proportionality  assessment.



    Submissions - error of law

    4.     Mr Whitwell for the Secretary of State relied on the grounds  of
         onwards appeal and submitted that this was a clear  case  of  legal
         error in relation to what was in substance an Article 8 ECHR claim,
         as the grant of permission to appeal indicated.  Section  117B  had
         not been considered at all.  Insufficient weight had been given  to
         the public interest and to the Immigration  Rules  when  conducting
         the proportionality assessment.  Key authorities had been  ignored.
         The decision should be set aside and remade at a fresh hearing.

    5.     Miss Bassiri-Dezfouli for the Respondent candidly accepted  that
         the judge had not mentioned section 117B and that it was  not  easy
         to defend the decision.  Nevertheless she invited the  tribunal  to
         uphold it.

    6.     There was nothing which Mr Whitwell wished to add.

    The error of law finding

    7.     At the conclusion of submissions, I indicated that I found  that
         the judge had fallen into material error  of  law,  such  that  the
         decision would be set aside.  It would not be possible to  preserve
         any findings of fact and the appeal would have to be reheard before
         another judge.  I reserved my determination which now follows.

    8.     Judge Majid's decision is difficult if not impossible to follow.
         It seems he purported to allow the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules but he failed to specify which rule or rules were applicable.
          There followed what can  only  be  described  as  a  rambling  and
         disjointed series of personal and irrelevant observations about the
         law, which I regret to say I have seen in other decisions from  the
         same judge.  These it has to be said stray far from  the  principle
         of judicial impartiality.

    9.     I consider that there were a number of grave problems  with  the
         judge's decision, beginning  with  the  legal  framework.   It  was
         unclear which Immigration Rules, if any, the judge had  considered.
         The judge was required by law  to  give  express  consideration  to
         section 117B in particular when  considering  the  Article  8  ECHR
         claim.  The judge ought to have shown that by such  reference  that
         he  had   adequately   weighed   the   relevant   public   interest
         considerations,  one  of  which   was   the   Appellant's   adverse
         immigration history.  Important health  cases  such  as  N  v  SSHD
         [2005] UKHL 31 received no mention, despite the Secretary of  State
         reliance on such authority: see paragraph 21  of  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter.  The tribunal has already observed the judge's free
         expression of his personal views.

    10.    It is plain that the Appellant's complaints are fully justified.
         The decision cannot stand and the tribunal accordingly  sets  aside
         the decision.  There has not been an effective hearing  because  of
         the judge's incompetence.  There is no alternative  but  to  return
         the appeal for a fresh hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
         findings are preserved.

    11.    There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
         tribunal sees no need for one.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, sets  aside  the  original  decision  and  directs  that  the
    original appeal should be heard again before a differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal.  The date has been fixed 15 August 2015, at Taylor
    House, not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.






    Signed Dated 19 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
