
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Court of Justice, Belfast  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 August 2016                              |On 18 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                               Nicolas Moodie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Millar, RP Crawford & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal has at its foundation a decision made by the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department ("SSHD") on 11  March  2014  refusing  to
    provide the appellant with an EEA residence card;  an  application  for
    such being  made  to  the  SSHD  pursuant  to  Regulation  15A  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hutchinson)
    heard an appeal against the SSHD's decision  on  29  January  2015  and
    dismissed it on all grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  3  February
    2015.  The pertinent features of such decision are as follows:

      i) It  was  conceded  by  the  appellant's  representatives  that  the
         appellant could not succeed under the 2006 Regulations;

     ii)  The  appellant  withdrew  reliance  upon  the  Immigration   Rules
         [paragraph 15 of the decision];

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal  considered  whether  the  SSHD's  decision
         breached the appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights and  concluded,  for
         reasons given in paragraphs 17 to 26 of its decision, that  it  did
         not.

 3. It is not contended that the SSHD served  a  notice  on  the  appellant
    pursuant to section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.

 4. The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  the  permission  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain, such permission being  granted
    on 16 July 2015.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  only  ground  of
    challenge brought before the Upper Tribunal is to the conclusion of the
    First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 8 ECHR.

 5.  The  hearing  of  this  appeal  was  initially  adjourned   to   await
    consideration by the Court of Appeal of an appeal against the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour & Ors (EEA appeals; human  rights)
    [2015] UKUT 00466, which the Upper Tribunal  promulgated  on  4  August
    2015.  Amirteymour was treated as having the status of a lead  case  by
    the Upper Tribunal and it concluded  that,  absent  the  service  of  a
    section 120 notice by the SSHD, an appellant could not rely upon  human
    rights grounds before the Tribunal in order  to  seek  to  challenge  a
    decision to refuse to issue an EEA residence card.  The Court of Appeal
    have yet to consider the case of Amirteymour.

 6. However, in  a  decision  of  1  December  2015  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered materially the same issue in the case of TY  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

 7. In TY the SSHD refused an application for an EEA residence card as  the
    dependant of a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.   The  applicant
    appealed the decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  two  basis;  the
    first relating to his entitlement to remain under the  EEA  Regulations
    and the second on Refugee Convention grounds.  The SSHD had not  issued
    a notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act to the applicant.  The First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  applicant's  appeal  on  both  grounds,
    concluding in relation to the second ground that the applicant was  not
    entitled to pursue Refugee Convention grounds in the appeal.  The Upper
    Tribunal confirmed the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    appellant subsequently appealed the matter to the Court of Appeal.

 8. By the time the matter come  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  the  Upper
    Tribunal had promulgated its  decision  in  Amirteymour.   Jackson  LJ,
    giving the judgment of the court, observed that the SSHD was not  under
    a duty to serve a section 120 notice, that such a notice had  not  been
    served on the applicant and that there had  been  no  removal  decision
    made, or removal  directions  given,  in  relation  to  the  applicant.
    Jackson LJ continued:

         "27. Since there is no section 120 one stop notice,  the  appellant
             is confined to the subject matter of  the  original  decision.
             That is a decision that the  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the
             requirements of the EEA Regulations. ...However strong or weak
             the claims are under the Refugee  Convention  or  ECHR,  those
             provisions could  not  entitle  the  appellant  to  receive  a
             residence card under the EEA Regulations. ...

         35.  It is impossible to say that the Secretary of State's decision
             to withhold a residence card  (a  decision  which  is  correct
             under the EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be in
             breach of the Refugee Convention or ECHR.  The UK will only be
             in breach of those Conventions if in the future the  appellant
             makes an asylum or human rights claim, which the Secretary  of
             State and/or the Tribunals incorrectly reject.

         36.  In the result therefore I reach  a  similar  decision  on  the
             issues before us to the decision reached by the Upper Tribunal
             in Amirteymour ...  The  Upper  Tribunal  in  Amirteymour  has
             analysed the  statutory  provisions  and  the  authorities  in
             formidable detail.  I shall not  seek  to  traverse  all  that
             material.  ...

         37.  For completeness, I should add that in her  skeleton  argument
             Ms Jegarajah raised a  number  of  points  concerning  the  EU
             Charter.  These could not affect the  outcome  of  the  appeal
             and, very sensibly, Ms Jegarajah did not press  them  in  oral
             argument."

 9. I am bound by the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  TY.   In  the
    instant case the SSHD made  a  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  an  EEA
    residence card.  There was no notice served under section  120  of  the
    2002 Act on the appellant, and neither has there  been  a  decision  to
    remove the appellant.

10. In these circumstances the appeal should  have  been  confined  to  the
    subject matter of the original decision  i.e.  the  decision  that  the
    appellant does not fulfil the requirements of the EEA Regulations.

11. The First-tier Tribunal therefore  erred  in  considering  whether  the
    decision of the SSHD led to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.  That error is,
    however, immaterial given that the Tribunal  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on that ground. As  a  consequence,  I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the appellant's appeal  remains
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is  dismissed.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
does not contain an error of law capable of affecting  the  outcome  of  the
appeal.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
2 August 2016

