
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15324/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 August 2014                              |On 19 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                Mr Raju Bandi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, Counsel instructed by Bright Star
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and his date  of  birth  is  2  May
    1988.  He made an application on 19 December 2013 to vary his leave  to
    remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  His application was refused by the respondent in a decision of
    21 March 2014.  The application was refused because the  decision-maker
    decided that the  bank  statements  submitted  by  the  appellant  from
    Federal Bank Limited India and the Punjab Bank are  false  because  the
    respective banks had confirmed that they had not been issued by them.

2.   The appellant was not awarded points for attributes  under  Appendix  A
    and C.  The application was refused under the substantive Rules and  in
    addition under 322(1A) of the Rules.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  J  S
    Law in a decision that was promulgated on 30 May 2015. This must  be  a
    typographical error and should read 2014. The matter was determined  by
    the Judge on the papers. The appellant had requested a hearing.

4.   The Judge went on to dismiss the appeal without a hearing  pursuant  to
    Rule 15(2) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005.  He also found that The Judge  found  that  there  was  no  valid
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "2.   Rule  15(2)(c)  of  the  Asylum  and   Immigration   Tribunal
             (Procedure)  Rules  2005  provides  that  the   Tribunal   may
             determine an appeal without a hearing if:


                  'A party has failed to comply with a  provision  of  these
                  Rules or a direction of the Tribunal and the  Tribunal  is
                  satisfied that in all circumstances, including the  extent
                  of the failure and any reasons for it, it  is  appropriate
                  to determine the appeal without a hearing.'


         3.   The Appellant's failure  to  supply  the  Notice  of  decision
             against which he is appealing is a failure to comply with Rule
             8(2) of the 2005 Procedure Rules as amended by the Asylum  and
             Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 2008  which
             came into force on 12th May 2008.


         4.   Bearing in mind that the burden of proof is on  the  Appellant
             and the standard of proof is on the balance  of  probabilities
             it is clear that the  Appellant  has  provided  no  basis  for
             determining an appeal in his favour  in  the  absence  of  the
             decision  to  which  his  appeal  relates.   The  decision  is
             indicated to be an application for entry on  a  non-settlement
             basis.  The grounds reveal this to be a  student  application.
             I have therefore  considered  whether  it  is  appropriate  to
             exercise the Tribunal's discretion to determine the appeal and
             to dismiss it for want of  the  Notice  of  decision  and  the
             likely consequences.  As the Appellant would be at liberty  to
             apply for entry clearance afresh  there  are  no  consequences
             which would apparently serve to indicate it would be unjust to
             do so."


5.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ievins in a  decision  of  20  June  2014.   The  grounds
    seeking leave to appeal argue  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    decision were forwarded to the Tribunal on 8 April 2014. The  Secretary
    of State served a response pursuant to Rule 24 of  the  2008  Procedure
    Rules which it is accepted that  the  Judge  did  not  appear  to  have
    understood the immigration decision. However, it is possible  that  the
    error is immaterial because the appellant has  failed  to  comply  with
    8(2) of the 2005 Procedure Rules.

Conclusions

6.   The Judge on the one hand dismissed the  appeal  whilst  on  the  other
    purported to finds that there was no valid appeal.  The  appellant  was
    sent a notice by the First-tier Tribunal on 29  April  2014  requesting
    grounds of appeal by 7 May 2014.  The appellant sent grounds of  appeal
    and  I  copy  of  the  decision  under  appeal  to  the   Tribunal   in
    correspondence of 8 April 2014. I also note that  there  was  a  second
    decision letter which is stamped 2 April 2014, presumably by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

7.   Mr Tufan conceded that in the  light  of  the  procedural  irregularity
    there was a material error of law and I agree with him.  It is  a  real
    possibility that the Judge dismissed the appeal without considering the
    documents that were  on  the  file.   In  addition  the  Judge  wrongly
    identified the decision under appeal.

8.   The procedural irregularity amounts to  a  material  error  and  I  set
    aside the decision to dismiss the appeal under Section 12(2)(a) of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and remit the matter to  the
    First-tier Tribunal pursuant to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  with  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2(a) of the practice statement of 25 September  2012.   The
    appellant has requested a hearing.

9.   Mr Tufan served and filed two document verification  reports  on  which
    the respondent seeks to rely.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 18 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

