
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 15541 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2013                           |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS
                                   Between

                               Shahzad Hussain
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.  In simple  terms  the  application  was  refused  because  the
    appellant had not produced the documents he was required to  produce  at
    the required time.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted on grounds complaining that  the  documents  had  in  fact  been
    produced.

 2. The appellant did not appear before us. The records  show  that  he  had
    been served properly by post in accordance with  the  rules.  Given  the
    honest and realistic  approach  that  Mr  Jack  had  indicated  that  he
    intended to take we saw no  point  in  making  any  enquiries  into  the
    appellant's absence.

 3. Mr Jack was quite satisfied, having looked at the file  carefully,  that
    this is a case where the evidential flexibility policy does apply.   The
    point that he made is that the documents that had not been produced,  or
    at least had not been found by the Secretary of State, were referred  to
    at an early stage in correspondence so that the Secretary of State  knew
    that they were alleged to exist. They  were  also  mentioned  in  a  CAS
    letter which further tended to confirm their existence.

 4. Mr Jack was satisfied that, in accordance  with  her  published  policy,
    when confronted with corroboratory evidence of this kind  the  Secretary
    of State should have stepped back and asked herself if this was  a  case
    where the documents were not produced because  they  did  not  exist  or
    because of a mistake, or if in fact they were produced by the  appellant
    and lost by the Secretary of State.  He did not concede  that  they  had
    been lost but recognised that this was a possible explanation for  their
    apparent absence.

 5. We agree with Mr Jack that in these circumstances the Secretary of State
    was required by the policy to notify the appellant of the difficulty and
    give him an opportunity to respond.  She did not do that.

 6. It follows that the decision is not in accordance with the  law  and  we
    make a finding setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. We
    rule that the decision complained of is not in accordance with the  law.
    The Secretary of State must remake the  decision  lawfully  with  proper
    regard to her policy.



         |Signed                               |                                     |
|Senior Immigration Judge             |                                     |
|(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)        |Dated 28 November 2013               |

