
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15181/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Prepared at Field House on the Papers         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                 Gopal Pant

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Nepal who was born on  10  November  1984,
    has appealed against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies,
    who had dismissed  his  appeal  against  a  combined  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing to vary his leave to remain on human rights grounds
    and also to remove him by way of directions under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   On  4  November  2013  I  refused  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    substantive decision  but  gave  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal
    limited to an appeal against the removal decision.  At the  same  time,
    in a Notice of Provisional  Decision,  I  indicated  that  it  was  the
    provisional view of the Tribunal that the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the removal decision should be allowed without a hearing, to the extent
    that  the  decision   to   issue   removal   directions,   being   made
    simultaneously with the substantive decision,  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

3.   However, I stated further that before giving a formal determination  to
    this effect, I would consider any representations as to  why  I  should
    not do so, so long as these were filed with the Tribunal  by  no  later
    than seven days after the Notice of Provisional Decision had been  sent
    to the parties.

4.   Following service on  the  parties  of  my  decision  granting  limited
    permission to appeal and  of  my  Notice  of  Provisional  Decision,  a
    response was received from the  respondent,  dated  20  November  2013,
    expressing agreement with the Tribunal's provisional view.  No  further
    representations have been received from or on behalf of the  appellant.



5.   Accordingly, I now make the decision which I indicated  I  intended  to
    make.

Decision

I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  substantive  decision,
refusing to vary his leave to remain, is dismissed.

The appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  simultaneous  decision  to
issue removal directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
Nationality Act 2006 is allowed to the limited  extent  that  this  decision
was not in accordance with the law.



Signed:                                 Date: 10 December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

