

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/15319/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         | Determination issued             |
|on 4 May 2016                            | On 10 May 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                HOROJA SALLAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Stein, Advocate; Stuart Karatas, Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Gambia,  born  on  17  March  1981.   No
    anonymity order has been requested or made.

 2. The appellant was issued with a visit visa on 20 December  2001,  valid
    until 20 June 2002.  She overstayed.   In  September  2009  she  sought
    leave to remain outwith the Immigration Rules,  on  the  basis  of  the
    ECHR, in particular Article 3,  on  medical  grounds.   The  respondent
    mislaid the application.  It was not decided until "chased up"  by  her
    solicitors in December 2013.

 3. The respondent's reasons for refusing the application are in a decision
    dated 6 March 2014.

 4. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed by  Judge
    Majid in a decision promulgated on 28 November 2014, but that  was  set
    aside  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Manuell   by   determination
    promulgated on 20 February 2015.  The case was  case  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Judge Walters dismissed the appeal again, by determination  promulgated
    on 28 September 2015.

 6. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

        2. ... in paragraphs 32-37 of the determination  ...  the  Tribunal
           erred  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality.   In  assessing
           proportionality, the Tribunal decides how much weight is  to  be
           attributed to competing considerations in  determining  how  the
           balance  should  be  struck  between  the  public  interest  and
           protected individual rights:  see Huang [2007] UKHL  11  and  EB
           (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL41.   The  doctrine  of  judicial  precedent
           requires ... tribunals to  follow  binding  authorities  of  the
           superior courts.  As a result, section 117B(4) and (5)  [of  the
           2002 Act] does not require  the  ...  Tribunal  ...  to  ascribe
           "little weight" to the matters specified  therein.   Rather  ...
           what appears to be a clear and strict  instruction  to  the  ...
           Tribunal can effectively be ignored, with the  result  that  the
           judge is unconstrained in deciding how much weight to accord  to
           each of the listed considerations.

        3. The concept of proportionality is central ...  to  the  Tribunal
           ... failed to take into consideration the guidance in ...  Huang
           ...

        4. The judge ... failed to take into consideration the delay it has
           taken the [respondent] to consider the  appellant's  application
           submitted on 1 September 2009 ... nearly 5 years ... the judge's
           contention that the appellant remained in the UK unlawfully  for
           all her stay is therefore inaccurate as she  has  been  pursuing
           her application for the past 6 years.  The  delay  in  making  a
           decision in this case is exceptional.

 7. On 24 December 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal, observing as follows:

        2. At paragraph 40 ... the judge has referred to the ...  delay  by
           the respondent.  The judge has not set out any findings of  fact
           in relation  to  the  consequences  ...  the  judge  states  his
           submissions without making any findings of fact.

        3. At paragraph 36 the judge has referred to the  appellant  having
           been here unlawfully for all of her stay ... except the first  4
           months.  The judge has not referred to the date of the appeal or
           the status of the appellant having so appealed.  At paragraph  7
           ... the judge refers to the immigration history.  It is arguable
           that the judge should have differentiated  between  the  periods
           there  referred  to   in   making   his   analysis   under   the
           proportionality exercise.

 8. Ms Stein relied on the grounds of appeal and the grant  of  permission,
    and submitted further as follows.  There  was  no  dispute  as  to  the
    applicable law.  The determination recorded that it had  been  conceded
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and that her medical issues did not reach the level required for
    protection under Article 3.  However, those circumstances were part  of
    the factual matrix under which her appeal should have  succeeded  under
    Article  8.   Applying  the   principles   of   Huang,   all   relevant
    circumstances had to be taken into account in the final proportionality
    decision.  As set out in the grounds, the judge failed to recognise all
    such circumstances.  The judge failed to recognise that the time  spent
    by the appellant in the UK without lawful permission was  not  entirely
    her responsibility, because she had been awaiting a decision  from  the
    respondent.  The analysis by Judge Hollingworth was accurate.  This was
    a significant factor which the judge failed to take into  account.   It
    had also now emerged that there were some issues with the  literacy  of
    the appellant, which had become apparent to Ms Stein only following her
    very recent instruction in the case.  These issues appeared not to have
    been  fully  appreciated  in  the  past,  and  might  explain  apparent
    contradictions in her evidence.  Those issues would be best be resolved
    by another hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
    aside and the case should be remitted there  for  a  fresh  hearing  in
    order for the appellant to have the opportunity to put forward  further
    evidence, particularly on the medical aspect and her illiteracy.

 9. Mrs Saddiq submitted in response as  follows.   The  case  had  a  long
    history and medical issues were always to the fore.  The appellant  had
    every opportunity to make her case, and had not  applied  to  introduce
    any further evidence.  The assertion that illiteracy had anything to do
    with the matter came very late, given the  long  history  of  decision-
    making and appeal.  The appellant's grounds went much too far in  their
    assertion that tribunals  could  ignore  the  statutory  expression  of
    Article 8 in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  That argument went  in  the
    face of the statute and had been settled by  case  law,  in  particular
    Dube (section 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090, which made  it  clear  that
    the provisions were "not an a la carte menu"  and  that  the  enactment
    that these were  "public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases" left no doubt as to the intent of  the  legislature.   The  fact
    that the appellant made an application in 2009 did not alter  the  fact
    that she was here unlawfully.  She had no leave  since  expiry  of  her
    visit visa in 2002.  The application she made never had  any  prospects
    of success either in or out of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  evidence
    given on behalf of the appellant had been found not to be credible, for
    sensible reasons which were not criticised in the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Medical evidence had not been ignored but had been set out at paragraph
    24.  There was no error in the determination.

10. Ms Stein in reply said  that  the  leading  authority  on  the  correct
    approach to Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules  was  MS  v  SSHD
    [2013] CSIH 52.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. There  has  been  lengthy  delay  here,  partly  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent.  The appellant's application was lost, and not  dealt  with
    until she chased the matter up some years later.  There has  also  been
    unfortunate delay in the appeal process, due to a highly unsatisfactory
    determination in the first instance.  However, it remains the case that
    the appellant was here from 2002 to 2009 unlawfully, without making any
    assertion of a right to remain here; and the application which she made
    in 2009 was one with no real  prospects  of  eventual  success  on  its
    merits.  There has been no such delay on the part of the  Secretary  of
    State as  significantly  to  enhance  the  appellant's  position  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, outwith the Rules.

13. The interpretation of  section  117B  (4)  and  (5)  of  the  2002  Act
    contended for in the grounds is plainly contrary to the statute itself,
    and now also to case law.  Those provisions were applied accurately  by
    the judge at paragraphs 33 to 36 of the determination.

14. Counsel has attempted to make the best case that could be made for  the
    appellant on the facts, but the assessment of proportionality was  well
    within the judge's lawful scope.  He took  into  account  all  relevant
    considerations.  No error of law is disclosed.

15. While it is not necessary to go further than that for present purposes,
    it is difficult to see how any  judge,  on  the  evidence,  might  have
    justified a proportionality outcome in the appellant's favour.

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

            [pic]


            5 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




