
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15237/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2015                     |On 30 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MS AISHA HASSAN YOUSIF IBRAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr M Hoshi (Solicitor), Sabeers Stone Greene LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Claimant whose date of birth is 5  March  1950,  is  a  citizen  of
    Sudan.  She appeals a decision made by the Secretary  of  State  on  10
    January 2014  refusing  her  application  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE and under Article 8.

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether  there  was
    an error of law by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appellant  in  this
    matter is the Secretary of State and for  the  sake  of  convenience  I
    refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" and to "the Claimant".

3.   The Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 8 outside  of  the  rules
    having found exceptional circumstances in  that  the  Claimant  was  an
    elderly and sick woman who was reliant on her daughter and family,  who
    are all British citizens settled in the UK for all her needs, and  that
    no suitable care could be provided in  Sudan.   The  sponsor  would  be
    forced to return to Sudan which would cause a disruption in family life
    in the UK.

4.   The Secretary of State contended in her  grounds  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Rothwell) in a decision promulgated on 4 December 2014,
    erred in law by reaching conclusions that were not open to  it  on  the
    evidence and making findings that were irrational (perverse).

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    21 January 2015. The permitting judge found the grounds to be  arguable
    given that:

         (i)  "The Tribunal found that the appellant's state of health was a
             circumstance that fell outside the Immigration Rules [36]  (in
             spite of the provision that it is made for it  under  Appendix
             FM of the Immigration Rules) and the fact that the sponsor had
             given evidence that there may be suitable care  homes  in  the
             appellant's country of origin [25],

         (ii) treated the inability of the appellant to  integrate  into  UK
             society as a factor  that  weighed  in  her  favour   [41]  in
             apparent contradiction to  the  public  interest  question  as
             defined by Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002,

         (iii)    found that  the  appellant  had  established  family  life
             whilst in the  UK  legally,  had  never  breached  immigration
             controls and had 'complied with the requirements of  her  visa
             in the past' [42] in spite of the fact that since 2009 she had
             spent the majority of her time in the UK, under  the  auspices
             of a  multi-visit  visa,  without  ever  having  sought  entry
             clearance as an adult dependant relative, and

         (iv) treated 'the sponsor's position in  the  United  Kingdom'  (an
             apparent reference to the fact that  she  is  settled  in  the
             United Kingdom) as the 'only' factor that tipped 'the  balance
             of proportionality' in the appellant's favour."

6.   At the hearing before  me  Mr  Tarlow  expanded  on  the  grounds.   He
    submitted that as the Claimant's circumstances were clearly covered  by
    the Immigration Rules under the dependant relative provisions and there
    was no basis for the Tribunal to have gone outside of the  Rules.   The
    Tribunal had given weight to the fact that the sponsor  was  a  GP.  He
    submitted that she should not have been placed  in  a  better  position
    than others because of her profession.

7.   Mr Hoshi submitted that the Tribunal decision was flawless.   This  was
    an Article 8 appeal. The Tribunal had clearly set out why  it  believed
    that the medical circumstances were exceptional and why  the  sponsor's
    considerations were taken into account in favour of the Claimant.   The
    Tribunal accepted the medical conditions were of critical  significance
    and that the care provided by  the  sponsor  due  to  her  professional
    qualification was unique.  Further the Tribunal had taken into  account
    that the sponsor had taken a decision not to put her mother into a care
    home either in the UK or in Sudan.  The sponsor was now pregnant with a
    baby due in May and it would prove to be  more  difficult  for  her  to
    travel to Sudan with her mother.  Public interest factors had  properly
    been considered under Section 117B including the fact that the claimant
    was not able to speak the English language.

Discussion and Decision

8.   The Claimant is a national of Sudan and she has been  visiting  the  UK
    on a regular basis from 2009.  She last entered the UK on 14  September
    2013 and subsequently made an application for further leave  to  remain
    on 10 January 2014.  There is no dispute as to the facts in the case in
    particular as regards the claimant's poor state of health.

9.   As regards  the  concerns  raised  as  to  the  Claimant's  immigration
    history, I am satisfied that she has  never  overstayed  her  visa  and
    throughout her time in the UK has been with lawful leave. She  has  not
    been found to be in breach of  her  landing  conditions  at  any  point
    during  her  stay  in  the  UK  prior  to  submitting  her  Article   8
    application. I find no merit in the ground raised in this regard.

10.  As to the contention that the Tribunal erred by  placing  undue  weight
    on the sponsor's profession as a  GP  and  thereby  given  preferential
    treatment, I do not consider that this was a fair representation of the
    position taken by the  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal  took  the  view  that
    because of the sponsor's job she was in a better position to be able to
    provide daily care for her mother including medical input and  personal
    assistance together with her husband who  is  self-employed  and  works
    from home.  The Tribunal found that there were  no  relatives  able  to
    look after the Claimant or  to  coordinate  any  care  in  Sudan.   The
    Tribunal took into account the public interest in  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor was training as a GP in the UK and it was  not  in  the  public
    interest for her to have to leave the UK mid training given that  as  a
    doctor she was a useful resource.

11.   The  Tribunal  found  compelling  or  exceptional  evidence   meriting
    consideration  of  Article  8  outside  of   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Notwithstanding that no application had been made under  the  dependant
    relative rules from outside of the UK, I am satisfied that the Tribunal
    had regard to all of  the  evidence  of  the  particular  circumstances
    including  the  Claimant's   significant   health   difficulties,   the
    deterioration in health whilst in the UK and the care provided for  her
    by her daughter.  It accepted that the sponsor would  return  to  Sudan
    with the Claimant in the event that she was not granted leave, and that
    in turn would have a significant and disruptive effect  on  the  family
    life in the UK.  I am satisfied that the  Tribunal  properly  evaluated
    the evidence and made findings that were open to  it  on  the  evidence
    before it, and gave clear and adequate reasons for its decision.

12.   The  Tribunal  properly  took  into  account   all   public   interest
    considerations and had  regard  to  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

13.  I find no material error of law in  the  determination.   The  Tribunal
    made findings that were open to it on the evidence  available  in  this
    particular  case,  followed  the  correct  approach   to   Article   8,
    proportionality and had regard to  the  public  interest  factors.  The
    grounds relied on by the Secretary of State amount  to  a  disagreement
    with the Tribunal's findings.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decisions and reasons dated 4 December 2014 shall stand.

The appeal is allowed under human rights grounds Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction made.



Signed        Date 30.3.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.  The Tribunal required the benefit of the claimant's  evidence
in order to reach a decision.



Signed        Date 30.3.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
