
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15785/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                        mr Mohan Chanaka Kumarasinghe
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Cooke
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant
    promulgated on 18 May 2016.  The appellant was born on  16  March  1984
    and is Sri Lankan.  His appeal related to a refusal by the Secretary of
    State to grant leave to remain outside of the Immigration  Rules,  such
    application being in form FLR(O).

2.   The appellant's immigration history is  summarised  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and is controversial.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 19 April 2010 with entry clearance as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    valid until 30 November of 2011 and his leave subsequently extended  to
    30 January of 2015.

3.   The purpose of  the  student  visa  was  to  enable  the  appellant  to
    undertake a BSc honours course in business  computing  and  information
    studies at the London Academy of Management Sciences.  The  course  was
    due to commence on 23 May 2011 and conclude on 30  September  of  2014.
    The leave, as is usual, had a grace period at the end of the completion
    of the period of study such that it did not expire until January 2015.

4.   The judge in this instance made findings which appear  at  paragraph  6
    of  the  decision  indicating  that  the  appellant  had  clearly   not
    undertaken the course prescribed in  the  visa  pursuant  to  which  he
    gained entry.  The judge also remarks that  it  is  incredible  that  a
    certificate should be  issued  by  the  London  Academy  of  Management
    Science dated 16 January of 2015 indicating completion of  the  diploma
    in business information.

5.   The manner in which the appeal has been run  before  me  on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State failed to follow her own guidance  in  this
    particular case.  The guidance to which I was  taken  was  the  version
    valid from 6 November of 2014, but no point is taken on  the  Secretary
    of State's behalf as to its applicability.  Certainly no  challenge  is
    made as to the text I am about to recite, reliance being placed upon it
    by both representatives before me.  The  matter  deals  with  questions
    arising and the policy  which  applies  when  a  sponsor's  licence  is
    suspended or revoked.  At page  124  of  this  document  is  a  section
    dealing with the eventuality  of  a  Tier  4  sponsor's  licence  being
    revoked. Against the rubric "if the applicant  is  already  in  the  UK
    studying and does not have an application under  consideration  in  the
    Home Office" it reads

         "You must limit the applicant's existing permission to stay:

         .    to 60 days provided they have been a  bona  fide  student  and
             have not participated in practices that may  have  contributed
             to the sponsor's licence being revoked  or  surrendered.   You
             must not limit their permission to stay if they have less than
             60 days left on  their  CAS.   The  applicant  can  apply  for
             permission to stay with another Tier  4  sponsor  during  this
             time;

         .    immediately if you have not been a bona fide student  and  you
             think they were  involved  in  the  reasons  why  the  Tier  4
             sponsor's licence was revoked or surrendered.

6.   There was no suggestion in the material before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and there is no suggestion before me that the  appellant  was  in  some
    means complicit in the reasons for the revocation of  the  licence  for
    the London Academy of Management and Science.  I confess to some unease
    concerning the negative credibility findings made by the judge in  this
    instance.

7.   Mr Nath properly concedes that the refusal letter  does  not  take  the
    point that the appellant  was  not  undertaking  the  course  which  he
    claimed to be and did not appear to put credibility  in  issue.   I  am
    told by Ms Cooke who acted for the appellant in this instance that  the
    issue of credibility and authenticity was not in play before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  Clearly  Mr  Nath  was  not  present  and  cannot
    gainsay that.  I have found nothing to assist me in the  judge's  notes
    from the First-tier Tribunal but I have any to doubt what  is  asserted
    by Ms Cooke this morning.

8.   Initially I was concerned as to the relevance and applicability of  the
    guidance because on its face it would seem to have  little  application
    in circumstances when there was adequate  time  for  the  appellant  to
    complete the course on which he was already registered, but the  policy
    is clear and it must be read  and  applied  accordingly.   There  is  a
    legitimate expectation that when the Secretary of State places her  own
    policies in the public domain they will be referred to and followed.

9.   Mr Nath again concedes that the policy itself  is  not  quoted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge although on two occasions in  the  course  of
    the determination references are made to a conceivable entitlement to a
    '60 day letter'. I am concerned that in this matter the judge  may  not
    have given the anxious scrutiny  to  the  issues  which  were  properly
    required.  It is not unknown for degree courses to  be  incremental  in
    their nature by which I mean students who are registered will obtain  a
    diploma at one stage which will mature into a full degree  at  a  later
    stage after further study is successfully undertaken. The impression  I
    gained from Ms Cooke is that this was also her  understanding  of  what
    would take place in this instance.  She has given me a credible  reason
    why it may have been the case that this appellant did not complete  the
    degree course within the time allowed due to a family bereavement which
    took him outside the  jurisdiction.   This  matter  has  not  been  the
    subject of comment by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

10.  It does seem to me that at the very least the  judge  should  have  set
    out the policy which applied to the Secretary of State and given proper
    consideration to whether that policy applied in this  particular  case.
    Were the policy to be applied then the proper course  would  have  been
    for the judge to have remitted the matter to the Secretary of State for
    further consideration within that policy.

11.  I have considered whether in the light of this material  error  of  law
    the proper course would  be  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision and to  make  that  referral.   My  initial  view  subject  to
    argument is  that  such  would  be  an  arrogation  to  myself  of  the
    responsibilities of the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  a  matter  where
    there are factual issues to be determined, not least the nature of  the
    course the appellant was attending, the reason for him  not  completing
    it within the time prescribed and whether that  of  itself  invalidated
    the visa.  Those matters will play into the relevance and applicability
    of the policy.

12.  The appropriate course is to remit the matter to be heard de novo by  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and for that judge to give the  matter
    the full consideration which regrettably I cannot be confident was  the
    case in this instance.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed and the decision of First-tier  Judge  Grant  is  set
aside. The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  decided
afresh by  a  Judge  other  than  Judge  Grant.  No  findings  of  fact  are
preserved. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date     11 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

