
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15912/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 06 January 2016                   |On 07 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MUHAMMAD OWAIS SHEHARYAR KHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P. Solanki, Counsel instructed by Lawta Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    issue a residence card recognising his right of residence in the UK  as
    the extended family member (partner in a durable  relationship)  of  an
    EEA national.

3.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R.  Sullivan  allowed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 02 March 2015. She made  unchallenged  findings
    that the appellant was likely to be in a durable relationship with  his
    EEA partner and allowed the appeal in the following terms: "I find that
    the refusal is not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  applicable
    regulations."

4.    The respondent seeks to challenge the decision on the ground  that  it
    was an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to  "allow  the  appeal
    outright" in light of the  Tribunal's  decision  in  Ihemedu  (OFM's  -
    meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.

5.    The appellant's rule 24 reply pointed out that the appeal was  allowed
    on the ground that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    although the phrasing at paragraph 30 did appear to confuse matters.

6.    I am satisfied that, despite the wording  of  paragraph  27,  and  the
    final statement in paragraph 30 that the appeal was allowed  under  EEA
    Regulations, there is no indication in the body of  the  decision  that
    the judge sought to compel the issuing of a residence card.  The  judge
    allowed the appeal on the ground that it was not in accordance with the
    law and the reference to the appeal being allowed in respect of the EEA
    Regulations is merely standard phrasing in an EEA appeal.

7.    With the agreement of both parties I find that there is  no  error  of
    law and that it is sufficient merely to  clarify  that  the  appeal  is
    allowed to the limited extent that the decision is  not  in  accordance
    with the law. It now remains for the respondent to consider whether  to
    issue a  residence  card  pursuant  to  regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed      [pic]      Date 06 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

