

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15857/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27 February 2017                           |On 4 May 2017                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                       SAROJINI WIMALAWATHY JAYASINGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr V.P. Lingajothy of Linga & Co.
For the respondent:          Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Daldry   ("the   judge")   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse a  human
    rights claim. In a decision promulgated on 06 January  2017  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law and listed the appeal for a  further  hearing
    to remake the decision (annexed). The First-tier Tribunal's findings of
    fact relating to the appellant's personal circumstances were preserved.
    The appeal  was  relisted  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    following issues:

       i) Whether there are "very significant obstacles to the  applicant's
          integration in the country to which [she] would  have  to  go  if
          required to  leave  the  UK"  within  the  meaning  of  paragraph
          276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules.

      ii) In the alternative, whether it would be proportionate to  require
          the appellant to leave the UK to make an  application  for  entry
          clearance as an adult dependent relative: see  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
          [2008] UKHL 40.

2.    The First-tier Tribunal judge's factual findings are set  out  in  the
    error  of  law  decision  [5].  In  summary,  Judge  Daldry  found  the
    appellant's daughter, Angela, to be a credible  witness.  She  accepted
    that the appellant lives with her daughter in the UK. She accepted that
    her other daughter, Matilda, who she used to live with  in  Sri  Lanka,
    now lives in the UK. She accepted that the appellant no longer has  any
    relatives in Sri Lanka. Although no medical evidence was produced,  the
    judge accepted that the appellant suffers  from  high  blood  pressure,
    asthma, high cholesterol  and  short-term  memory  problems.  She  also
    accepted that  the  appellant,  who  is  84  years  old,  now  requires
    considerable personal care. Whilst the  individual  medical  conditions
    were not serious or life threatening, having  considered  her  age  and
    overall situation, the judge accepted that  the  appellant  now  needed
    "the care and support of her  daughter  for  her  activities  of  daily
    living and for her personal care" [19]. The fact that  the  appellant's
    daughter and her husband had gone to some lengths  to  rearrange  their
    work lives to care for the appellant showed that the care they provided
    was required. The nature of her relationship with her daughter was  now
    one of dependency [20]. The judge accepted that her daughter could look
    after her mother more easily within her household in the UK. She  would
    find it more difficult to provide financial  support  and  monitor  her
    mother's health if she lived in Sri Lanka [21]. The judge  acknowledged
    that the appellant had visited the UK on several occasions in the past,
    but found that she was now unable to care for herself in Sri Lanka  and
    had no family there to support her [20].

3.    The  appellant's  daughter,  Angela,  gave  evidence  at  the  resumed
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal. The full detail of  her  evidence  is  a
    matter of record. She told me that her  mother  used  to  live  in  her
    sister's home in Sri Lanka. She did not own her own  home.  Her  mother
    doesn't have her own source  of  income  and  is  reliant  on  her  for
    support. The appellant's daughter told me that her mother was  an  only
    child. She did not have any relatives in Sri Lanka. Her father's family
    were from India. Her mother lived in Colombo for many  years.  She  had
    some friends from church, but they were the ones who told her that  her
    mother was lonely and needed assistance. The appellant's daughter  told
    me that it would be too expensive to pay  someone  to  look  after  her
    mother in Sri Lanka. The extent of her current health issues meant that
    she required 24-hour care. In contrast, she can afford to  support  and
    care for her mother within her  household  in  the  UK.  She  expressed
    doubts about her mother's fitness to make a long journey to Sri  Lanka.
    She thought it would be difficult for her to return to apply for  entry
    clearance. Her main concern was that her mother might quickly pass away
    if she had to return to Sri Lanka.

4.    I have considered the  written  and  oral  submissions  made  by  both
    parties before coming to a decision in this appeal.

Decision and reasons

5.    The immigration rules reflect the respondent's policy as to where  the
    balance will be struck in relation to private and  family  life  issues
    under Article 8 of the European Convention of human rights: see GEN.1.1
    Appendix FM and Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

6.    The appellant wishes to remain in the UK as a dependent relative.  The
    appellant does not meet the  strict  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules for leave to remain as an adult dependent  relative  because  the
    rules only allow such applications from people who are outside the  UK:
    see paragraph EC-DR 1.1(a) Appendix FM. The appellant does  not  engage
    any of the other family life categories outlined in Appendix FM,  which
    relate to partners and children.

The scope of 'private life'

7.    Paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules sets  out  the  respondent's
    policy in relation to private life  issues.  The  appellant  falls  far
    short of the 20-year period required for long residence. However, it is
    argued that she meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The
    wording of the rule at the date of  the  respondent's  decision  on  14
    April 2015 was as follows:

           "(vi) ...... is aged 18 years or above, has  lived  continuously
           in the UK for less than 20  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) but there would be very significant  obstacles  to
           the applicant's integration into the country to which  he  would
           have to go if required to leave the UK."

8.    The factual circumstances considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  were
    relevant to a proper assessment of Article 8 within the context of  the
    immigration rules. However, the decision was set aside for  the  narrow
    reason that the judge, whilst having considered whether there would  be
    "very significant obstacles" to return, failed  to  consider  the  full
    scope  of  the  test  contained  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
    immigration rules, which must include an assessment  of  whether  there
    are obstacles to "integration".

9.    'Private life' is a  broad  concept  that  can  encompass  a  person's
    personal, social and economic relations as well as engaging aspects  of
    their 'physical and moral integrity'. In Onur v UK (2009)  49  EHRR  38
    the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) outlined the broad nature of
    the  right  to  private  life  as  it  relates  to  social  and  family
    relationships as follows:

           "46.  ....the Court recalls that, as Article 8 also protects the
           right to establish and develop relationships  with  other  human
           beings and the outside world and can sometimes  embrace  aspects
           of an individual's social identity, it must be accepted that the
           totality  of  social  ties  between  settled  migrants  and  the
           community in which they  are  living  constitutes  part  of  the
           concept of "private life"  within  the  meaning  of  Article  8.
           Regardless of the existence or otherwise of a "family life", the
           expulsion  of  a  settled  migrant  therefore   constitutes   an
           interference with his or her right to respect for private  life.
           It will depend on  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case
           whether it is appropriate for the Court to focus on the  "family
           life" rather than the "private life" aspect.."

10.   In so far as Article 8 also encompasses the right to family life,  the
      House of Lords made the following observations in Huang v SSHD  [2007]
      UKHL 11:

           "But the main importance of the case law is in illuminating  the
           core value which article 8  exists  to  protect.  This  is  not,
           perhaps, hard to recognise. Human  beings  are  social  animals.
           They depend on others. Their family, or extended family, is  the
           group on  which  many  people  most  heavily  depend,  socially,
           emotionally and often financially. There comes a point at which,
           for some, prolonged and unavoidable separation from  this  group
           seriously inhibits their ability to  live  full  and  fulfilling
           lives. Matters such as the age, health and vulnerability of  the
           applicant, the closeness and previous history of the family, the
           applicant's dependence on the financial and emotional support of
           the family, the prevailing cultural tradition and conditions  in
           the country  of  origin  and  many  other  factors  may  all  be
           relevant."

11.   In Beoku Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39  the  House  of  Lords  concluded
      that the effect of removal on all family members could be  taken  into
      account as part of  the  overall  assessment  of  whether  a  proposed
      removal would  amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  an
      appellant's Article 8 rights.

12.   In Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10 the ECtHR reiterated  that  'private
      life' is "a broad term not succeptible to exhaustive definition".  The
      court recognised that Article 8 protects  a  right  to  establish  and
      develop relationships with other human beings and  the  outside  world
      and concluded that "the preservation of mental stability  is  in  that
      context an indispensible precondition to the  effective  enjoyment  of
      the right to respect for private life." [47].

13.         In Pretty v UK (2002) 35 EHRR 1  the  ECtHR  considered  whether
      the applicant had a right to assisted  suicide.  The  ECtHR  concluded
      that refusal to give an undertaking  not  to  prosecute  Mrs  Pretty's
      husband if he helped her to die did  not  amount  to  a  violation  of
      Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention. Regarding  her  right  to
      private life the ECtHR recognised that Mrs Pretty's medical condition,
      and her fear that she would die in an undignified and distressing way,
      was likely to engage her right to private life within the  meaning  of
      Article 8(1). The ECtHR stated:

           "65. The very essence of the Convention  is  respect  for  human
           dignity and human freedom.  Without  in  any  way  negating  the
           principle of sanctity of life protected  under  the  Convention,
           the Court considers that it is under Article 8 that  notions  of
           the quality of life take on significance. In an era  of  growing
           medical sophistication combined with longer  life  expectancies,
           many people are concerned that they  should  not  be  forced  to
           linger on in old age or in states of advanced physical or mental
           decrepitude which conflict with strongly held ideas of self  and
           personal identity."

The meaning of 'very significant obstacles to integration'

14.   In the context of the previous  wording  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
    which required an applicant to show that they had  no  ties  (including
    social, cultural of family) to the country of return, the  Tribunal  in
    Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42  concluded
    that the test required a  rounded  assessment  of  whether  a  person's
    familial ties could result in support  to  him  in  the  event  of  his
    return. The assessment should take into  account  both  subjective  and
    objective considerations and should also consider what lies within  the
    "choice of a claimant to achieve".

15.   The wording of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  was  amended  by  way  of  a
    Statement of Changes to the Immigration Rules (HC 532), which came into
    effect on 28 July 2014. The  Explanatory  Notes  to  the  Statement  of
    Changes made the following policy statement:

           "7.16.  These  changes  make   technical   amendments   to   the
           Immigration Rules on family and private life in Appendix FM  and
           paragraphs 276ADE-276DH to align these with the public  interest
           considerations in section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 for decisions engaging the  qualified  right
           to respect for private and family life  under  ECHR  Article  8.
           These considerations, inserted by section 19 of the  Immigration
           Act 2014 which comes into force on 28 July 2014, give the weight
           of primary legislation to Parliament's view of what  the  public
           interest under Article 8 requires, in particular in  respect  of
           controlling immigration to safeguard  the  UK's  economic  well-
           being. The amendments to the Immigration  Rules  on  family  and
           private life in Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH made  by
           this Statement of  Changes  do  not  represent  any  substantive
           change to the policies reflected in the Statement of Changes  HC
           194 which came into force on 9 July 2012, but ensure consistency
           of language with that used in section 19 of the 2014 Act,  which
           now provides statutory underpinning for those policies."

16.    Although  nothing  in   the   language   of   the   public   interest
    considerations  contained  in  section   117B   of   The   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  in  fact  reflects  the
    wording of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) (section 117C(4)(c) only applies  to
    deportation cases), the explanatory  notes  make  clear  that  the  new
    wording was not intended to have a substantially different  meaning  to
    the previous wording.

17.   The phrase "very significant obstacles to integration in  the  country
    to which it is proposed he is deported" is also contained in  paragraph
    399A of the immigration rules. That provision provides a  private  life
    exception to the deportation of foreign criminals. The overall  context
    of the phrase is slightly different in so far as the person who  it  is
    proposed should be deported must also show that he has  been  "lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life" and that he is  "socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK". The phrase is therefore  intended  to
    apply to those who already have significant private life  ties  to  the
    UK.

18.   The only pre-conditions to the requirement to show  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration" for the purpose  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    are:

       i) The applicant meets the 'Suitability' requirements of Appendix FM
          (see 276ADE(1)(i));
      ii) The applicant has made a valid application for leave to remain on
          grounds of private life (see 276ADE(1)(ii)); and
     iii) The applicant is aged over 18 years or above and has lived in the
          UK for a continuous period of less than 20 years (discounting any
          period of imprisonment).

19.   While the same phrase is used in both areas of the rules  the  context
    is different in  deportation  cases  because  the  public  interest  in
    deportation is given  significant  weight.  In  deportation  cases  the
    public interest requires  a  person  to  show  that  they  have  strong
    cultural and integrating links  to  the  UK  and  that  they  would  be
    significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  the  proposed  country  of
    deportation.

20.   Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) applies to private  life  cases  that  do  not
    involve deportation. The emphasis is on the effect of  removal  to  the
    country to which a person would have  to  go.  In  circumstances  where
    there would be very significant obstacles to a person's integration  in
    that country the respondent policy, as  expressed  in  the  immigration
    rules, accepts that removal would be disproportionate under Article 8.

21.   I have not been referred to any case law relating to  the  meaning  of
    the term "very significant obstacles to integration" within the context
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). In interpreting the meaning of this  phrase
    within the context of paragraph 399A  of  the  immigration  rules  Lord
    Justice Sales made the following findings regarding the meaning of  the
    term "integration" in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 [14]:

           "In my view, the concept of a foreign  criminal's  "integration"
           into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as
           set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph  399A,  is  a  broad
           one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or  to
           sustain life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
           appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject  to  some
           gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or  tribunal
           simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has  chosen
           to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a  broad  evaluative
           judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be  enough
           of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
           in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity   to
           participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to  be
           accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in
           that society and to build up within a reasonable time a  variety
           of human relationships to give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life."

22.   This interpretation is consistent with the broad  ambit  of  the  term
    'private life' as set out in the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  The  term
    'integration', as it is used in the immigration rules, relates  to  the
    substance of a person's private life, which may include a wide  variety
    of factors including a person's personal  identity,  their  social  and
    economic relationships with others as well as their 'physical and moral
    integrity'. However, in a similar way to the 'insurmountable obstacles'
    test contained in the family life requirements under paragraph EX.1  of
    Appendix FM, the requirement to show 'very  significant  obstacles'  to
    integration is likely to impose a relatively stringent test: see R  (on
    the application of Agyarko) v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11.  In  most  cases,
    common  difficulties  that  a  person  might  face  in  re-establishing
    themselves in a country after several years  abroad,  such  as  finding
    work or accommodation, are unlikely to reach the  stringent  threshold.
    The  obstacles  need  not  be  impossible  to  overcome,  but  must  be
    sufficiently serious to  render  removal  disproportionate.  Where  the
    balance is struck  in  an  individual  case  will  require  a  holistic
    assessment of all the relevant factors including the  strength  of  the
    person's social, cultural and familial ties to the proposed country  of
    return and whether there are significant obstacles to the person  being
    able to re-establish a private life of sufficient substance.

Findings on the facts of this case

23.   The First-tier Tribunal judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  a
    close relationship of dependency with her daughter over and  above  the
    normal emotional ties between adult relatives. Although the appellant's
    relationship with her daughter is now at a  level  of  dependency  that
    engages her right to family life within the meaning of Article 8, it is
    undoubtedly the case that it also  forms  a  substantial  part  of  her
    private life.

24.   The appellant visited relatives in  the  UK  several  times  over  the
    years. In the past she was sufficiently fit to  make  the  journey  and
    could return to live with Matilda in Sri Lanka  at  the  end  of  those
    visits. Although her daughter Angela intimated that she had a difficult
    relationship with her sister, and had some concerns about her  mother's
    welfare while she was living with her in Sri Lanka, the fact  that  her
    sister no longer lives in Sri Lanka, as well as her mother's increasing
    care needs, appear to have prompted the application for leave to remain
    when her mother visited the UK on the last occasion.

25.   The appellant is an 84-year-old woman who has spent a  large  majority
    of her life in her country of nationality. Undoubtedly, she has  strong
    cultural ties there and understands how life in the country is  carried
    on. However, what is in question is her capacity to operate there on  a
    day to day basis such that she has  some  form  of  meaningful  private
    life. The appellant has no income of her own and is of an age and state
    of health where she is unable  to  work  to  support  herself.  She  is
    reliant  on  family  members  for  financial,  emotional  and  physical
    support. She no longer has family members to support her in Sri Lanka.

26.   The First-tier Tribunal judge accepted  that  it  would  be  far  more
    difficult for the appellant's daughter to be able to afford to  support
    her in Sri Lanka. I accept that the level of care  that  the  appellant
    requires would be extremely difficult for her daughter to organise  and
    monitor from the UK. An integral part of that  care  is  the  love  and
    emotional support provided by her daughter. The appellant  now  suffers
    from a range of age related health issues that make  it  difficult  for
    her to care for herself. Even if some practical care arrangements could
    be made in Sri Lanka she would be returned to  a  situation  of  social
    isolation whereby she would be deprived of the  close  relationship  of
    dependency she now has with her daughter and her family.  After  having
    considered all the circumstances I am satisfied that it can properly be
    said that there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant
    being able to re-establish a meaningful private life in Sri Lanka.  Her
    age, state of health and dependence  on  the  financial  and  emotional
    support of family members in the UK, taken with the absence of  support
    in Sri Lanka  at  such  a  late  stage  of  her  life,  render  removal
    disproportionate in the circumstances in this case.

Article 8 - outside the rules

27.   Because I have made detailed findings relating  to  the  private  life
    requirements contained in the immigration rules I do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make lengthy findings relating to Article  8  outside  the
    rules. However, considering the factual findings it seems clear that if
    the appellant were to be required to apply for entry clearance from Sri
    Lanka that it is likely that she would meet the requirements for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative.

28.   The appellant's relationship with her daughter is likely to  meet  the
    'Relationship requirements' (E-ECDR 2.1-2.5). Because of  her  age  and
    state of health the  appellant  requires  long-term  personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks. Integral to the care that she requires  is  the
    emotional and practical support of her daughter,  which  would  not  be
    available in Sri Lanka. In the alternative, the appellant's daughter is
    unlikely to be able to afford to support her mother from  the  UK.  The
    First-tier Tribunal judge was satisfied that the  appellant's  daughter
    had sufficient means to provide support and accommodation. As such, she
    is also likely to meet the 'Financial requirements'  (E-ECDR  3.1-3.2).
    The only aspect of the immigration rules the appellant does not satisfy
    is the requirement to make an entry clearance application from  outside
    the UK.

29.   In Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 the House of Lords  considered  the
    practical purpose of the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  of  requiring
    applicants to return to their country of  origin  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance. Whilst it acknowledged that there may be  some  cases  where
    the appellant's immigration history is so poor that it might  still  be
    necessary to require them to apply from  abroad,  the  House  of  Lords
    concluded that it would only  be  comparatively  rarely,  certainly  in
    family cases involving children, that an Article  8  appeal  should  be
    dismissed solely on the basis that it would  be  proportionate  for  an
    appellant to apply for entry clearance abroad.

30.   The appellant is an 84-year-old woman with several age-related  health
    problems. She is likely  to  find  the  journey  particularly  arduous.
    Because she now requires personal care, and has no  family  members  in
    Sri Lanka, members of her family in the UK would have to accompany her.
    While the appellant could have applied for entry clearance as an  adult
    dependent relative from abroad,  I  find  that,  even  if  my  findings
    relating to the immigration rules are wrong, requiring her to return to
    Sri Lanka to make what is likely to be  a  successful  application  for
    entry clearance would be  disproportionate  in  circumstances  of  this
    case.

31.   I conclude that the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules and that her  removal  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED under  the  immigration  rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 02 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

































APPENDIX

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15857/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 29 November 2016                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                       SAROJINI WIMALAWATHY JAYASINGH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr V.L. Lingajorthy, Counsel instructed by
Linga & Co.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen who was born on  23  March  1933
    (83 years old). The appellant visited family members in  the  UK  on  a
    number of occasions between 2001 and 2014. She last entered the  UK  on
    10 October 2014 with entry clearance as a visitor that was valid  until
    04 February 2015. She made an in time application for leave  to  remain
    on human rights grounds outside the rules  in  order  to  continue  her
    family life with her adult children.

3.    The Secretary of State refused the application in a decision dated  14
    April 2015. She found that the appellant did not meet any of the family
    life requirements contained in Appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules.
    The respondent considered whether she met the private life requirements
    set out in paragraph 276ADE of the  immigration  rules.  She  fell  far
    short of  the  long  residence  requirement.  The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that she had severed all ties including social, cultural  and
    family ties in Sri Lanka  in  order  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). She had spent most of her life  in  Sri  Lanka
    and would be able to readapt to life there. There were no  language  or
    cultural barriers. There was no documentary evidence to show  that  she
    had any mental or physical disabilities that  might  prevent  her  from
    returning to Sri Lanka. The respondent  went  on  to  consider  whether
    there were any 'exceptional circumstances' that might justify  granting
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules but  concluded  that  her
    age and related health problems were not sufficient to  show  that  her
    circumstances were 'exceptional'. She had been  able  to  visit  family
    members in the UK and they could travel to visit her in Sri Lanka.  Her
    family  members  could  continue  to  support   her   emotionally   and
    financially in Sri Lanka.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Jude Daldry ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 03 May 2016.  She  summarised  the  appellant's
    family circumstances [4] as well as the reasons for refusal [5-7].  She
    heard evidence from the appellant  and  her  daughter  and  made  clear
    findings of fact, which are not subject to challenge. She accepted that
    the appellant no longer had any family members living in Sri Lanka. She
    was living with her daughter Matilda in Sri Lanka. However, Matilda  is
    now living in the UK, as are the appellant's other children  [12].  The
    judge found that the appellant  and  her  daughter  Angela  gave  their
    evidence in a credible and consistent manner [14].

5.    The judge accepted that the siblings do not  have  much  contact  with
    one another in  the  UK  and  that  the  appellant's  most  significant
    relationship is with her daughter Angela, with  whom  she  lives  [15].
    Angela is a  British  citizen  who  lives  with  her  husband  and  two
    children. She works as a community psychiatric nurse. The  judge  noted
    that it was not disputed  that  her  daughter  was  in  a  position  to
    maintain and accommodate the appellant in the  UK  [16].  After  having
    heard evidence from the  appellant  and  her  daughter  the  judge  was
    satisfied that they "had a strong bond and attachment  and  that  there
    was a caring and loving relationship between them" [17].  Having  found
    them to be credible witnesses, and despite the  fact  that  no  medical
    evidence had been produced,  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant
    suffers from high blood pressure, asthma, high  cholesterol  and  short
    term memory problems. She also needs the  assistance  of  her  daughter
    with some personal care [18]. The judge concluded as follows:

             "19.  Whilst   the   appellant's   medical   conditions   taken
           individually  are  not  serious  or  life   threatening,   taken
           holistically, as a whole and bearing in mind  her  age,  I  find
           that they have a significant impact on her life  and  result  in
           her needing the  care  and  support  of  her  daughter  for  her
           activities of daily  living  and  for  her  personal  care.  The
           appellant's daughter is a qualified nurse and gave detailed  and
           cogent evidence about the nature of the care required and it was
           clear that she approached this aspect of her  relationship  with
           her mother in a pragmatic and caring way and that she  was  able
           to deal with this by having made certain changes to  her  family
           life. In particular, she was able to work flexible  hours  which
           involved her working three "long days"  during  which  time  her
           husband was able to care for the appellant, he  working  sixteen
           hours a week at Marks and Spencer and for the remainder  of  the
           time the appellant's daughter would care for her. The fact  that
           Mrs Poomathu and her husband had had to  make  such  changes  to
           their working arrangements showed that the care they were giving
           to the appellant was required.

            20.  I have considered  the  case  law  and  find  that  in  the
           absence of  having  any  family  in  Sri  Lanka  and  given  the
           appellant's health conditions, there would be  very  significant
           obstacles to her returning there. She would be alone without the
           support of her daughter upon whom she has come to depend. I find
           the  development  of  that  relationship  of  dependency  to  be
           entirely reasonable in  the  circumstances.  The  appellant  has
           maintained contact with her daughter  over  the  years  and  has
           visited the United Kingdom frequently but now she is  no  longer
           able to return to Sri Lanka to care for herself and nor does she
           have any family there to help. At this stage in her later  life,
           that there is a relationship now  of  dependency  involving  the
           appellant's daughter Angela taking a caring role with regard  to
           her mother.

            21.  I heard from the appellant's daughter that  whilst  it  was
           quite possible for her to  support  her  mother  in  the  United
           Kingdom in her own household it would be much more difficult for
           her to provide financial support on an ongoing basis to meet all
           of her mother's needs whilst she was living in Sri Lanka. I find
           this  to  be  entirely  reasonable.  The  appellant's   daughter
           explained how she was able to absorb the  costs  of  having  her
           mother in her household by sharing food with her that  was  made
           for the rest of the family and  generally  by  distributing  the
           provisions of the household such that it was not  a  significant
           extra expense for her mother to be there. I also accept that  it
           would be difficult for her both to monitor her  mother's  health
           and to support her if  she  were  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  I
           therefore find that the appellant does qualify for  a  grant  of
           indefinite leave under the provisions of 276ADE(1)(vi).

            22.  I also find when applying the stage  test  in  Razgar  that
           the appellant would qualify for a grant of leave outside of  the
           rules.  This  is  because  when  considering  the  question   of
           proportionality find that it would  be  disproportionate  remove
           the appellant. I have accepted that she has a private and family
           life in the UK with her daughter Angela and her family.  I  find
           that to remove the appellant to Sri Lanka would  interfere  with
           her private and family life.  I  find  that  there  would  be  a
           legitimate aim in terms of such a removal in that  it  would  be
           for the purposes of immigration control and would clearly be  in
           accordance with the law. But for the  reasons  I  have  set  out
           above I find that in the very exceptional circumstances of  this
           appellant's case, given her age, health problems and the lack of
           family support in Sri Lanka  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
           remove her."

6.    The Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the following grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider  material  matters  in
          assessing whether  there  were  'very  significant  obstacles  to
          integration' for the  purpose  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  She
          considered the position if the appellant remained in the  UK  but
          failed to consider what her position would be if she returned  to
          Sri Lanka.


      ii) In assessing Article 8 outside the immigration  rules  the  judge
          failed to have  regard  to  the  public  interest  considerations
          outlined in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
          Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the arguments put forward by  both  parties  I
    am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law.

8.    Despite the fact that the respondent  applied  the  wrong  version  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in the reasons for refusal letter, that part of
    the rules having been amended in July 2014 (HC  542),  the  judge  made
    reference to the correct test of "very significant  obstacles"  in  her
    decision. While her factual findings are not the subject of appeal, and
    were clearly open to her to make on the evidence, it was necessary  for
    the judge to  consider  the  full  wording  of  the  test  outlined  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), which states:

          (vi)   subject to sub- paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
                 has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than  20  years
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
                 very significant obstacles to the  applicant's  integration
                 into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
                 to leave the UK.

9.    While the  judge  considered  whether  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles to her returning" to Sri Lanka, her  reasons  for  coming  to
    that finding related largely to the appellant's circumstances in the UK
    and her dependent relationship with her daughter. The  wording  of  the
    rule requires some analysis  of  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's "integration into the  country"  to  which
    she would have to go. A full assessment  of  the  relevant  legal  test
    requires consideration of the conditions that the appellant would  face
    in Sri Lanka and whether there are "very significant obstacles" to such
    integration.

10.    Although  paragraph  276ADE  is  said  to  reflect  the  respondent's
    position regarding the right to private life under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention the wording of the rule does not give rise  to  the
    kind  of  approach  normally  taken  by  the  Strasbourg   court   when
    considering Article 8 or by the UK courts following the decision in R v
    SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

11.   The judge clearly considered that it would be unreasonable  to  expect
    the appellant to return to Sri Lanka in the circumstances but paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) requires an assessment of whether there are obstacles  to
    "integration". This aspect of the assessment is lacking from the First-
    tier Tribunal decision. It might well be that many of the same  factors
    could be taken into account as part of  that  overall  assessment.  The
    meaning of the phrase "integration"  may  not  be  confined  solely  to
    issues of nationality, language and cultural ties. It  is  possible  it
    could include issues relating health, social isolation and  a  person's
    ability to conduct a meaningful life within the community. Although  it
    was open to the judge to consider the strong bond between the appellant
    and her daughter, it was necessary to give  specific  consideration  to
    the issue of "integration"  in  order  to  reach  sustainable  findings
    relating to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

12.   The judge made  alternative  findings  with  reference  to  Article  8
    outside the  rules.  When  undertaking  the  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8(2) she was obliged by statute to take into account the public
    interest considerations outlined in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). Her  failure  to  do  so
    also amounts to a material error of law.

13.   For these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law. The parties were  in
    agreement that  if  an  error  of  law  was  found  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to relist the case for remaking in the Upper Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

14.   The appeal will be relisted for hearing before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan.

15.   There has been no  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  factual
    findings relating to the appellant's personal circumstances, which will
    stand.

16.   The resumed hearing will  need  to  focus  on  the  test  outlined  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), or in the alternative, whether there  are  any
    compelling circumstances to engage the operation of Article  8  outside
    the immigration  rules.  The  latter  might  require  consideration  of
    whether it would be proportionate to expect the appellant to return  to
    Sri Lanka to apply for entry clearance as an adult  dependent  relative
    with reference to the principles outlined by  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

17.   The appellant shall inform the Upper Tribunal  by  Friday  13  January
    2016 at the latest whether she intends to call witnesses in relation to
    the outstanding issues, and if so, whether the witnesses  will  require
    the assistance of an interpreter.

18.   If the appellant intends to  call  further  evidence  from  witnesses,
    further statements should be  prepared  dealing  with  the  outstanding
    issues, which must be served  at  least  10  days  before  the  resumed
    hearing.

19.   Any further evidence relied upon by either party  must  be  served  at
    least 10 days before the resumed hearing.

20.   Both parties must prepare written arguments to be served at  least  10
    days before the resumed hearing, including:

       i) Arguments relating to the  proper  interpretation  of  the  "very
          significant obstacles to integration" test outlined in  paragraph
          276ADE(1)(vi). In particular, what is the  meaning  of  the  term
          "integration" in this context.

      ii) Arguments relating to whether it would be proportionate to expect
          the appellant to return to Sri Lanka to apply for entry clearance
          as an adult dependent relative with reference to  the  principles
          outlined in Chikwamba.


     iii) Any other arguments the parties consider  relevant  to  a  proper
          determination of the appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
of law

The appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal


Signed   [pic]   Date 03 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan






