

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15663/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                            |Determination Promulgated |
|On 2 October 2014                      |On 6 October 2014         |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             Mr Nnmadi Onuekwere
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner (Birnberg Peirce & Partners, solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1.       The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who claims to have arrived
      in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1999  as  a  visitor.   He  appeals  the
      determination of First-tier Judge M A Khan who  dismissed  his  appeal
      against the respondent's refusal on 24 September 2010 to grant  him  a
      permanent residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 as he had not completed 5  years  residence  in
      the light of the time the appellant had spent  in  prison.  The  judge
      found the appellant was entitled  to  a  residence  card  however  and
      allowed the appeal on that  ground.  He  rejected  the  submission  by
      counsel based  on  Tsakouridis  [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09  that  as  the
      appellant had lived continuously in the United Kingdom since  1988  he
      was entitled to permanent residence.

   2.       The appellant appealed the decision on the following ground:

      The FTT erred in law in holding that the family member of the European
      Union (EU) national who, for a period of five years, resided with that
      EU national in the United Kingdom in exercise of  a  right  to  do  so
      under EU law, does not have the right of permanent  residence  because
      for part of that period of five years he was imprisoned in the  United
      Kingdom following conviction."

   3.       Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  upper  tribunal  judge
      McGeachy on 12 July, 2011 on the basis that the  grounds  were  "just"
      arguable.

   4.       On 1 November 2011 the Upper Tribunal (Lord Bannatyne and  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Jordan) decided to  refer  questions  to  the  European
      Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.  On  16  January  2014  the
      Court gave its decision (Case C-378/12).

   5.       The background facts and questions referred are set out  in  the
      Court's decision as follows:
      10      Mr Onuekwere is a Nigerian national. On 2 December  1999,  he
          married an Irish national  exercising  her  right  of  freedom  of
          movement and residence in the United Kingdom. He had two  children
          with her. On 5 September 2000, he obtained, as a family member  of
          a Union citizen, a residence permit valid for five  years  in  the
          United Kingdom.

      11      On 26 June 2000, Mr Onuekwere was  sentenced  to  a  term  of
          imprisonment of nine months, which was suspended  for  two  years.
          That conviction did not give rise to actual  imprisonment  of  the
          person concerned.

      12      On 16 September 2004, Mr Onuekwere was convicted again for an
          offence committed in 2003. Although  the  prison  sentence  handed
          down was for two years and six months, Mr Onuekwere  was  released
          on 16 November 2005. However, by a decision of 18  November  2005,
          the Secretary of State ordered the expulsion of Mr Onuekwere  from
          the United Kingdom. That decision was annulled on the ground  that
          Mr Onuekwere was the spouse of a Union citizen  exercising  rights
          conferred by the EC Treaty.

      13      During January 2008, Mr Onuekwere was  imprisoned  again  for
          another offence. On 8 May 2008, he was sentenced to two years  and
          three months of imprisonment.  Mr  Onuekwere  was  released  on  6
          February 2009, but  the  Secretary  of  State  again  ordered  his
          expulsion from the United Kingdom. However, on 29 June  2010,  the
          Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), London,  annulled
          the Secretary of State's decision ordering that  expulsion.  While
          stating that the right of permanent residence within  the  meaning
          of Article 16 of Directive 2004/38 had been acquired  only  by  Mr
          Onuekwere's wife, that tribunal held that the  factors  particular
          to Mr Onuekwere's circumstances prevailed over the public interest
          in his expulsion on grounds of public policy.

      14      Mr Onuekwere subsequently submitted a request for a permanent
          residence card, which  the  Secretary  of  State  dismissed  by  a
          decision of 24 September  2010.  Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) held  that  Mr  Onuekwere  had  a
          right of residence, that tribunal nevertheless confirmed  that  he
          had no right of  permanent  residence.  Mr  Onuekwere  brought  an
          action before the referring tribunal.

      15      That tribunal observes that, if the periods of imprisonment of
          Mr Onuekwere, lasting three years and three months in  total,  are
          excluded from the calculation of the duration  of  Mr  Onuekwere's
          residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  that   residence,   although
          interrupted by those periods, is  of  a  duration  exceeding  five
          years.  By  contrast,  if  those  periods  must  be   taken   into
          consideration, Mr Onuekwere's  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
          would be of a duration of nine years and three months at the  date
          of the decision at issue in the main proceedings and of a duration
          of more than ten years at the date of submission  of  the  request
          for a preliminary ruling.

      16      It was  against  that  background  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
          (Immigration and Asylum Chamber),  London,  decided  to  stay  the
          proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court  for
          a preliminary ruling:

          '(1)      In  what  circumstances,  if  any,  will  a  period  of
              imprisonment constitute legal residence for the  purposes  of
              the acquisition of  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
              Article 16 of [Directive 2004/38]?

          (2)      If a period of imprisonment does not  qualify  as  legal
              residence,  is  a  person  who  has  served   a   period   of
              imprisonment permitted  to  aggregate  periods  of  residence
              before  and  after  his  imprisonment  for  the  purposes  of
              calculating the period of five years needed  to  establish  a
              permanent right of residence under [Directive 2004/38]?'

   6.       The Court answered the questions referred as follows:

       1.      Article  16(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
           Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the  right  of
           citizens of the Union and  their  family  members  to  move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States amending
           Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC,
           68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,   73/148/EEC,   75/34/EEC,   75/35/EEC,
           90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and  93/96/EEC  must  be  interpreted  as
           meaning that the periods of  imprisonment  in  the  host  Member
           State of a third-country national, who is a family member  of  a
           Union citizen who has acquired the right of permanent  residence
           in that Member State during those periods, cannot be taken  into
           consideration in the context of the acquisition by that national
           of the right of permanent residence for  the  purposes  of  that
           provision.

       2.      Article  16(2)  and  (3)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be
           interpreted as meaning  that  the  continuity  of  residence  is
           interrupted by periods of imprisonment in the host Member  State
           of a third-country national who is a family member  of  a  Union
           citizen who has acquired the right  of  permanent  residence  in
           that Member State during those periods.

   7.       Directions were issued by Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  and  the
      matter set down for hearing today. The  respondent  had  not  complied
      with the directions and the parties requested  the  Tribunal  to  deal
      with the matter as a case management hearing.

   8.       Mr Hopkin apologised for the failure to comply with  directions.
      I pointed out that there had been no error of law hearing.  Mr  Hopkin
      submitted that the respondent's position had been all along  that  the
      First-tier Judge had not erred in law.

   9.       Mr Furner said the appellant had brought a  separate  appeal  in
      the First-tier Tribunal following the refusal  of  the  respondent  to
      endorse the appellant's new Nigerian  passport  with  the  appellant's
      existing residence card.

  10.  I asked Mr Furner whether, given the decision  of  the  ECJ,  it  was
      clear there was no material error of law in Judge Khan's decision.

  11. Mr Furner submitted he was not instructed to concede matters  and  had
      not been prepared for a hearing. Although the appellant's position was
      to an extent protected by the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
      respondent had not agreed to transfer the residence card  -  this  was
      despite his appeal being allowed on this issue by Judge Khan. Moreover
      the appellant had the benefit of legal aid before the Upper Tribunal.

  12. On the question that there was only one issue before the  Tribunal  Mr
      Furner submitted that had he drafted the grounds he would  have  taken
      additional or other points.

  13. Mr Hopkin pointed out that the appellant had a  right  which  did  not
      depend on documentary evidence. He further observed that the appellant
      had  now  accrued  the  requisite  period  of  residence  (five  years
      continuous residence) and subject to the formal requirements - such as
      the marriage continuing about which there appeared to be  no  issue  -
      the appellant would be entitled to permanent residence  since  he  had
      continuously resided since 6 February 2009.  Finally,  he  would  take
      charge of matters  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  make  sure  the
      difficulties to which Mr Furner had alluded were addressed.

  14. As I mentioned previously, there has been no  error  of  law  hearing.
      Absent a material error of law the decision of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Khan stands. The Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction to interfere  with
      a decision absent a material error of law.

  15. Mr Furner submitted he was not in a position to deal with the  issues.
      However, this matter was listed for hearing today  and  no  indication
      had been given that the Tribunal would be  inhibited  from  proceeding
      because of the respondent's breach of directions. Both parties had  no
      reason to suppose the Tribunal would  simply  adjourn  the  matter  to
      another date the matter having been listed for a whole day.

  16. Secondly Mr Furner is widely experienced and indeed acknowledged  that
      he might have taken additional points in this appeal. I have no  doubt
      that the appellant's interests were fully protected. The appellant has
      had ample time to seek to amend or add additional grounds.

  17. Thirdly the appellant's position is protected by  the  pending  appeal
      before the First-tier Tribunal  and  by  Mr  Hopkin's  undertaking  to
      assist in progressing matters by taking charge.

  18. Finally, Mr Hopkins had accepted, subject to the formalities, that the
      appellant now qualified for permanent residence.

  19. Mr Furner said the appellant had the benefit of legal aid which  would
      be lacking before the First-tier Tribunal. However it would  be  quite
      wrong to prolong proceedings at  public  expense  where  that  was  no
      longer warranted.

      Conclusion


      Judge Khan's decision to allow the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
      appellant is entitled to a residence card stands as does  his  request
      to the respondent to issue one.


      In the light of the answers given by the European Court of Justice  to
      the questions referred, Judge Khan did not materially err  in  law  in
      finding that the appellant did not qualify for permanent residence  as
      a result of periods of imprisonment.


      Appeal dismissed


      Upper Tribunal Judge Warr                     2 October 2014
