
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15590/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 September 2019                   |On 19 September 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                       Mr richard boluwatife oyerinde
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Talbot promulgated on 13  August  2018,  dismissing
    his appeal under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations") against a decision of the respondent  made
    on 13 May 2015 to remove him from the United  Kingdom  on  the  grounds
    that the decision violated his rights pursuant to the  EEA  Regulations
    as a person who does not have or who has ceased  to  have  a  right  to
    reside under those Regulations.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  His father, Shina Oyerinde  who
    is also a national of Nigeria was in 2011 issued with a residence  card
    as a spouse of an EEA national. The father was, at the time, living  in
    the United Kingdom.

 3. In 2014, the appellant applied under the EEA Regulations for an  family
    permit to join his father in the United Kingdom.  That  application,  a
    copy of which appears in his bundle, that an application was made on  2
    May 2014 and was issued on 19 January 2015. The  appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 30 January 2015.

 4. After the application had been made but before the  family  permit  was
    issued the appellant's father was divorced from his  former  wife.  The
    decree absolute was issued on 10 November 2014.

 5. On 20 November 2014 the appellant's father applied for a residence card
    on the basis he had retained  the  right  of  residence  following  his
    divorce from the EU national, that  application  being  refused  on  13
    April 2015.  The basis of the refusal was that the Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the marriage had been one of convenience.  That decision
    was,  however,  overturned  on  appeal  the  judge  finding  that   the
    respondent had  not  shown  that  there  were  reasonable  grounds  for
    suspecting this was a marriage of convenience.

 6. On appeal the judge found the appellant was not a "family member" of an
    EEA national within Regulation 7 of the  EEA  Regulations  nor  was  he
    satisfied, having had regard to Article 13 of  Directive  2004/38  that
    the appellant did fell  within the category of those non- EEA nationals
    who were entitled to retained rights of residence following divorce.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in finding that the appellant could not be "sponsored"
    by his father, this being an incorrect interpretation of Article  3  of
    the Directive, this in turn relying on a misinterpretation of the  term
    "personal basis".  It is also submitted that the  judge  erred  in  his
    interpretation as it offended against the principle of equivalence  as,
    if the appellant's father had  required  a  right  of  residence  under
    domestic legislation without reference to EEA law that he would not  be
    barred from acting as a sponsor to the advocate.

 8. It  is  also  averred  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning  is
    inadequate.

    The law

 9. The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 apply to this
    appeal as, although they were repealed  by  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016, Section  3  of  Schedule  3  to  those
    Regulations operates to preserve them for this appeal as  the  date  of
    decision is prior to the coming into force of the 2016 Regulations.



10. The grounds on which the appellant can challenge the decision  are  set
    out in Schedule 1 to the EEA regulations.   The  grounds  were  amended
    with effect  from  6  April  2015,  by  operation  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) (amendment) Regulations  2015  (SI  2015/694),
    Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations was amended to read:




    The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act have effect in
    relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the First-tier
    Tribunal as if it were an appeal [against a decision of the Secretary
    of State under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act (right of appeal to the
    Tribunal)-

      section 84 (grounds of appeal), as though the  sole  [emphasis  added]
      permitted ground  of  appeal  were  that  the  decision  breaches  the
      appellant's rights under the EU Treaties [emphasis added]  in  respect
      of entry to or residence in the  United  Kingdom  ("an  EU  ground  of
      appeal");

11. Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations provided as follows:

    7.- Family member

    (1)  Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these Regulations
    the following persons shall be treated as the family members of another
    person-
         (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;
         (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who
    are-
             (i)  under 21; or
             (ii)  dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
         (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of
         his spouse or his civil partner;
         (d)  a person who is to be treated as the family member of that
         other person under paragraph (3).


    ...


    (3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an extended family
    member and has been issued with an EEA family permit, a registration
    certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the family member
    of the relevant EEA national for as long as he continues to satisfy the
    conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that EEA
    national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to be valid
    or been revoked.

    Directive 2004/38 on which the EEA Regulations are  based  provides  as
    follows:


       Article 2 Definitions


       For the purposes of this Directive:
       1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a
       Member State;
       2) "Family member" means:
         (a) the spouse;
         (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
         registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a Member
         State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats
         registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage and in accordance
         with the conditions laid down in the relevant legislation of the
         host Member State;
         (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
         dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point
         (b);
         (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those
         of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);


       3) "Host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union
       citizen moves in order to exercise his/her right of free movement and
       residence.

    Article 3 of the Directive provides as follows:

    Article 3 Beneficiaries


    1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a national,
    and to their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who
    accompany or join them.


    2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the host Member State
    shall, in accordance with its national legislation, facilitate entry
    and residence for the following persons:
         (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality,
         not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in
         the country from which they have come, are dependants or members of
         the household of the Union citizen having the primary right of
         residence, or where serious health grounds strictly require the
         personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;
         (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
    relationship, duly attested.


    The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of the
    personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
    residence to these people.

12. Article 13.2 of the Directive provides:

    Article 13

    Retention of the right of residence by family members in the  event  of
    divorce, annulment of marriage or termination of registered partnership

    ...
    2. Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, divorce, annulment of
    marriage or termination of the registered partnership referred to in
    point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not entail loss of the right of residence
    of a Union citizen's family members who are not nationals of a Member
    State where:


    (a) prior to initiation of the divorce or annulment proceedings or
    termination of the registered partnership referred to in point 2(b) of
    Article 2, the marriage or registered partnership has lasted at least
    three years, including one year in the host Member State; or


    (b) by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred to in
    point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or partner who is
    not a national of a Member State has custody of the Union citizen's
    children; or


    (c) this is warranted by particularly difficult circumstances, such as
    having been a victim of domestic violence while the marriage or
    registered partnership was subsisting; or
    (d) by agreement between the spouses or partners referred to in point
    2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or partner who is not a
    national of a Member State has the right of access to a minor child,
    provided that the court has ruled that such access must be in the host
    Member State, and for as long as is required.

    Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the right of
    residence of the persons concerned shall remain subject to the
    requirement that they are able to show that they are workers or self-
    employed persons or that they have sufficient resources for themselves
    and their family members not to become a burden on the social
    assistance system of the host Member State during their period of
    residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host
    Member State, or that they are members of the family, already
    constituted in the host Member State, of a person satisfying these
    requirements. "Sufficient resources"� shall be as defined in Article
    8(4).

    Such family members shall retain their right of residence exclusively
on personal basis.

13. It is not in doubt that the appellant's father has retained  the  right
    of residence which he first acquired as the spouse -  and  thus  family
    member of - an EEA national.

14. Not all non-EEA nationals or EEA national  spouses  have  their  rights
    preserved; in cases where marriage lasted less  than  three  years  and
    where there has  been  no  difficult  circumstances  such  as  domestic
    violence, then their rights are not preserved.

15. In Singh and Others [2015] EUECJ C-218/14 the court  held  at  [50]  to
    [53]:
    50    As regards the right of residence in the host Member State of
    nationals of third countries who are family members of a Union citizen,
    attention should be drawn, as a preliminary point, to the settled case-
    law of the Court which states that the rights conferred on third-
    country nationals by Directive 2004/38 are not autonomous rights of
    those nationals but rights derived from the exercise of freedom of
    movement by a Union citizen. The purpose and justification of those
    derived rights are based on the fact that a refusal to allow such
    rights would be liable to interfere with the Union citizen's freedom of
    movement by discouraging him from exercising his rights of entry into
    and residence in the host Member State (see, to that effect, judgment
    in O and B, C-456/12, EU:C:2014:135, paragraphs 36 and 45 and the case-
    law cited).
    51      It must also be recalled that it is not all third-country
    nationals who derive rights of entry into and residence in a Member
    State from Directive 2004/38, but only those who are a 'family member'
    within the meaning of Article 2(2) of that directive of a Union citizen
    who has exercised his right of freedom of movement by becoming
    established in a Member State other than the Member State of which he
    is a national (judgment in Iida, C-40/11, EU:C:2012:691, paragraph 51
    and the case-law cited).
    52      Moreover, Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38 requires that the
    family member of the Union citizen moving to or residing in a Member
    State other than that of which he is a national should accompany or
    join him, in order to be a beneficiary of the directive (see judgment
    in Iida, C-40/11, EU:C:2012:691, paragraph 61).
    53      Article 7 of Directive 2004/38, which concerns the right of
    residence for more than three months, likewise requires that the family
    members of a Union citizen who are not nationals of a Member State
    'accompany' or 'join' him in the host Member State in order to enjoy a
    right of residence there (judgment in Metock and Others, C-127/08,
    EU:C:2008:449, paragraph 86).

16. Further, at [57] the Court of Justice stated:

    57      Finally, under Article 14(2) of Directive 2004/38, the right of
    the family members of a Union citizen to  reside  in  the  host  Member
    State on the basis of Article 7(2) of the directive continues only  as
    long as they meet the conditions laid down in that provision

17. It is also stated at [65] that on the departure from  the  host  member
    state of  an individual who is a Union citizen, spouse who is  a  third
    country national no longer meets the conditions for enjoying a right of
    residence see Article 7(2).

18. It is necessary also to have regard to SSHD v NA [2016] EUECJ  C-115/15
    where at [40] to [41] the Court of Justice said this:
    40   It is apparent, first, from the wording employed both in the
    heading and in the text of Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38, that
    provision is made for the right of residence, to which, on the basis of
    that provision, a Union citizen's family members who do not have the
    nationality of a Member State are entitled, to be retained, in
    particular, in the event of divorce and that, as a consequence, when
    the conditions laid down in that provision are satisfied, divorce does
    not entail the loss of such a right of residence.
    41      Second, as regards the context of that provision, Article 13(2)
    of Directive 2004/38 constitutes a derogation from the principle that
    Directive 2004/38 confers rights of entry into and residence in a
    Member State not on all third-country nationals, but solely on those
    who are a 'family member', within the meaning of point 2 of Article 2
    of that directive, of a Union citizen who has exercised his right of
    freedom of movement by settling in a Member State other than the Member
    State of which he is a national, that principle being established by
    the Court's settled case-law (see, inter alia, judgment of 16 July
    2015, Singh and Others, C-218/14, EU:C:2015:476, paragraph 51).

19. The Court also stated at [45] to [49]:
    45   Last, as regards the aims of Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38,
    that provision corresponds to the objective, stated in recital 15 in
    the preamble of that directive, of providing legal safeguards for
    family members in the event of the death of the Union citizen, divorce,
    annulment of marriage or termination of a registered partnership,
    taking measures in that respect to ensure that in such circumstances
    family members already residing within the territory of the host Member
    State retain their right of residence exclusively on a personal basis.
    46      In that regard, it is apparent from the history of Directive
    2004/38 and, more particularly, from the explanatory memorandum of the
    Proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the right
    of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside
    freely within the territory of the Member States (COM/2001/0257
    (final)), that, under EU law prior to Directive 2004/38, the divorced
    spouse could be deprived of the right of residence in the host Member
    State.
    47      In that context, that proposal for a directive states that the
    purpose of the envisaged provision, now Article 13(2) of Directive
    2004/38, was to offer certain legal safeguards to third-country
    nationals whose right of residence was dependent on a family
    relationship by marriage and who could therefore be open to blackmail
    accompanied by threats of divorce, and that safeguards were necessary
    only in the event of final divorce, since, in the event of de facto
    separation, the right of residence of a spouse who is a third-country
    national is not at all affected.
    48      It follows from the foregoing that it is apparent from the
    wording, the context and objectives of Article 13(2) of Directive
    2004/38 that the application of that provision, including the right
    derived from Article 13(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38, is dependent on the
    parties concerned being divorced.
    49      It follows also that an interpretation of Article 13(2)(c) of
    Directive 2004/38 to the effect that a third-country national is
    entitled to rely on the right derived from that provision where her
    spouse, who is a Union citizen, has resided in the host Member State,
    in accordance with Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38, not until the
    date of the commencement of divorce proceedings but, at the latest,
    until the date when the domestic violence occurred, is contrary to the
    literal, systematic and teleological interpretation of Article 13(2) of
    Directive 2004/38.

20. The principle of law is clear: rights conferred by the Directive do  so
    to give effect to the principles of free movement as  set  out  in  the
    TFEU in particular at Articles 20 and 21.  Any rights that  their  non-
    EEA family members derive from that flow from the EEA national and  are
    derived from the rights that EEA national has. The  rights  of  non-EEU
    nationals are entirely derived from the right of the EEA family member.
    The default position is that those rights cease to exist once  the  EEA
    national ceases to be exercising Treaty Rights in the host member state
    or ceases to be a family member of the non-EEA national as defined.

21. The appellant contends that  the  phrase  "personal  basis"  should  be
    interpreted as meaning "a  basis  held  only  by  that  person  without
    reference to another", that is  without reference to the former spouse,
    and does not meant that he cannot pass the benefits of that  status  on
    to another.

22. The difficulty of that interpretation is that it would confer on such a
    person direct rights under EU law as if he were an EEA  national  which
    he is not. That is contrary to the jurisprudence set out above.  As the
    respondent submitted, the non -EEA family member has no discrete  right
    to have his family members with him; that right derives only  from  the
    EEA national. The interpretation contended for by the  appellant  would
    require the conferring on the non-EEA national rights equivalent to EEA
    nationals which is out of the scope of the TFEU and the Directive.

23.  Accordingly,  I  do  not  accept  that  Article  13.2  can  bear   the
    interpretation put on it by the appellant.  I accept in principle  that
    Article 13.2 applies to non-EEA dependent children of a marriage  which
    is dissolved (and it  is  notable  that  the  reference  is  to  family
    members, not spouse). An interpretation permitting a former  spouse  to
    continue to reside post-divorce but not her children who had been  here
    with her and who had had rights to be here so long as they were part of
    the family of an EEA national would be open to objection, but  that  is
    not the scenario here.

24. On the facts of this case there were no rights to be retained.  That is
    because the appellant was in Nigeria at the  point  when  his  father's
    marriage was dissolved.  At that moment, by operation of law he  ceased
    to be a family  member.   This  is  entirely  analogous  to  the  legal
    position of the spouses both in NA and in Singh.

25. Article 13 is about the retention of rights which had been conferred by
    EU law.  It is evident from the chronology set out above that while the
    appellant was still in Nigeria, he ceased to be with a  family  member,
    as defined, as his father was no longer the partner of an EEA national.
    He was no longer a family member as defined by operation of the  decree
    absolute.

26. Further, the beneficiaries of the Directive as set out in Article 3 are
    Union citizens and to their family members as defined who accompany  or
    join them.  As at the  date  of  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom  the
    appellant was not such a person.

27. Whilst I accept that the appellant was issued with  a  permit  and  was
    treated as though he had the right of entry that right is under Article
    5 of the Directive, confined to those who are members of the family  of
    a Union citizen.  That does not apply here and accordingly neither does
    the right of residence for up to three months (Article 6) or Article 7,
    right of residence for more than three months. The position is the same
    under the EEA Regulations.

28.  In summary, as the appellant was outside the UK (and for  that  matter
    the EEA) when he ceased to be a family member, he had no  rights  which
    had been conferred on him  by  EU  law  which  were  capable  of  being
    preserved.

29. I turn next to the issue of equivalence.  While that was raised in  the
    grounds of appeal, it is not addressed in the skeleton argument nor did
    Mr Coleman make submissions on the issue.  The respondent  observed  in
    her skeleton argument at [5] that this issue was no longer relied upon,
    and the appellant has not disagreed with that observation.

30. In any event, I am not persuaded  that  there  is  any  merit  in  that
    ground.  Even were the applicant's father a British Citizen, given  the
    appellant's age at all material times, the circumstances  in  which  he
    could obtain leave as an adult dependant are very limited and there  is
    nothing  in  the  material  to  show  he  could   meet   the   relevant
    requirements.

31. It cannot be argued that the judge erred in his interpretation  of  the
    law albeit that there is little explanation for his conclusion  but  it
    was a conclusion as to the law which  was,  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above, correct.  No purpose is, however, served in setting the decision
    aside as it is clear from the law as set out above that the appeal  was
    bound to fail in any event.

32. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it

 2. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 17 September 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul











