
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15878/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th April 2015                   |On 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mrs Sumi Begum
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  1st  December  1989.
    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 10th November 2011 and made
    application thereafter for further leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of her relationship with  Gousul  Mukul.   That  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal dated 10th March
    2014.   In  refusing  the  application  the  Secretary  of  State  gave
    consideration to the Appellant's family life under Article 8 which from
    9th July 2012 fell under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ross sitting at Richmond on  3rd  December  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 23rd December 2014 the Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. On 9th January 2015 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds argued that the judge had erred  in  that  the
    Appellant needed to establish that exceptional circumstances existed in
    order to engage Article 8 of the ECHR.  On 14th  February  2015  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy granted permission to appeal stating that  it
    was arguable that the judge had  applied  the  wrong  test  within  the
    Article 8 appeal.

 4. On 16th March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under  Rule  24.   The  Rule  24  response  contended  that  the
    Appellant's grounds amounted to  nothing  more  than  an  opportunistic
    claim advanced in mere disagreement with the negative  outcome  of  the
    appeal and that it was  clear  that  the  Appellant  had  a  precarious
    immigration status in the UK and that  her  husband  only  had  limited
    leave to remain in the  UK  with  discretionary  leave.   The  Rule  24
    response set out  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  properly
    considered the facts and evidence before him and that it was clear that
    for the Appellant there were simply no compelling  circumstances  which
    could possibly outweigh the public interest and it was properly open to
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to conclude that the evidence before  him
    did not establish that there would be unjustifiably harsh  consequences
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest.  It was  contended  therein
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had clearly and fully considered the
    material facts of the appeal before him and that  the  judge  had  been
    entitled to conclude that there were  no  compelling  circumstances  to
    warrant the grant of leave to the  Appellant  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Iqbal.  Mr Iqbal is familiar with this  matter  having  been
    the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Everett.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Iqbal submits that the test of exceptionality is wrong on the  facts
    as the Appellant had never had precarious immigration status within the
    UK.  He points out that the Appellant's application  for  variation  of
    leave had been submitted on 27th December 2013 and that her  leave  did
    not expire until 31st January 2013.  The judge, he  submits,  addressed
    the issue that the application was invalid  because  it  had  not  been
    properly completed and that the judge had made findings at paragraph  6
    of his determination but the appeal had  been  determined  pursuant  to
    paragraph 3C of the 1971 Immigration Act and the Appellant had leave to
    remain and that there was consequently a right of appeal.   It  was  on
    that basis that the judge went on to consider the merits and took  into
    account the historical background that the Appellant had  been  granted
    leave to enter the UK in November 2011 as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    but that she had met her husband on 19th May 2012  and  had  eventually
    married her husband on 26th June 2013.

 7. He takes issue with regard to  the  reference  to  "precarious  status"
    pointing out that there is no  definition  of  "precarious"  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that it  would  not  be  right  to  construe  the
    Appellant as having precarious status even if her leave  is  under  the
    points-based system.  He submits that if a precarious test is  accepted
    then exceptionality does not apply and  relies  on  R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

 8. Secondly Mr Iqbal submits that the judge has not made credible findings
    against the Sponsor's evidence and that the contention set out  in  the
    Sponsor's witness statement has not been  properly  considered  by  the
    judge and it is not stated anywhere within  the  determination  whether
    the learned Judge found the Appellant and/or Sponsor  to  be  credible.
    He submits that if they are credible then these  are  relevant  factors
    which warrant consideration of Article 8 even if the judge was  correct
    about imposing the threshold of exceptional circumstances.

 9. He also points out to me there have been two changes  of  circumstances
    namely that the Appellant  has  now  given  birth  to  a  daughter  and
    therefore it is appropriate for considerations to be given to the  best
    interests and welfare of the  child  and  secondly  that  discretionary
    leave to enter has been extended to the Sponsor to 2018.  He asked that
    if I accept there is a material error of law that fresh evidence  would
    assist in the remaking of the decision and would ask me  to  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal  so  a  correct  credibility  finding
    against the Sponsor could be made.

10. Ms Everett relies on the Rule 24 response and submits there is  nothing
    wrong with the decision.  She points out that the Appellant cannot meet
    the Rules and that the judge is further entitled to look at the test of
    exceptionality and refers me to the  recent  authority  of  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  Ms Everett disagrees with the submissions made on
    the Appellant's behalf with regard  to  the  definition  of  precarious
    pointing out that it means uncertain and that an incorrect test has not
    been applied and that this was a view expressed in Gulshan (Article 8 -
    new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 which has been endorsed
    by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo).

11. So far as the new evidence is concerned Ms Everett points out  this  is
    not the correct time to give any consideration to it and that if  there
    is new evidence and that it is of the nature that the Appellant and her
    Sponsors seek to rely upon then the correct approach is for her to make
    a new application and that the judge was aware of the facts at the time
    that the hearing was made.  She urged me to find no material  error  of
    law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Relevant Case Law

14. Reference is made herein to the up-to-date guidance given  by  relevant
    case law in particular that of SS (Congo).  Paragraph 29 of SS  (Congo)
    states:-

         "It is clear, therefore, that it cannot be maintained as a  general
         proposition that LTR or LTE outside the  Immigration  Rules  should
         only be granted in exceptional cases.  However, in certain specific
         contexts, a proper application of Article  8  may  itself  make  it
         clear that the legal test for grant of LTR or LTE outside the Rules
         should indeed be a test  of  exceptionality.   This  has  now  been
         identified  to  be  the  case,  on  the  basis  of   the   constant
         jurisprudence of the ECtHR itself, in relation to applications  for
         LTR outside the Rules  on  the  basis  of  family  life  (where  no
         children are involved) established in the United Kingdom at a  time
         when the presence of one or other of the partners was known  to  be
         precarious: see Nagre, paras.  [38]-[43], approved by this court in
         MF (Nigeria) at [41]-[42]."

    The Court of Appeal further at paragraph 31 of SS (Congo)  went  on  to
    give additional guidance to the judiciary and to legal practitioners:-

         "In other contexts, it cannot simply be assumed that a strict legal
         test of exceptional circumstances will be applicable when examining
         the application of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  (or
         within  the  Rules  themselves,  where  particular  paragraphs  are
         formulated so as fully to cover the applicability of Article 8,  as
         in paragraphs 399 and 399A as interpreted in  MF  (Nigeria)).   The
         relevant general balance  of  public  interest  considerations  and
         individual interests will  vary  between  different  parts  of  the
         Rules.  It is only if the normal balance of interests  relevant  to
         the general area in question is such  as  to  require  particularly
         great weight to be given to the public interest  as  compared  with
         the individual interests at  stake  (as  in  the  precarious  cases
         considered in Nagre and  the  foreign  criminal  deportation  cases
         considered in MF (Nigeria)) that a strict  test  of  exceptionality
         will apply."

Findings

15. The Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules and the  whole
    thrust of the Appellant's submission both at the First-tier and now are
    that under the Immigration Rules that her circumstances constituted  an
    exceptional case which the judge should have allowed outside the Rules.



16. The judge considered the authority of  Gulshan  and  then  went  on  to
    consider, quite properly, the approach that the Tribunals now  need  to
    address as to the proportionality of  the  approach  and  to  give  due
    consideration in particular  to  paragraph  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.  Thereafter looking at  those  factors  the
    judge has made findings of fact which he was entitled to  at  paragraph
    15.

17. I acknowledge that the judge has not set out the full and detailed case
    law authority that can be traced following  the  decision  in  Gulshan.
    However the failure to do so does not constitute a  material  error  of
    law particularly in  circumstances  where  the  authorities  can  offer
    little assistance to the Appellant in these  circumstances.   There  is
    nothing in the early authorities (including Gulshan) that suggests that
    a threshold test was being suggested as opposed to making it clear that
    there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there  was  anything
    which had not already been adequately considered in the context of  the
    Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.
     The authorities must not be read as seeking to qualify or  fetter  the
    assessment of Article 8.  There is no utility  in  imposing  a  further
    intermediate test as a preliminary to a consideration of an  Article  8
    claim beyond the relevant criterion-based  Rule.   As  was  held  in  R
    (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin)  there  was  no  prior
    threshold which dictated whether the exercise of discretion  should  be
    considered; rather the nature of the assessment and the reasoning which
    were called for were informed by threshold considerations.

18. That approach albeit laid down in authorities that postdate Gulshan has
    been adopted by the judge  in  this  instance  and  I  agree  with  the
    submission made both in the Rule 24 response and by Ms Everett that  to
    challenge this in the manner in which  has  been  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant amounts to little more than disagreement with the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge  has  applied  a  proper  and  well
    reasoned test  of  exceptional  circumstances  and  the  expansion  and
    guidance given therein in the authority of SS (Congo) clearly  endorses
    that and does nothing to show that there is any material error  of  law
    in the decision.

19. It is acknowledged by both legal representatives that there has however
    been a change of circumstances since the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Those change of circumstances may very well lead (and it  is
    not for this Tribunal to comment) to  a  different  assessment  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The Appellant has given birth to  a  child.   That
    child and the whole family position is one that the Secretary of  State
    needs to look at.  However it needs to be looked at against the current
    position of both the Appellant and her Sponsor and I  am  advised  that
    there has now been a substantial change in  the  circumstances  of  the
    Sponsor in that his discretionary leave to remain in the  UK  has  been
    extended to 2018.  These are factors that were not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  It is not for this Tribunal to  pre-empt  what  a
    fresh application  would  decide  but  clearly  the  circumstances  are
    different to that considered in this case by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and whilst I am satisfied that decision  does  not  disclose  any
    material error of law that is not to say that such a  decision  in  any
    way would preclude the Secretary of State from looking  at  the  matter
    afresh in view of the new circumstances in the event that the Appellant
    chose to make a further application.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal both under the Immigration Rules and pursuant  to
Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
