
IAC-AH-KEW-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 15th May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MS AYSHA BEGUM TAFADER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  28th  November  1959.
    The Appellant has an extensive immigration history culminating on  12th
    December 2013 with her being issued with an IS151A notifying her of her
    immigration status as an overstayer and her liability to detention  and
    removal from the UK.  By letter dated 24th  November  2013  along  with
    appropriate  attachments  and   photographs   the   Appellant's   legal
    representatives asked that the Appellant's case be considered under the
    European Convention of Human Rights.   That  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Notice of Refusal of the Secretary of State dated 6th March 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came  before  Judge  R  Callender
    Smith sitting at Taylor House on 28th October 2014.  In a determination
    promulgated on 12th November 2014 the Appellant's appeal was  dismissed
    both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 21st November 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 2nd January 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pooler granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Pooler  noted  that  the
    application contended that by failing to make findings on  family  life
    established between the Appellant  and  two  of  her  daughters  or  on
    whether the Appellant had retained any  ties  to  Bangladesh  that  the
    judge had erred in law.  He noted that  the  judge  had  dismissed  the
    appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules but had arguably  failed  to
    direct himself by  reference  to  their  terms  particularly  those  at
    paragraph 276ADE and to make  findings  of  fact  on  relevant  matters
    including whether the Appellant had retained ties to Bangladesh.  Judge
    Pooler noted  that  Judge  Callender  Smith  had  directed  himself  by
    reference to the five-step approach set out in  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]
    UKHL 27 and had accepted that the Appellant's presence had been helpful
    for her daughters and their children.  He  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not made  a  specific  finding  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant had proved the existence of family life but that  he  clearly
    accepted that Article 8 was engaged because he went on to consider  the
    proportionality of removal.  In any event he considered it made  little
    difference  whether  her   relationships   with   her   daughters   and
    grandchildren were considered as aspects of private or family life  and
    that the judge had concluded that the decision to remove the Appellants
    was proportionate.  Whilst therefore considering it  less  likely  that
    the ground in respect of the claimed family life disclosed  a  material
    error of law since permission was to  be  granted  on  all  grounds  he
    considered that it may be argued.

 4. On 9th January 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24 in some detail.  The Rule 24 response stated  that
    it was for the judge having concluded that Article  8  was  engaged  to
    carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  and  that  the  only  significant
    relationship at issue was that the Appellant had with her daughter.  It
    was contended therein that the Appellant clearly  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that
    there was no adequate evidence to demonstrate that, to the  balance  of
    probabilities, the Appellant had lost all ties to her home country.  It
    was  pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  retained  a  land  share   and
    accommodation and had a brother remaining in Bangladesh.  The  Rule  24
    response contended that it was clear that the Appellant who lived full-
    time in Bangladesh until she came to the UK at the age of  45  and  who
    was not credible in her assertion that she did not come to  settle  and
    intended to return was not likely to accept that she retained  ties  to
    her home country.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Khan.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Miss Pal.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Khan contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  findings  in
    relation to one of the Appellant's daughters who was a witness but made
    no findings about her other two daughters who were also witnesses.   He
    refers me to the authority of AK (Turkey) [2004] UKIAT 00230 where  the
    Tribunal reiterated at paragraph 12 and set out "the necessity to  make
    proper findings of fact in relation to all the oral  evidence  and  not
    merely that given by the Appellant ..."  He submits  that  one  of  the
    other daughters not mentioned provides most of the subsistence for  the
    Appellant and that it is important to note that there is a family  life
    and a level of dependency.  He submits that the judge has erred in  not
    giving due and proper consideration to these factors.

 7. Secondly he considers that there has been no finding made whatsoever as
    to whether during the nine years that the Appellant has been in the  UK
    she has retained social, cultural or  family  ties  in  Bangladesh  and
    therefore there has not been a proper consideration of the  Appellant's
    rights to private life or matters set out in paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He reminds me that the Appellant claims that she no
    longer has any ties with Bangladesh and submits that if this  could  be
    demonstrated then the Appellant may have come within the remit  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  She submits that the Appellant's husband has passed
    away and whilst previously they held  land  she  no  longer  knows  the
    situation regarding this land and submits that it is possible that  the
    Appellant's circumstances have  changed.   Mr  Khan  submits  that  the
    correct approach is to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for reconsideration.

 8. In response Miss Pal acknowledges that whilst the Appellant's daughters
    did not give evidence at the First Tribunal she submits  that  even  if
    the evidence of the daughter is taken into account that would not  make
    any difference to the outcome overall of the appeal.  She takes  me  to
    the witness statement of the said  daughter  Mrs  Farhena  Siddiqua  at
    paragraphs 7 onwards in which Mrs Siddiqua contends that it is now  the
    Appellant's daughter's responsibilities to look after  her.   Miss  Pal
    points out there is nothing in the witness statement to say what  level
    of care is required for the Appellant and submits that  if  she  is  so
    weak at the age of 54 then she hardly would be in a  position  to  look
    after family members and submits that there is no reason whatsoever why
    the Appellant should remain in this country.

 9. So far as the challenge under paragraph 276ADE of the Grounds of Appeal
    she submits that the judge has addressed issues of family  and  private
    life at  paragraphs  30  to  41  of  his  determination  especially  at
    paragraphs 31 and 32 and  made  a  finding  therein  that  he  was  not
    satisfied there was nowhere suitable for the Appellant to return to and
    no proof that she had ever lost control of the property  in  which  she
    lived when she was there even though her husband was no  longer  alive.
    She asked me to find no material errors  of  law  and  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. The Grounds of Appeal concentrate on two specific  areas.   Firstly  on
    the contention that there was no finding on the family life established
    between the Appellant  and  her  other  two  daughters  who  were  also
    witnesses.  Whilst acknowledging that one of the daughters who had made
    a witness  statement  did  not  give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it is clear from examination of  the  determination  that  the
    judge has given a full and thorough consideration of  the  evidence  of
    the daughters.  This  is  set  out  at  paragraphs  12  to  24  of  the
    determination.  In paragraph 14 the judge notes that the Appellant  had
    three daughters and the personal circumstances of the Appellant  and  a
    visit made in 2005.  The fact that the Appellant has resided in the  UK
    for over nine years was noted  as  were  the  health  problems  of  the
    Appellant's daughter Moriom.  The judge  has  fully  analysed  all  the
    evidence that was before him and made findings of fact at paragraphs 26
    onwards.  He has acknowledged that since 2006 the Appellant has had  no
    lawful basis for staying in the UK and it is clear  from  the  evidence
    given that it was being asserted  that  the  Appellant's  presence  was
    helpful to her daughters which in fact is contradictory to the evidence
    at paragraph 7 onwards of Mrs Siddiqua's witness  statement  suggesting
    that the Appellant is old and frail and needs the  daughter's  support.
    I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  made  findings
    which he was  entitled  to  and  has  on  the  evidence  shown  therein
    considered all documentary evidence  that  was  submitted  before  him.
    Submissions  on  this  area  merely  amount  to  disagreement  and  the
    determination discloses no material error of law.

13. It is briefly appropriate to consider the position as a matter  of  law
    under Article 8.  This is a claim where it is submitted that the  judge
    has accepted that Article 8 is engaged because the  judge  went  on  to
    consider the proportionality of removal.  What is submitted is that the
    judge has failed to make findings of fact on relevant matters including
    whether the Appellant has retained ties to Bangladesh.   The  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge has consequently gone on to consider the  Appellant's
    claim pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.



14. In any consideration of an Article 8 claim the starting  point  is  the
    law itself.  Article 8 states:

    (a)  everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence;

    (b)  there should be no interference by a public body with the exercise
         of this right except such as is in accordance with the law  and  is
         necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interest  of  national
         security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of  the  country,
         for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedom
         of others.

15. The general approach to Article 8 cases is that in Nhundu  and  Chiwera
    (01/TH/00613).  In those cases the  Tribunal  said  that,  in  deciding
    claims under Article 8, there is  a  five  stage  test  which  must  be
    applied in order to determine whether a breach has occurred:

      1) does family life, private life, home or correspondence exist within
         the meaning of Article 8;

      2) if so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with;

      3) if so, was the interference in accordance with the law;

      4) if so, was the interference in pursuit of  one  of  the  legitimate
         aims set out in Article 8(2); and

      5) if so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
         legitimate aim?

    Those were essentially the five questions  endorsed  by  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

16. The law has somewhat crystallised as to the  approach  to  be  adopted.
    The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

    In Haleemudeen v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558 Beatson LJ held at paragraph 17 that where the  Article  8
    ECHR element of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  met,  refusal  would
    normally  be  appropriate,  "but  that  leave  can  be  granted   where
    exceptional  circumstances,  in  the  result  of  'unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences' for the individual, would result".

17. There is a requirement to look at the  evidence  to  see  if  there  is
    anything which has not already been adequately  considered  within  the
    context of the Rules which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.
    The further intermediary test as a preliminary to a consideration of an
    Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion based  Rules  is  now  no
    longer appropriate and in Ganesabalan, R (on the application of) v SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), there was no prior threshold  which  dictates
    whether the exercise of discretion should  be  considered;  rather  the
    nature of the assessment and the reasoning which were called  for  were
    informed by threshold considerations.

18. It was also necessary for the judge to consider  Section  117B  of  the
    2002  Immigration  Act  which  was  brought  into  force  by  the  2014
    Immigration Act.  Section 117B  makes  public  interest  considerations
    applicable to all cases.  I am satisfied that the judge has carried out
    a full and proper  consideration  of  paragraph  117B  as  specifically
    specified  at  paragraph  33  of  his  determination   and   thereafter
    considered in the subsequent paragraphs and in addition has  considered
    the Section 55 considerations pursuant to the 2009 Act in  some  detail
    particularly at paragraph 39 of his determination.  Consequently  I  am
    satisfied that the judge has given due and proper consideration to  the
    necessary factors that he needs to look at pursuant to  Article  8  and
    that the judge has particularly at paragraphs 31, 32 and 40 given  full
    and proper  consideration  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's  ties  to
    Bangladesh and  has  made  findings  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    demonstrate a wholesale loss  of  ties  noting  for  example  that  the
    Appellant retained a land share and accommodation  and  had  a  brother
    remaining in Bangladesh.

19. It is the role of the Upper Tribunal merely to consider  whether  there
    is an error of law.  It is not the role of the Upper Tribunal Judge  to
    look at the evidence and come to conclusions that  might  be  different
    from the First-tier Tribunal unless such  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are clearly perverse and  unsustainable.   That  threshold  is
    nowhere near approached in this matter.  In fact the  judge  has  given
    full and detailed consideration to all the relevant factors.   In  such
    circumstances  the  submissions  on  behalf  of   the   Appellant   are
    unsustainable and amount to little more than mere  disagreement.   This
    is a  decision  that  discloses  no  material  error  of  law  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is consequently therefore dismissed and the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  maintained.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

