
IAC-BFD- MD


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15392/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th October 2014                             |On 21 October 2014         |
|Prepared                                        |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                              mr rash pal singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, of Ryan Adams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born 21st March 1984.  He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge A M Baker) against  the  decision  of
    the Respondent dated 12th March 2014 to refuse him leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the  Points
    Based System.

 2. The FtT dismissed the appeal in a  determination  promulgated  on  20th
    July 2014. The Appellant now  appeals  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. I find that the determination of the FtT should be set aside.  I  reach
    that conclusion for the following reasons which  I  can  set  out  here
    briefly.

 4. However before I do so I should pause  to  say  that  at  the  original
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge there were two  Appellants
    (the Appellant before me and his business partner Mr Akolkar  Shantanau
    Sharadrao). It is correct to say that the Appellant's business  partner
    has not appealed and therefore the only appeal before me is that of  Mr
    Pal Singh.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge having  heard  evidence  sought  to  make
    findings on the credibility of the Appellant and his business  partner.
    At paragraph [13] under the heading 'My Findings of  Fact',  the  Judge
    says,

         "This is a relatively finely balanced  case  where  the  Appellants
         came over in evidence as earnest and plausible, but lurking  doubts
         do remain that they are entirely genuine and  have  discharged  the
         burden of proof upon them herein".

    It is hard to see  what  conclusion  the  Judge  has  come  to  on  the
    Appellants' credibility. This lack of clarity in turn  affects  whether
    the Judge properly appreciated  where  the  burden  of  proof  lay  and
    whether his  findings  can  be  relied  on  in  the  face  of  such  an
    inconsistent statement.

 6. By paragraph [16]  of  the  determination  the  Judge  finds  that  the
    Appellants have not discharged the burden of proof upon them but it  is
    unclear how the Judge related his credibility findings to the  standard
    of proof set out.

 7. Despite Mr Duffy's valiant attempt to save this  determination,  it  is
    trite law that an Appellant is entitled to know why he won or lost  his
    appeal and what  evidence  the  Judge  is  accepting  and  what  is  he
    rejecting. I am satisfied that the FtT Judge's determination is legally
    unsustainable because it is unclear on these matters.

 8. Having  announced  at  the  hearing  that  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    determination contained such error as to require  the  decision  to  be
    remade, I canvassed with the representatives the  appropriate  disposal
    of this appeal. Mr Parkin did urge that  I  remake  the  decision,  but
    since Judge Baker's findings must be infected by his unclear remarks on
    credibility, I consider the only proper course of action is for  me  to
    set aside the determination of the FtT and to direct that the  decision
    be remade in that Tribunal by a Judge other than Judge A M Baker.  None
    of the findings shall stand.





DECISION

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    20th July 2014 is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
    I direct that the appeal  should  be  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a Judge other than Judge A M Baker.

No anonymity direction is made




Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                           20 October 2014

