
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/15476/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 July 2016                               |On 28 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                 mahbub alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel, Lincoln's Chambers London
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 13 May  1977.   On  13
    March 2007 he applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on compassionate grounds.  The Respondent sent a letter  on  16
    September 2014 to the Appellant which  stated  that  he  had  submitted
    insufficient information and evidence for leave to be granted  and  his
    application was refused with no right of appeal.  His appeal was  heard
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Symes  on  19  October  2015.   The
    appeal  was  dismissed  for  want  of  jurisdiction,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 22 October 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  17  May
    2016.  At paragraph 4 of the decision the Judge states  that  when  the
    case is properly analysed there is no right of  appeal.   In  the  same
    paragraph he refers to a decision informing a migrant, (the appellant),
    of his liability to treatment as an illegal entrant, not amounting to a
    removal direction.  In the respondent's bundle is a form IS.151A  which
    refers to the appellant  being  informed  that  he  may  be  liable  to
    removal.  Following that there is a form IS.151A 2 which states that  a
    decision has been  taken  to  remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The permission states that the Judge has not referred to this
    decision in his analysis although he  placed  weight  on  the  decision
    informing the appellant of his liability to  treatment  as  an  illegal
    entrant not amounting to a removal direction.  The  grounds  of  appeal
    state that to the Appellant's case is that he fears for his  life  from
    non-state actors on account of his journalism and the appeal is  stated
    to be against the decision of the Respondent dated  16  September  2014
    served on 4 April 2015 refusing his claim for  humanitarian  protection
    or discretionary leave and the issue  of  removal  directions  dated  4
    April 2015.  The permission states that it is arguable that  the  Judge
    has not provided a  sufficient  analysis  before  reaching  his  stated
    conclusion  that  the  appeal  should  be   dismissed   for   want   of
    jurisdiction.

 3.  There  is  a  Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent  opposing  the
    Appellant's appeal.  This states that the issue appears to  be  whether
    the Appellant has an in country right of appeal.

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that there  is  a  preliminary  issue.
    This claim revolves round whether the Appellant  made  a  human  rights
    claim initially, when in 2007 he applied for leave to remain.  She made
    reference to the refusal letter of 2014 which states that there  is  no
    right of appeal and she referred to the service of  the  forms  IS.151A
    and IS.151A 2.  The latter deals with a right of  appeal  from  outside
    the United Kingdom.  She submitted that the  Respondent  has  not  been
    provided with sufficient evidence to show that an  asylum  or  a  human
    rights claim was made initially by the Appellant but she submitted that
    if the Appellant did  make  a  human  rights  claim  with  his  initial
    application there will be an in country right of appeal.

 5. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that he agrees up to a  point  with
    the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions.   He  confirmed  that  if  the
    Appellant made a human rights claim with his application for  leave  to
    remain he will have an in country right of appeal.  He referred to a 93
    page bundle which was submitted with  the  Appellant`s  appeal  and  he
    referred to paragraph 92(4)(a). This deals with an  appeal  against  an
    immigration decision, if the Appellant has  made  an  asylum  claim  or
    human rights claim while in the United Kingdom.  It states that if that
    if he has done that he will have  an  appeal  from  within  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. I asked Counsel if he was able to make  submissions  showing  that  the
    Appellant did make a human rights claim with his original  application.
    He submitted that the First-tier Judge made an error  in  his  decision
    because the Respondent did not mention that right specifically when the
    application was refused.

 7. I was referred to paragraph 4 of the decision and IS.151A Part  2.   He
    submitted that the Respondent has, since issuing  that  decision,  been
    trying to remove the Appellant.  He submitted that  the  Respondent  is
    not entitled to do that because the Appellant has an in  country  right
    of appeal.  I asked  Counsel  to  show  me  where  in  the  Appellant's
    original application, he applied on human rights issues.

 8. I was referred to the Respondent's bundle and the covering letter  sent
    to  the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate  by  Erasure  Legal
    Services on 12 March 2007.  He submitted that this covering letter  was
    sent in with the application form.  I was referred to the  second  page
    of this letter which states that the Appellant is relying on Article  3
    of ECHR to support his application.  He submitted that because  he  had
    made that human rights application, when he received the refusal letter
    he appealed in spite of its terms.   He  submitted  that  the  covering
    letter makes it absolutely clear that a human  rights  claim  was  made
    with the Appellant's original application.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the human rights claim is  not  a
    strong claim but when the letter of 12 March 2007 is considered,  (this
    is in the Respondent's bundle), it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant  is
    relying on Article 3 of ECHR and this means that he has an  in  country
    right of appeal.

10. I  have  considered  all  the  evidence  on  file,  in  particular  the
    application form and the covering letter from  Erasure  Legal  Services
    dated 12 March 2007.  I have given  weight  to  this  when  considering
    Section 92(4) (a) which makes it clear that if a human rights claim has
    been made while the Appellant is in the United  Kingdom  he  should  be
    granted an appeal within the United Kingdom.   I  have  considered  the
    submissions made by both parties. There is clearly a material error  in
    the First-tier Judge's decision promulgated on 29  October  2015.   The
    Appellant has an in country  right  of  appeal  and  the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to hear this appeal.

Notice of Decision

11. As I have found that there is a material error of law in the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and that the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  in  this
    claim I am setting the First-tier Tribunal decision aside.

12. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal cannot  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statements 7.2 the nature  and
    extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision  to  be  re-
    made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
    the case are not to include Judge Symes.

13. Anonymity has not been directed in this case.



Signed                              Date 28 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

