
IAC-AH-SAR-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15695/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 3rd February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MS PEACE OGONNAYA SMITH
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G McIndoe, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  11th  March  1976.   The
    Appellant has leave to enter the United Kingdom as a multientry visitor
    until 4th April 2016.  On 21st August 2013 she made application  for  a
    derivative residence card on the basis that  she  is  a  third  country
    national upon whom a British citizen is dependent in the United Kingdom
    on the basis of the Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  (ECJ)
    judgment in the case of Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09).

 2. On 17th March 2014 the  Appellant's  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on the basis that there  was  insufficient  evidence
    that the Appellant's British  children  Bradley  and  Hannah  would  be
    unable to remain in the United Kingdom if the Appellant were forced  to
    leave on the basis that the Appellant had not provided evidence  as  to
    why the children's father is not in a position to care for his  British
    children if the Appellant were forced to leave the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal and the appeal came before Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Lever sitting at Manchester  on  1st  August
    2014.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  18th  August  2014   the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed under the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. On 26th August 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 29th September 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kamara granted permission to appeal.  Judge Kamara noted  that
    the grounds sought permission to argue that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    finding that the requirement  of  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)  of  the  2006
    Regulations had been met.  In particular, the  Respondent  was  of  the
    view that there was another British citizen parent who would be able to
    assume caring responsibilities for the children of the  Appellant.   In
    addition criticism was made of the judge's treatment of Article 8 ECHR.



 5. Judge Kamara found in an otherwise  well  reasoned  determination  (his
    words) that the judge had arguably erred in law  in  finding  that  the
    British citizen children would be unable to reside in the EU  were  the
    Appellant compelled to leave notwithstanding the fact that  they  lived
    with their British citizen father in the United Kingdom.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department.  For the  purpose  of  continuity  within  the
    legal process the Secretary of State  is  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Respondent and Ms Smith as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears by her
    instructed legal representative Mr McIndoe.   Mr  McIndoe  is  familiar
    with this matter, having appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    is also the author of a detailed Rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal served  and  filed  on  8th  December  2014.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

The Facts

 7. The Appellant and her husband, Mr Peter Smith, are separated.  Mr Peter
    Smith has been working in Nigeria since 1992 as a procurement  manager.
    Mr Smith and the Appellant married in  2005  and  they  lived  together
    between 2005 and 2012.  The Appellant was  the  primary  carer  of  the
    children who were in her care every day given that Mr Smith spent  much
    of his time  working  away  at  different  locations.   They  have  two
    children, Miss Hannah Abeni Smith, a British citizen born in Nigeria on
    4th March 2005, and Master Bradley Obinne Smith, a British citizen born
    in the UK on 13th June 2010.  Mr Smith continues to reside  in  Nigeria
    where he works as a procurement manager  for  Fiddil  Limited  and  his
    contract requires him to be present at his workplace  for  four  weeks,
    with the following four weeks away from his workplace, although  he  is
    still required to undertake duties  -  principally  outside  the  UK  -
    during those weeks away from his workplace.

 8. The Appellant and the two children have a property in  the  UK  jointly
    owned by the Appellant and Mr Smith.  The separation between  Mr  Smith
    and the Appellant is amicable to the extent that  Mr  Smith  retains  a
    bedroom within the property for his overnight use on occasions when  he
    is able to visit the home and to see his children.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Secretary of State accepts that Mr  Smith's
    job takes him  away  from  the  country  a  lot,  noting  that  he  has
    employment in the oil industry in Nigeria.  He however  relies  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal, in particular the Secretary  of  State's  contention
    that the existence of a British citizen parent who  would  be  able  to
    assume caring responsibility for the children  excludes  the  Appellant
    from qualifying for a derivative right under Regulation 15A.

10. Mr McIndoe submits that there might be some force in the  Secretary  of
    State's argument with regard to the assumption of caring responsibility
    in the event of Mr Smith living, to use his words, "down the road" from
    the Appellant.  However he submits that the reality is  that  Mr  Smith
    works in Nigeria and that this is accepted by the Secretary  of  State.
    He further submits that that was the approach  adopted  by  Immigration
    Judge Lever and that the judge took the correct approach  at  paragraph
    24 in finding that it is not  a  helpful,  conclusive  or  constructive
    approach to look  at  hypothetical  circumstances  at  the  edge  of  a
    spectrum of reasonableness in order to conclude as to whether or not  a
    child could theoretically be able to remain within the United  Kingdom.
    He submits that the  judge's  findings  were  sustainable  and  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

11. He  further  emphasises  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  the
    children's primary carer is not  a  recent  development  but  one  that
    existed previously when the parties resided in Nigeria and that she has
    in fact always been the children's primary carer and therefore it could
    not be contended that these circumstances had been manufactured  purely
    for the purpose of obtaining a derivative residence card.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Material Error of Law

14. The  Appellant  has  sought  a  derivative  right  of  residence  under
    paragraph 15A of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.   Judge  Lever  has  identified  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    application and  appeal  from  the  Notice  of  Refusal  and  that  the
    application is on the basis that the Appellant is the primary carer  of
    two British citizen children under the age of 18 residing in the UK, in
    education and on whose behalf it  is  said  they  would  not  be  in  a
    position to remain in the United Kingdom if the Appellant  were  to  be
    returned to Nigeria.

15. The determination is well thought out and constructed.  At paragraph 23
    the judge has made findings of fact concluding from the  evidence  that
    he has heard and having had the benefit of seeing the children  at  the
    hearing he has concluded that they are well adjusted children with  the
    benefit of the upbringing and security provided by their  parents.   He
    thereafter at paragraph 24 and subsequent goes on to consider  who  has
    the primary responsibility for the children and  whether  the  children
    would be able to remain in the United Kingdom  if  the  Appellant  were
    forced to leave.  He has considered the most recent authority of  Hines
    [2014] EWCA Civ 60 and having studied the  case  law  and  analysed  it
    sensibly and carefully, he has made findings that the Appellant is  the
    primary carer and that the children aged 9 and 4  at  date  of  hearing
    would be unable to remain in the UK to the extent that there would be a
    serious impairment of their quality of life if the mother was forced to
    return to Nigeria.  Those were findings that the judge was entitled  to
    make and he was also entitled to make findings regarding the  inability
    in these circumstances of the children's father to act as their primary
    carer due to his employment.  Having heard the submissions  and  having
    considered this matter, I wholeheartedly  agree  with  the  conclusions
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

16. Further thereinafter for the  avoidance  of  doubt  and  to  provide  a
    complete picture, he has gone on to consider the position of Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules and made  findings  that  he  would  have
    allowed the appeal under Article 8.  He has thus  carried  out  a  very
    thorough and detailed analysis of the facts and law and  made  findings
    which  are  completely  sustainable.    In   such   circumstances   the
    determination discloses no material error of law and the appeal of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of
law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 2nd February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed.  No application is made for a fee  award  and
none is made.



Signed        Date 2nd February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

