
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA150362013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 June 2017                               |On 26 June 2017                |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                  Mrs Thilani Indika Madupeiris Yalagalage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and her date  of  birth  is  23
    January 1979.  She made an application for leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the  points-based  system  on  7  December
    2012. The application was refused by the Respondent on 18 April 2013.
2.   The Appellant appealed.  At that time her husband  was  a  co-Appellant
    and their appeals were dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  S
    J Clarke, following a hearing at Taylor House on 26 November 2013.

3.   Permission was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  on  6
    January 2014 and Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane  on  11  March  2014.   The
    Appellant applied for judicial review  in  respect  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Lane's decision and permission was granted by the High Court  and
    the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Lane  quashed  on  20  June  2014.
    Following this Vice President of the Upper  Tribunal  Ockelton  granted
    permission on 21 April 2017.

4.   The Appellant accepts that the evidence that  was  submitted  with  her
    initial application on 31 October 2012  was  deficient.   However,  her
    evidence was that post the date of the initial application, and  before
    it was returned to her for non-payment of a fee, on  28  November  2012
    she submitted further evidence that met the requirements of the  Rules.
    The application was returned  to  her  and  she  resubmitted  it  on  7
    December 2012 relying on relying on the documents that she sent  on  28
    November 2012.

5.   The judge did not accept the  Appellant's  evidence  and  he  made  the
    following findings:

         "13. I do not accept the Appellant has  discharged  the  burden  of
             proof that the documents relied upon in the Appellant's bundle
             were those sent under the proof of postage on  28.11.2012.   I
             accept  that  the  date  given  by  the  Respondent  for   the
             application is 7 December 2012, which is some time  after  the
             date found on the application form of 31.10.2012  and  in  the
             Immigration history section of the Respondent's bundle  it  is
             stated that the form was received on 10 December 2012.


         14.  I conclude that on the evidence before me, the  Appellant  has
             not shown that  she  provided  the  proper  documents  to  the
             Respondent and the appeal must fail.  I also conclude, despite
             this not being raised by the Respondent, the application could
             not succeed in any event, because the  English  language  test
             certificates  were  only  awarded  after  the  date   of   the
             application, and does not meet the requirement of Paragraph 34
             of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  was  not  raised  by  the
             Respondent, but it is relevant  for  me  to  mention  in  this
             determination."


6.   At the hearing before me Mr Duffy conceded that  the  judge  materially
    erred in respect of  the  findings  about  the  English  language  test
    certificate and there was no need for me to  engage  any  further  with
    this issue.

7.   I heard oral submissions from both representatives and I conclude  that
    the judge erred at paragraph 13 of the decision.  The  judge  may  have
    misunderstood the timeline insofar and failed to  appreciate  that  the
    Appellant's first initial application had in fact been returned to her.
     There Applicant's evidence was that she sent the documents  after  the
    initial application and I am not sure that the judge understood this.

8.   In any event, at paragraph 13 the judge reached an adverse  credibility
    finding in relation to the Appellant  which  he  failed  to  adequately
    reason. It is not explained why he did not accept the evidence that the
    documents had been sent to the Respondent, particularly when there  was
    evidence of proof of postage and he accepted that this established that
    something had been posted to the Respondent on 28 November  2012.   The
    issue is not explicitly raised in the grounds, but the general tenor of
    the  grounds  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the   further
    documentation and therefore, the credibility  findings  are  implicitly
    challenged. In any event,  should  I  be  wrong  about  that,  I  grant
    permission to amend the grounds. There is no prejudice  caused  to  the
    Respondent.

9.   The judge materially erred for the  reasons  given.  I  set  aside  the
    decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  Regrettably I did not have
    before me an Appellant's bundle  containing  the  documents  which  she
    states that she sent to the Respondent on 28 November 2012 and  neither
    representative had a copy. There is no copy bundle available apparently
    resulting from the  passage  of  time.   However,  Ms  Anzani  has  the
    documents and Mr Duffy  had  the  opportunity  to  look  through  those
    documents and he conceded that they meet the requirements of  paragraph
    41-SD of Appendix A of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  only  issue  was
    whether or not those documents had been sent to the  Respondent  on  28
    November 2012 as asserted by the Appellant.

10.  The parties confirmed that there were no credibility issues  raised  at
    the hearing before Judge Clarke and Mr Duffy indicated that he did  not
    take issue in respect of the Appellant's credibility. In the  light  of
    this I make  a  finding  that  the  documents  were  submitted  to  the
    Respondent prior to the  date  of  the  decision  as  asserted  by  the
    Appellant and therefore the appeal is allowed under the Rules.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 23 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


