
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15937/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                         |On 8 December 2014             |
|Extempore                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Emmanuel Kojo Eshun
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Garrod, Counsel instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated  on  19
    September 2014 in which he allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Emmanuel  Kojo
    Eshun, whom I refer to as the claimant, against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 26 March 2014  to  refuse  to  issue  him  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence under  Community
    law as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The claimant entered into a customary marriage by proxy with a  citizen
    of Italy.  The ceremony took place in Ghana. It is  not  disputed  that
    the   The sole issue in this case is a narrow one and it is  this:  was
    there sufficient  material  before  Judge  Rowlands  which  constituted
    independent and reliable evidence about the recognition of the marriage
    under the laws of Italy?  That is the sole issue which is challenged by
    the Secretary of State in the appeal.

 3. Judge Rowlands had before him two documents which appear at  pages  221
    and 223 of the claimant's bundle.  The first is a letter  sent  by  the
    claimant's solicitors to the Italian  Embassy  in  respect  of  another
    couple who it is said were Ghanaian and Italian and who like the couple
    in this case were married under Ghanaian customary law.   The  marriage
    was by proxy and  the  documents  were  executed  by  their  respective
    representatives.  The letter asks  the  Italian  Embassy  whether  they
    would confirm whether such a marriage is recognised under Italian  law.
    The response from the Consulate General in Italy  states,  without  any
    reservation or caveat, that Italian law recognises  Ghanaian  customary
    marriages.

 4. Mr Melvin  for  the  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  this  is  not
    sufficient  material  on  which  the  judge  could  have  come  to  the
    conclusion which following Kareem Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
    24(IAC) he must reach which is to answer the  question  as  to  whether
    there is:

         "independent and reliable evidence about  the  recognition  of  the
         marriage under the laws of the EEA country and/or the country where
         the marriage took place."

    Relying on Kareem   he submitted that  the  mere  production  of  legal
    materials of the EEA country where the  marriage  took  place  will  be
    insufficient and mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will for
    similar reasons carry no weight.

 5. The material on which the judge relied in this appeal is of a different
    character from that produced in Kareem. It is not just legal materials;
    it is a letter from Consulate General of Italy in the  United  Kingdom,
    the official representative  of  that  state.  Further,  as  Mr  Melvin
    accepts, there was no challenge made in the First-tier Tribunal to  the
    material but he submits that it is just  simply  insufficient,  firstly
    because it does not actually relate to this couple and  second  because
    it does not mention whether proxy marriages are recognised.

 6. Mr Garrod  submitted  that  this  material  is  sufficient  relying  in
    addition on the fact that this evidence was not challenged.

 7. In considering the evidence I note that the  letter  from  the  Italian
    Embassy  clearly  relates  to  the  questions  put  by  the  claimant's
    solicitors in another matter.  The  issue  of  marriage  by  proxy  was
    raised in that and it is I consider a reasonable  inference  that  that
    matter was considered by the official who put forward the opinion  that
    customary marriages.  Whilst I note that there is no reference made  to
    statute or other provisions of Italian law I note equally  that  it  is
    difficult to consider that the Italian Consulate General who is charged
    with such matters could  be  anything  other  than  an  independent  or
    reliable source as to the recognition of marriages by the  Republic  of
    Italy.

 8. Given that this evidence was not challenged and  given  its  provenance
    and given that there appears to have been  no  challenge  made  in  the
    First-tier that this  was  unreliable  because  it  is  a  copy,  I  am
    satisfied that firstly Judge Rowlands did direct himself properly  with
    respect to Kareem and I am satisfied also that he was entitled to  find
    on the facts of this case that there was sufficient material before him
    having had regard to Kareem to discharge the burden  of  proof  on  the
    claimant to show that his sponsor did have capacity to enter  into  the
    marriage by proxy in Ghana and that the marriage would be valid for the
    purposes of Italian law. Accordingly for those  reasons  I  uphold  the
    First-tier decision as there is no material error  of  law  within  the
    decision of Judge Rowlands.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error of law and I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul








