
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15947/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th November 2013                         |On 12th December 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              MS Agata Marczak

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance [by arrangement]
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                 NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OF DECISION AND APPEAL


1.   On 2nd  July  2012  the  respondent  notified  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order so as to remove the appellant from the  jurisdiction.



2.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan  and  Mr  Yates  (non-legal
    member) on 3rd November 2012.  The appeal was dismissed both under  the
    Immigration Rules and in respect of human rights.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  which  led  to
    the granting of permission to appeal.  At a hearing on 16th April  2013
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Lewis  set  aside  that  decision  on  the
    grounds of error of law and  directed  that  that  decision  should  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal.

4.   The  matter  came  before  me  on  12th  September  2012  when  further
    directions were issued.  In particular the respondent  was  invited  to
    reconsider her decision of 2nd July 2012 in the light of the  policies
    extant and the extra material supplied.

5.   By a letter  of  11th  November  2013  the  Home  Office  notified  the
    Tribunal and those acting on behalf of the appellant of their  decision
    not to deport the appellant.  The respondent thereby sought  permission
    to withdraw the decision of 2nd July.

6.   There was no response made to that letter by those acting on behalf  of
    the appellant such that it was necessary for the  Tribunal  to  contact
    them on the day before the scheduled hearing.  It  was  indicated  that
    there was no objection by  the  appellant  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    decision and in those circumstances there would be no  purpose  in  any
    attendance at the hearing.  The outcome which the appellant  sought  by
    reason of the appeal had now been achieved.

7.   Therefore pursuant to Rule  17(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 I give permission to the  respondent  to  withdraw
    her case and her decision.

8.   Further I will treat the consent of the appellant  to  that  course  of
    action to be a request  and  an  agreement  that  her  appeal  is  also
    withdrawn contingent upon the withdrawal of the decision.

9.   This is a notice pursuant to  Rule  17(5)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to the parties to  the  decision  that  the
    immigration decision is withdrawn at the respondent's request with  the
    permission of the Upper Tribunal and that the  appeal  based  upon  the
    original decision is now also withdrawn with permission  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.


    This then brings to a conclusion the proceedings in this matter  before
    the Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
