
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15526/2013
     IA/15533/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 21 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                              Aqeel Khan Abbasi
                            Valentina Dinaburska
                         (NO ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    None (and the appellants did not attend the hearing)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   These two appeals were listed for a remaking  hearing.   This  followed
    my decision that there had been an error  of  law  in  a  determination
    dismissing their appeals.  My error of law decision and directions  was
    as follows.

         ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


         1.   The appellants,  who  are  citizens  of  Pakistan  and  Latvia
             respectfully, applied for a registration card, in the case  of
             the first appellant, and a  registration  certificate  in  the
             case of the second appellant.  These applications were refused
             on 27 April 2013.  The applications had been made on the basis
             that the second appellant was an EU citizen exercising  treaty
             rights in the UK, and the first  appellant  was  her  husband,
             following  a  civil  marriage  conducted  in  the   UK.    The
             applications were refused on the grounds that the marriage was
             one of convenience, and that there was  insufficient  evidence
             to establish that the second appellant was  exercising  treaty
             rights.


         2.   The appellants opted for consideration of their appeals on the
             papers, without an oral hearing.  The appeals  were  dismissed
             by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese,  in  a  determination
             promulgated on 18 February 2014.


         3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
             Parkes, on 14 April 2014.  The main ground seeking  permission
             to appeal was that the judge had erred  in  not  applying  the
             correct burden of  proof,  which  was  on  the  respondent  to
             establish that the marriage  was  not  genuine.   In  granting
             permission to appeal it was noted  that  it  was  correct,  as
             asserted in the grounds, that the burden was on the respondent
             in respect of the assertion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
             convenience.  It was not clear what finding the judge had made
             on the point, or on what basis the couple had failed  to  meet
             the requirements for the documents applied for.


         4.   A Rule 24 response from the Secretary  of  State  opposed  the
             appeal,  arguing  that  the   judge   had   directed   himself
             appropriately.  Paragraph 12 of the determination showed  that
             the judge had in fact taken the correct approach to the burden
             of proof.  The judge noted that the evidence provided  by  the
             appellants did not address the issues raised by the  Secretary
             of State arising from the interview.  The judge  was  entitled
             to dismiss the appeal.


         The Hearing


         5.    The  appellants   did   not   attend   the   hearing.    Both
             representatives made submissions.  The key  points  that  were
             considered were whether the correct burden  of  proof  had  in
             fact been applied.  It was accepted  by  Mr  Tarlow  that  the
             judge had not stated the burden of proof explicitly, and  that
             this was a legal error, but it was not a material one  because
             the judge had summarised the interview record,  and  therefore
             had identified the differences in the appellants' answers that
             were relied on in the refusals.  The judge had looked  at  the
             appellants' side at paragraph 12.  Although the  paragraph  12
             reasoning could have been  better,  it  was  adequate  in  the
             circumstances.  Mr Benton, for the appellants, submitted  that
             paragraph 12 was inadequate, in that it  did  not  make  clear
             whether some of the discrepancies relied  on  in  the  refusal
             letter have been accepted  as  being  explained  or  not.   In
             addition the judge had not dealt properly with the explanation
             in the witness  statements  for  the  home  visit,  and  other
             matters.


         Error of Law Decision


         6.   As I indicated at the hearing I have decided  that  the  judge
             did err in law, in a manner that was material to the  outcome.




         7.   The judge's  treatment  of  the  statements  provided  by  the
             appellants would have been adequate if  those  statements  had
             been brief.   As  it  was,  however,  the  statements  in  the
             appellants' bundle were relatively detailed.   They  responded
             at length to the circumstances  of  the  interviews  conducted
             with both appellants, and they also responded at length as  to
             the explanation for the second appellant not being present  on
             the date of the home visit.  There  were  also  some  detailed
             complaints as to the manner in which the visit was  conducted.




         8.   Given the detailed nature  of  the  statements  I  accept  the
             submission made on behalf of the appellants that paragraph  12
             of the determination did not provide  adequate  reasoning  for
             rejecting the explanations put  forward.   Paragraph  12  does
             contain a conclusion, namely that the contents of the  witness
             statements fell short of  what  was  required  by  way  of  an
             explanation, but it is well-established that a  conclusion  or
             finding requires reasoning to be regarded as legally adequate.
              It may be that the judge, in a case of this sort,  would  not
             have been expected to deal at great length with every detailed
             point, but there was a need to engage with the central  thrust
             of the witness statements, and provide some reasoning for  the
             conclusion that the appellants' explanations were  inadequate.




         9.   It appeared to me that this was the central issue, rather than
             the burden of proof point.  Having said that, however, I  note
             that the judge did not identify,  in  his  determination,  the
             nature of the burden of proof.  If the rejection of  the  case
             put forward by the appellants had been adequately reasoned the
             burden of proof point could have been argued either  way.   As
             it is, however, I have decided that there was a material error
             of law  in  relation  to  inadequacy  of  reasoning,  and  the
             decision falls to be set aside for that reason.


         10.  Having heard from both  parties  I  decided  that  the  matter
             should be listed for a remaking hearing before me in the Upper
             Tribunal.  As I indicated at the hearing this appears to me to
             be an appeal where oral evidence is required.  The  appellants
             should attend.  In a case of this sort, where the matter turns
             on credibility, and the assessment  of  contested  allegations
             that there has been a  marriage  of  convenience,  a  negative
             inference is likely  to  be  drawn  from  a  decision  by  the
             appellants not to engage with attending the hearing and giving
             evidence.  I was informed that the appellants were willing and
             able to attend a hearing.


2.   On 7 July 2014 two typed letters were received, from  both  appellants.
    These were dated 2 July 2014.  The  appellants  stated,  amongst  other
    things, that they could no longer afford legal representation  for  the
    remaking hearing, having paid to be represented at  the  error  of  law
    hearing.  The  letters  are  silent  on  whether  the  appellants  were
    intending to attend their hearing, even if unrepresented.  The  letters
    both close with a request that the judge  should  consider  their  case
    carefully.

3.   A telephone call was made to the former representatives  (Farani  Javid
    Taylor Solicitors LLP).   They  confirmed  that  they  were  no  longer
    representing the appellants.  They did not  have  any  further  contact
    telephone numbers.  The only number for the appellants on the file  was
    a mobile number for the second appellant.  A  call  was  made  to  this
    number, which went to the answering service.  A message was left  about
    an hour before the hearing, but there was no response.

4.   Having considered the situation, and heard from Mr Bramble,  I  decided
    to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellants.   It  was
    clear, first of all, that the appellants were  aware  of  the  hearing,
    because they referred to it in their letters.  They had been  given  an
    opportunity to attend, and had not done  so.   I  have  considered  the
    possibility that they might have been under the false  impression  that
    it was not open to them to attend if not legally  represented,  but  it
    appears to me to be very likely that they would have  been  advised  by
    their representatives that, even if no longer  represented,  they  were
    nevertheless able, and indeed expected,  to  attend  the  hearing.   If
    there had been any doubt on this point it could not have remained given
    the clear indication that I made at the error of law  hearing,  and  in
    the error of law decision.  At paragraph 10 above  I  noted  that  oral
    evidence would be required; that the appellants should attend, and that
    a negative inference was likely to be drawn if they did not do  so.   I
    was also informed by their then representative that they  were  willing
    and able to attend the hearing.

5.   The letters from the appellants  explain  the  circumstances  in  which
    they were no longer represented, but do  not  say  anything  about  any
    possible reason for the appellants being unable to attend  the  hearing
    themselves.  There is nothing in the letters  that  could  be  said  to
    amount to an adjournment request.

6.   Having considered all of these matters I decided to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of the appellants.  I was  satisfied  that  they
    had been notified of the hearing, and I considered that it was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed (Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

7.   Mr Bramble, for the respondent, made  submissions  as  follows.   There
    were two issues.  The  first  was  whether  the  second  appellant  had
    established that she was working in the UK,  and  therefore  exercising
    treaty rights.  The second  was  the  sham  marriage  allegation.   The
    couple had not attended the First-tier hearing, and  neither  had  they
    attended the error of law hearing.  Mr Bramble relied on  the  refusals
    of 27 April 2013.  There were difficulties with the documents  provided
    to show  that  the  second  appellant  was  working.   The  address  on
    financial documents was the same as that  provided  for  First  Contact
    Property Services.  There were invoices for hotel  cleaning  work,  but
    there was no correlation with bank statements.   The  second  appellant
    had said at interview that she had been paid in  cash.   She  had  also
    said that she had only been at  a  particular  address  for  one  month
    (Plasket Road) but invoices featuring that address submitted  with  the
    application covered a significantly longer period.   There  were  other
    invoices at different addresses put forward covering the  same  period.
    There was a discrepancy between the second appellant being described as
    a student on the marriage certificate (20 March 2012)  when,  according
    to other evidence submitted, she was at that time said  to  be  working
    for hotels as a cleaner.  There was no evidence to  show  that  tax  or
    national insurance contributions had actually been paid, even if  there
    was evidence to show registration.  The letter from City View Hotel was
    the only document in support of her claim to have been working.

8.   In relation to the second issue, the sham marriage allegation,  it  was
    accepted that  the  burden  was  on  the  respondent.   This  had  been
    satisfied by the detailed interviews with the two appellants,  and  the
    home visit.  It was also correct to draw a negative inference from  the
    failure of the appellants to attend the hearing  today.   The  lack  of
    proper evidence to establish that the second appellant was working  was
    also significant in relation to the marriage point.

Decision and Reasons

9.   In remaking the decision I have decided to dismiss the appeals.

10.  The appellants provided reasonably detailed statements in  response  to
    the allegations based on the interviews and home visit.  It appeared to
    me that these were capable of rebutting the allegations.  In particular
    I noted the observation  by  an  Immigration  Officer  that  the  first
    appellant's accommodation had the appearance of a place where a  female
    partner was cohabiting with the first appellant.   The  nature  of  the
    comment from the Immigration Officer suggested that this was  taken  to
    amount to a pretence, but it is of note that it was not said that there
    was no sign of the seoncd appellant's presence  at  the  address.   The
    appellants both provided an explanation, in their statements,  for  the
    absence of the second appellant on the morning of the visit.  This  was
    that she had attended a party,  and  had  stayed  overnight,  with  the
    agreement of the first appellant.  There was  then  a  comment  in  the
    first appellant's statement that he had received a later telephone call
    from an Immigration Officer.  The second appellant had been at home  on
    that occasion, but when the first appellant had offered to put her  on,
    the Immigration Officer had rung off.  In addition there were a  number
    of complaints which suggested that the Immigration Officers involved in
    the investigation had formed a negative impression from the start,  and
    were unwilling to listen to explanations.  The witness statements  also
    put forward detailed accounts of how the couple met, through the second
    appellant applying for work at a hotel where the  first  appellant  was
    working, and of how they started their relationship,  and  came  to  be
    married.

11.  The various points made in the witness statements  had  the  potential,
    in my view, to rebut the allegations about the home visit.  I also took
    into account, in reaching the error of law decision, that it  may  have
    been the case that the appellants were unable to afford  representation
    at the initial hearing, and that it may have been for that reason  that
    they did not attend.

12.  In Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]
    UKUT 00038 (IAC) it was established that there  is  no  burden  at  the
    outset of an application on a claimant to demonstrate that  a  marriage
    to an EEA national was not one of convenience.  In this case,  however,
    the respondent has put  forward  significant  reasons  for  making  the
    allegation, following investigations, which included interviews of  the
    two parties, and a home visit.  In IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia
    [2008] UKAIT 31 it was held that there was an evidential  burden  on  a
    claimant to address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion  that  the
    marriage had been entered into for the predominant purpose of  securing
    residence rights.

13.  This appears to me, in essence, to be a situation  where  evidence  has
    been put forward to justify a reasonable suspicion that this was a sham
    marriage.  I nevertheless regarded the evidence  to  be  of  a  nature,
    given that the point was disputed, as  to  be  potentially  rebuttable.
    There will be  cases  where  evidence  appears  to  point  towards  the
    conclusion that a marriage is not genuine, but  on  closer  examination
    the suspicions turn out not to be justified.  Having decided that there
    had been an error of law in the earlier  determination  dismissing  the
    appeals  the  remaking  hearing  represented  an  opportunity  for  the
    appellants, as a couple, to attend a hearing for the  first  time,  and
    give evidence, which could have been tested  in  cross-examination.   I
    made clear at the error of law hearing, and in writing in my  error  of
    law decision, that a failure to take up this opportunity would lead  to
    a negative inference.

14.  For the same reasons set out above for deciding  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the appellants' absence I do make such a negative inference.
     The various points raised in the  witness  statements,  including  the
    explanations offered in the second appellant's  witness  statement  for
    incorrect answers given at interview, had the potential  to  rebut  the
    allegations.  In themselves, however, even engaging in detail with  all
    of the points made in the witness statements, it appears to me that the
    evidence presented by  the  appellants,  not  backed  up  by  any  oral
    evidence, is not sufficient to rebut  the  sham  marriage  allegations,
    even taking careful note of the  fact  that  the  burden  of  proof  in
    relation to such an allegation is on the respondent.

15.  There was room for the giving of  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  to  the
    appellants in relation to not attending the  initial  hearing  to  give
    oral evidence, in view of the  explanation  offered  and  the  detailed
    statements provided.  There was also room to give the  benefit  of  the
    doubt to the appellants not attending the error of law hearing, in that
    appellants will often be advised that these  are  hearings  where  they
    will not  be  giving  evidence,  and  I  was  also  informed  that  the
    appellants were both able and willing to  give  evidence  if  required.
    Following the error of law hearing, however, and  my  comments  at  the
    hearing and in the written decision there remains no room for extending
    the benefit of the doubt.  It appears to me that  the  appellants  must
    have understood that they were required to attend  if  they  wanted  to
    rebut the allegations that had been made.

16.  I therefore find that the matters referred to in the  refusal  letters,
    relating to the answers given at interview, and relating  to  the  home
    visit, are sufficient to justify the sham marriage allegation, and that
    the respondent has satisfied the burden of proof on her, and has shown,
    on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  marriage  between  the
    appellants is one of convenience.  The witness statements  provided  by
    the appellants are insufficient  to  rebut  the  allegations,  and  the
    appellants have failed to take up an opportunity extended  to  them  to
    give oral evidence, that might  have  been  capable  of  rebutting  the
    allegations made.

17.  In addition I find that the  various  discrepancies  raised  about  the
    second  appellant's  financial  documents  have  not  been   adequately
    addressed in the witness statements.  The appellants have therefore not
    provided sufficient evidence to establish, on balance, that the  second
    appellant has been working in the UK,  and  is  therefore  a  qualified
    person.

18.  I therefore remake the decisions in these appeals  by  dismissing  both
    appeals under the 2006 Regulations, on the  basis  that  the  decisions
    taken in respect of both  appellants  were  in  accordance  with  those
    Regulations.

19.  It was not  suggested  at  any  stage  that  there  was  any  need  for
    anonymity in  these  appeals,  and  I  make  no  such  orders.   Having
    dismissed the appeals there can be no fee awards.

Decision

20.  The decision dismissing the appeals is  set  aside,  an  error  of  law
    having been found, for  the  reasons  given  above.   On  remaking  the
    decisions in the appeals, however, the outcome remains the same.

21.  The appeals under the 2006 Regulations are dismissed.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having dismissed the appeals there can be no fee awards in these appeals.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

