

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15364/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 28 October 2014                            |On 30 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               BORHAN HOSSAINI
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter,   instructed by McGill & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He appeals against a determination
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch,  dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of an application  made  under  cover  of  a  letter  from  his
    solicitors dated 7 February 2014, seeking "... leave  to  remain  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Immigration  Rules,  with  particular
    reference to private life and length of residence in the UK".

 2. Ground 1  of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  based  on  the
    impracticality of returns to Iran.  This point does not appear to  have
    been part of the case  put  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Winter
    correctly recognised that it is unstateable anyway, and did not  pursue
    it.  Ground 3 is that the judge "failed to give appropriate  weight  to
    the quality of the appellant's friendships in the UK".  This is only an
    expression of disagreement, not a proposition of legal error,  and  was
    also taken no further.

 3. Ground 2 is that the credibility of the appellant's assertion  that  he
    is an atheist went unchallenged; his ability to live as an apostate and
    an atheist goes to the core of his moral and  psychological  integrity,
    and private life; Iran is a theocracy which requires  its  citizens  to
    abide by Islamic law; the judge failed to consider the gravity  of  the
    interference; the consideration of private life  under  the  rules  was
    limited to whether he had ties to his country of origin,  and  did  not
    encompass assessment of whether his moral and  psychological  integrity
    would be interfered with; this was a ground for  consideration  outwith
    the rules, and an error of law.

 4. On 11 July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  granted  permission,
    although observing that the argument did not appear a strong one -  the
    appellant had not succeeded in his asylum claim, and it would seem  odd
    if he could succeed on Article 8 on the basis of lack of belief when he
    was not able to succeed on asylum or Article 3.

 5. Mr Winter said that despite  the  lukewarm  terms  of  the  grant,  the
    argument was a strong one.  While this matter might have been put under
    the Refugee Convention and Article 3, it was also capable of being part
    of a proportionality assessment.  The previous failed asylum  case  had
    been on an entirely different basis.  The appellant's evidence that  he
    is an atheist had been overlooked.  In the Iranian context  it  was  an
    obviously weighty matter.  The  judge  had  noted  that  no  background
    information was produced (paragraph 38) but the nature of  the  Iranian
    regime was well known to  judges  in  this  jurisdiction.    Mr  Winter
    pointed out  that  the  appellant  spoke  of  danger  to  atheists  and
    apostates at paragraphs 5 and 12 of his witness statement in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  He submitted that the  judge  should  have  appreciated
    that there might have been  inherent  danger  for  example  from  being
    noticed not to attend the mosque, or not to engage in prayer.

 6. The appellant's solicitors have now tendered evidence under cover of  a
    letter of 17 October 2014.  Mr Winter did not say that it was  relevant
    to whether there  had  been  error  of  law,  but  that  it  should  be
    considered through a remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  A finding  that
    the appellant is an atheist should be preserved.  Even in  the  absence
    of background evidence a weighty  factor  had  been  overlooked,  which
    undermined the determination.

 7. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the case as now argued, which amounted to  a
    further Refugee Convention claim, had not been put  in  any  meaningful
    way to the First-tier Tribunal.  This was an  attempt  to  put  a  case
    which could and should  have  been  made  there.   It  was  up  to  the
    appellant to put in evidence, not for  the  judge  to  go  looking  for
    evidence for him, or to speculate on how he might  behave,  or  on  any
    adverse consequences which might follow.  Having expressly renounced  a
    case under the Refugee Convention or Article 3,  the  outcome  was  the
    only one which could have been expected.  The case had been run on  the
    basis of private life enjoyed in the UK, with at best  a  hint  at  the
    issue of atheism.  He had put his case and had a proper answer  to  it.



 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. Risk to the appellant as an atheist was  not  invoked  in  any  of  the
    appellant's previous proceedings, which would have been the appropriate
    stage.  It was not part of the application to the respondent leading to
    this appeal (see paragraph 1 above).  It was not part of the grounds of
    appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  were  entirely  vague  and
    general, and no application was made to amend those grounds.

10. The judge said at paragraphs 37 -38:

      With regard to whether or not the appellant may  consider  himself  to
           be at risk on return ... there has been no real evidence ... and
           no relevant objective evidence has  been  lodged.   Mr  Vassilou
           [the appellant's solicitor] stated that  the  appellant  is  not
           relying on an asylum claim but  his  lack  of  religious  belief
           would interfere with private life ... there  has  not  been  any
           reliance on ... real risk ... and no evidence has been led  from
           the appellant, objective reports lodged, or  a  submission  made
           ... in this respect.

11. I do not think the judge had to say any more.  The substantive case was
    on the loss of the appellant's private life in the UK (on which he  led
    15 witnesses) not on the  adverse  consequences  in  Iran  of  lack  of
    belief.  The appellant said he had no Refugee Convention or  Article  3
    case for her to  decide.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  accept  that,
    particularly when she knew he had already run an asylum appeal.

12. The issue as now formulated is an afterthought.  It seeks to expand  an
    aside  into  the  centrepiece.   It  is  illogical,  because   if   the
    consequences are as now alleged, the case should have been put in terms
    of the Refugee Convention not proportionality under Article 8.

13. A Judge may sometimes be under a duty to recognise an  obvious  Refugee
    Convention point even if not put, but in the foregoing context  and  in
    absence of any  relevant  background  evidence,  the  issue  needed  no
    further treatment.

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law,  and  that  decision  shall
    stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.





            29 October 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




