
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15929/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             KWAME KYEI-GYIMIAH
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr J Dhanji, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  however  for
         convenience I shall refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant is a national of Ghana born on 12 June 1980. His wife
         and their two children are his dependants. Both  he  and  his  wife
         entered the UK as visitors and overstayed. A human rights claim was
         made after their arrest for immigration offences.

      3. The appeal against the refusal of the article 8 claim was heard  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss on 4 May 2016 at Birmingham and in a
         determination promulgated on 14 June 2016, the appeal was  allowed.
         Regrettably, the judge does  not  distinguish  between  the  appeal
         under the rules and on article 8 grounds in his heading "notice  of
         decision",  but  it  would  appear  from  paragraph   13   of   his
         determination that he meant to allow it on both limbs.

      4. The judge made adverse  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the
         appellant, whose evidence he did not believe; however, having found
         that the eldest child had been in the UK for seven  years  and  was
         doing well at  school,  he  considered  that  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE(iv) and free standing article 8 jurisprudence  had
         been met.

      5. The respondent obtained permission to appeal on the basis that  the
         judge  had  misapplied  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and  had  failed  to
         adequately reason his article 8 findings and conclusions.

      6. At the hearing before me on 17 November  2016,  Mr  Dhanji  readily
         conceded that Judge Juss had made material errors of law;  notably,
         that he had failed entirely to engage  with  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the UK.  He  asked
         that the matter be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
         hearing afresh as full findings would need to be  made.  Mr  Melvin
         agreed to that course of action.

    Findings and conclusions

      7. It is plain from the determination that Judge Juss's findings  fall
         far short of what was required in a case such as this. Not only did
         he misapply paragraph 276ADE(iv) by disregarding the  date  of  the
         application as the relevant period in time for assessment,  but  he
         also failed entirely to have regard to the test of  reasonableness.
         Thus, he erred in concluding that, having lived here for over seven
         years, the eldest child was a qualifying child for the purposes  of
         paragraph 276ADE(iv) when, at the  date  of  the  application,  the
         child had only been here for six years. He also failed  to  proceed
         to consider whether it would have been  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK and there was no consideration of the  unduly
         harsh test. The judge also failed to have  any  regard  to  section
         117B when reaching his conclusions.

      8. The judge made errors of law and  the  determination  is  therefore
         unsustainable and is set aside in its entirety except as  a  record
         of proceedings.




    Decision

      9. The determination contains errors of law such that the decision  is
         set aside. It is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         hearing and for the decision to be re-made.

     10. There has been no request for an anonymity order and I therefore do
         not make one.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 17 November 2016


