
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15092/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                    MRS MARIA CELIA DE ALMEIDA MARCELINO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     None
For the respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 27 February  2015,  in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. For ease of  reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as appellant  and  respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision, although  it  is  the  Secretary  of
    State who pursues this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I see no
    need for one now.

Background

 4. The Appellant is Brazilian. She is the mother of an EEA national. On  4
    March 2014 she applied for a residence card as confirmation of a  right
    of residence in the UK.  That application was refused by the respondent
    on 12 March  2014  because  the  appellant  had  provided  insufficient
    evidence to demonstrate she was dependent on the EEA national  and  had
    been so since her arrival in the UK in January  2012.  The  application
    was refused by reference to regulation 7(1)(c)  in  that  she  had  not
    shown she was  a  dependent  direct  relative  in  the  EEA  national's
    ascending line.

 5. The FTTJ allowed the appeal on the grounds that (as per  paragraph  25)
    "the Appellant comes within the relevant immigration  law,  as  amended
    and merits the protections of ECHR" [sic].

The Hearing

 6. As neither the appellant nor her representative were in attendance  for
    the hearing I asked the court clerk to telephone the solicitors on  the
    record, Nabas Legal LLP. He did so and reported to  me  that  they  had
    told him they were no longer instructed by the appellant; a letter  had
    been sent by the solicitors to the tribunal to  that  effect.  However,
    this is not on the tribunal file.

 7. I was satisfied that the notice of hearing had been properly served  on
    the appellant's solicitors and on the appellant herself (albeit care of
    her solicitors).  The notice of hearing makes it clear that if a  party
    or his representative do not attend the hearing on the  due  date,  the
    appeal may be heard in the absence  of  that  party.   There  being  no
    application for an adjournment, I decided that it was in the  interests
    of justice for the matter to proceed. I heard  the  submissions  of  Mr
    Avery.

Submissions

 8. I referred Mr Avery to  Amirteymour  and  others  (EEA  appeals;  human
    rights)[2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) and he indicated that the respondent  no
    longer pursued her  appeal  on  the  grounds  of  a  flawed  Article  8
    analysis. However, he submitted that the  findings  of  the  FTTJ  were
    fundamentally flawed in that it was not clear  from  the  decision  and
    reasons which rule or regulation  had  been  applied  by  the  FTTJ  in
    reaching his decision.  The FTTJ  had  not  set  out  the  reasons  for
    refusal or even cited Regulation 7 in the decision.



Error of Law Discussion

 9. It is wholly unclear from the FTTJ's decision what,  if  any,  law  has
    been applied in reaching his decision. The relevant law is Regulation 7
    of the EEA Regulations and yet there is no reference  to  this  in  the
    decision and reasons.  Furthermore, whilst  parts  of  the  appellant's
    evidence are cited in the decision, there is no reference to the  terms
    of Regulation 7 or the  need  for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  her
    dependence on the EEA national.  Even  the  submissions  made  for  the
    appellant by her representative, as recorded by the FTTJ, do  not  deal
    specifically with this issue.

10. The FTTJ states at paragraph 14 as follows:

         "In my deliberations I must indicate that the  Appellant  has  been
         living with her daughter for a considerable  time  and,  therefore,
         for accommodation she will not be a burden on public funds  if  her
         appeal is allowed."

    It is not clear whether the FTTJ is identifying in this  sentence  what
    he must find or whether this is a finding in itself.   Either  way,  it
    makes no reference to the requirement for dependence,  as  set  out  in
    regulation 7.

11. The FTTJ notes parts of the appellant's evidence at  paragraph  15  and
    states at paragraph 16  that  that  evidence  is  corroborated  by  the
    statements of her Portuguese daughter and their  friend.   However,  at
    paragraph 15 it is stated that the appellant's  evidence  is  that  her
    daughter has been living in the UK since 11 March 2011  and,  prior  to
    that, with her daughter  in  Portugal.  According  to  the  appellant's
    application form, she only entered the UK in January 2012.  Thus  there
    is, on the face of  the  evidence,  an  inconsistency  as  regards  the
    appellant's and her daughter's living arrangements and this goes to the
    issue of dependency, as raised by the respondent.  This discrepancy  is
    not  addressed  in  the  decision-making  process.  Nor  has  the  FTTJ
    addressed the concerns of the respondent as to the insufficiency of the
    documentary evidence to demonstrate that the appellant is dependent  on
    her daughter, the EEA national.

12. I also note that the appeal was allowed by the FTTJ by reference to the
    Immigration Rules and to the European Convention on Human Rights. There
    is no reference to the appeal being allowed under the EEA  regulations.
    Nor indeed is there any reference  to  regulation  7  anywhere  in  the
    decision and reasons.  Given this essential element  of  the  decision-
    making process is missing,  the  findings  are  not  sustainable.   The
    respondent is entitled to know  the  basis  on  which  the  appeal  was
    allowed and this is not clear from the decision. The decision-making is
    fundamentally flawed. It contains material errors of law  and  must  be
    set aside.

13. Mr Avery submitted that the appropriate course was for the matter to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be taken by
    reference to regulation 7 and the relevant jurisprudence  and  I  agree
    this is appropriate, given the fact the appellant did not appear before
    me and no longer has legal representation.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. The decision is set aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    apart from Judge Andrew Davies.


Signed: A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date 9 September 2015



Fee Award

The FTTJ made a fee award and I set this aside also.


Signed: A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date 9 September 2015




                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 4.00 p.m. on 11 December 2015.

 2. The appeal is listed at Hatton Cross with a time estimate of two  hours
    to be heard at 10.00 a.m. on 11 January 2016.

 3. A Portuguese interpreter is required.


Signed: A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date 9 September 2015
