
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15062/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2015                   |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                             KHANDAKAR SHOEB ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Prasoody, Counsel, instructed by M-R
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  E  Walker
    ("the judge") in a  decision  promulgated  on  13  October  2014.   The
    appellant relied upon Article 8, in relation to private life  ties  and
    claimed that the requirements of the rules,  regarding  fourteen  years
    residence here, were met.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom with a visit visa in 1999.  He
    applied  under  the  "overstayer  regularisation   scheme"   in   2000,
    unsuccessfully.   Representations  were  made  on  his  behalf  by  his
    representatives between 2011 and 2013.  He was served with form  IS151A
    on 5 April 2013, which "stopped the clock" at  a  time  when  he  could
    show, at most, that he had been in  the  United  Kingdom  for  thirteen
    years and ten months.

3.   The judge found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    the rules in their post-9 July 2012 form, under paragraph  276ADE.   He
    could not meet the requirements of the pre-9 July  2012  rules  either.
    He heard submissions regarding the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402.  The judge took into account delay by the
    respondent in dealing with the appellant's case and the friendships  he
    had  established  here  since  his  arrival.   He  made  an  Article  8
    assessment, concluding  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  be
    disproportionate or amount to  an  unjustified  interference  with  his
    private life.  The appellant could re-establish himself  in  Bangladesh
    and maintain his friendships from abroad.  The judge took into  account
    the presence in Bangladesh of the appellant's parents and the potential
    use there of the work experience gained here.  He concluded that  there
    would be no significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  into
    Bangladesh.

4.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  in  typed
    grounds that the judge erred in relation to Edgehill and that he  ought
    to have applied the immigration rules "in line with facts at  the  time
    of the  hearing".   If  he  had  done  so,  the  appellant  would  have
    "satisfied this prerequisite of fourteen years of residence in the UK".
     It was also contended briefly in handwritten grounds  that  the  judge
    failed to properly assess the Article 8 case.

5.   In a short Rule 24 response, it  was  submitted  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's behalf that the judge made no error and that the  grounds  were
    misconceived.  Service of form  IS151A  in  April  2013  prevented  the
    appellant from meeting the requirements of paragraph 276B of the  rules
    in June that year.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Miss Prasoody said that  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    appellant could show thirteen years and ten months'  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge erred in  failing  to  apply  a  "near-miss"
    principle.  He ought to have  taken  this  principle  into  account  in
    balancing the competing interests.  Reliance was placed on  a  decision
    from the Court of Appeal in 2010: MM and SA  (Pakistan).   The  judge's
    conclusion was unfair.  When both sides were evenly balanced, the near-
    miss principle gave more weight to the appellant's case and  the  judge
    should have exercised discretion in his favour  as  the  appellant  was
    only short of fourteen years by a period of two months.

7.   Miss Isherwood said that there  was  no  material  error  and,  as  the
    author  of  the  Rule  24  response   suggested,   the   grounds   were
    misconceived.  IS151A stopped the clock. The judge  took  into  account
    the appellant's circumstances.  There was no family life claim and  the
    appellant relied on private life ties.   Here,  the  judge  found  only
    general friendships and no special ties. He was  entitled  to  conclude
    that removal was proportionate. The Article 8 findings were open to the
    judge on the new or the old rules.  The judge was also entitled to find
    that there were no significant obstacles to the appellant's integration
    in Bangladesh.

8.   Miss Prasoody said that it was accepted that there was no  family  life
    but the appellant had formed close friendships.  Some  of  his  friends
    appeared before the judge, and they were in attendance before the Upper
    Tribunal.  The judge erred in finding  what  he  described  as  general
    friendships.  The appellant had been present here for almost more  than
    fourteen years and was far away from his parents.  He  had  close  ties
    here and it could not be said that he had  close  ties  to  Bangladesh.
    There were real obstacles to his return and to re-establishing  himself
    there.

Decision on Error of Law

9.   Dealing first with the typed grounds in support of the application  for
    permission to appeal, I agree with the author of the Rule  24  response
    and with Miss Isherwood that they are  misconceived.    The  clock  was
    stopped by service of form IS151A in April 2013.  The judge did not err
    by failing to assess the position as at the date  of  hearing,  on  the
    basis that the appellant had  resided  here  for  fourteen  years.   He
    correctly found that the appellant could not show that the requirements
    of the rules were met in their pre or post-9 July 2012 form.  As  noted
    earlier, the judge recorded submissions  from  the  representatives  on
    Edgehill and took that judgment into account.  Having  found  that  the
    requirements of the rules were not met, he went on to make an Article 8
    assessment, taking into account  the  evidence  before  him.    He  was
    entitled to find that only general  friendships  had  been  established
    here by the appellant.  His assessment was carefully made and  cogently
    reasoned.  He was also  entitled  to  find  that  there  were  no  real
    obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  Bangladesh  on  return.
    His parents were still alive and might assist in this context  and  the
    appellant might make use of work experience gained here.

10.  So far as Miss Praisoody's oral submissions  are  concerned,  there  is
    simply no room for a "near-miss" principle, in the light of  Patel  and
    Others [2013] UKSC 27.  As was made clear in that case, where Article 8
    is relied upon, the proper focus  is  on  the  ties  established  by  a
    claimant.  The judge maintained  that  focus,  carefully  weighing  the
    evidence before him.  There is nothing  in  the  decision  and  reasons
    suggesting any unfairness and there was no room for the judge  properly
    to exercise any discretion in the appellant's favour.

11.  Returning to the brief handwritten grounds, the judge did  not  err  in
    his Article 8 assessment.  Again, he made findings which were  open  to
    him and carefully weighed the competing interests.  He was entitled  to
    conclude that the balance fell to be struck in the Secretary of State's
    favour.    There was little of  real  substance  weighing  against  the
    respondent's case that removal is a proportionate response and entirely
    lawful.

12.  As no material error of law has been shown, the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

Decision

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.



Signed        Date: 10 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity  and  I  make  no  direction  or
order on this occasion.



Signed        Date 10 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

