
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15274/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 29 May 2015               |
|On 11 May 2015                                |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           CHOWDHURY ADNAN SHAHPUR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hosain, Legal Representative, E1 Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cresswell which was promulgated on 28 October
    2013 following a hearing before him at Newport  Columbus  House  on  24
    October 2013.  This is the second time that this appeal has been before
    the Upper Tribunal in circumstances  which  I  will  briefly  summarise
    below. For ease of convenience I shall  throughout  this  determination
    refer to  Mr Shahpur who was the original appellant as  "the  claimant"
    and to the Secretary of State who was the original respondent  as  "the
    Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  25  February
    1984 and he applied to vary his leave  to  remain  as  a  student.   In
    support of this application he submitted an academic  transcript  dated
    30 October 2012 bearing the letterhead of Walthamstow Business College.
      The application was refused by the respondent on 25  April  2013  and
    the  sole  reason  given  within  the  refusal  letter  was  that  that
    transcript was a false  document.   Thus  the  application  had  to  be
    refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.   The  reason
    why the Secretary of State considered that the transcript was  a  false
    document was because Walthamstow Business College was  run,  or  so  it
    appeared from its letterhead, by  a  limited  company  which  had  been
    dissolved on 28 February 2012  and  so  it  was  said  that  a  genuine
    transcript could not have been issued on 30 October 2012 as claimed  by
    the claimant within his application.

 3. The claimant appealed against this  decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    document which he relied on had been properly issued  or  at  the  very
    least he was not aware that if it was not genuine this  was  the  case.
    The claimant's case essentially was that whatever might have  been  the
    position with regard to the limited company which  was  stated  on  the
    letterhead to be the proprietor of the college, the  college  continued
    to operate after the time when the company was dissolved.   His  appeal
    as already noted was heard before Judge Cresswell  sitting  at  Newport
    Columbus House on 24 October 2013 and in  a  determination  promulgated
    four days later the judge allowed his appeal.

 4. The basis on which the judge allowed the appeal was that the  Secretary
    of State had not satisfied the burden of proof which was on her to show
    that the college had ceased to exist as an entty form the date when the
    limited company was dissolved.  The relevant  finding  of  fact  is  at
    paragraph 15(iii) of the judge's determination and is as follows:

         "I must be satisfied in respect of Part  9  of  the  Rules  on  the
         balance of probabilities that the respondent  has  established  the
         basis of refusal before the burden shifts to the appellant [that is
         the claimant].  I am not  so  satisfied.  Although  the  respondent
         [that is  the  Secretary  of  State]  has  shown  that  Walthamstow
         Business College Limited was dissolved on 289  February  2012,  she
         has not shown that Walthamstow Business College ceased to exists as
         an entity from that date.  A limited company  is  a  legal  entity;
         there was no evidence before me to show that  the  limited  company
         was the sole entity 'running' the college, or that it was essential
         to the running of the college."

 5. The judge considered that it would have been open to the  Secretary  of
    State to adduce evidence to the effect that the college was not in fact
    running at the relevant time, but chose not  to  do  so  and  that  the
    Secretary of State "appears to have confused the limited  company  with
    the college because a letter from the [Secretary of State]  of  28  May
    2013 refers to the college being dissolved, when only limited companies
    can be dissolved" (at para 15(iv) of the determination).

 6. This might well have been a generous decision on the part of the First-
    tier Tribunal and certainly when this appeal initially came before  the
    Upper Tribunal  (a  differently  constituted  Tribunal)  permission  to
    appeal having been granted, the Upper Tribunal then considered that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had not given appropriate weight to the  fact
    that the limited company said to have been running the college had been
    dissolved.   The  Upper  Tribunal  on  that  occasion  set  aside   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal as containing an error of  law
    and substituted its own  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal.
    Subsequently, however, the claimant appealed against  the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal in an
    agreed statement of facts after Sir Stephen Sedley had given permission
    to appeal concluded that the Upper Tribunal had itself made an error of
    law in finding an error of law on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal.



 7. At paragraph 7 of the Statement of Reasons which  was  the  basis  upon
    which the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal it was stated as follows:

         "7.  The respondent agrees with the appellant that it  is  arguable
             that there was a material error of law in the determination of
             [the Upper Tribunal Judge]. Consequently, it is expedient, and
             the parties agree, that the matter should be remitted  to  the
             Upper Tribunal (the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  for  a
             fresh hearing."

 8. It is worth setting out the  basis  upon  which  permission  to  appeal
    against the first Upper Tribunal decision  was  granted.   The  reasons
    given by Sir Stephen Sedley were as follows.:

    "

          1. The FTT's determination was straightforward.  In short, the IJ
             found that the dissolution of the company associated with  the
             college (there seems to have been no evidence of the  specific
             nature of the association) did not necessarily mean  that  the
             college could not have continued to function. If, as seems  to
             me strongly arguable, there was no error of law in  this,  the
             UT had no power to substitute its own views.

          2. The UT's  determination, by contrast, depends on a  convoluted
             shifting of the burden of proof followed by  a  finding  (para
             27)  which assumes the very  thing  that  had  to  be  proved,
             namely that the college could not  have  functioned  once  the
             company had been  dissolved. From this an inference  of  fraud
             (para 28) is drawn.

          3. Although therefore it is arguable that the UT's  determination
             is itself flawed, the real point is that they had no power  to
             embark upon it because the FTT's decision was legally tenable.
              Is this a second appeal point?  The failure  of  colleges  at
             which foreign nationals are studying is a  recurrent  problem,
             and the question at what point, and  on  what  evidence,  such
             failures may implicate the student in fraud  seems  to  me  an
             important point both of principle and of practice. ..."

 9. In other words, the point troubling Sir Stephen Sedley was not  whether
    or not the Upper Tribunal had been entitled to overturn the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision (which clearly he considered should not  have  been
    overturned) but whether or not the  second  appeal  criteria  had  been
    satisfied.

10. In light both of Sir Stephen Sedley's reasons, and also of the decision
    of the Court of Appeal, made on the basis of the Statement  of  Reasons
    which had been agreed between both parties, quite properly Mr Tufan  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State did not seek to  persuade  me  that  I
    could properly now  again  overturn  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although, as I have already  stated,  I  consider  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision was arguably generous to this  claimant,
    nonetheless in light of the guidance already given in this case by  the
    Court of Appeal I am unable to find that there was any  material  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision in this case.  As Mr Tufan
    properly concedes, it is not for him to rewrite the reasons  given  for
    refusing the application.  The only reason given in the refusal  letter
    for refusing the application was that because  the  company  supposedly
    running the college  had  been  dissolved,  it  must  follow  that  the
    transcript was not a genuine document, but Judge Creswell in the First-
    tier Tribunal rejected this argument for reasons  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal has considered were open to him.  There is accordingly no proper
    basis upon which that decision can be overturned.  It follows that  the
    Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be dismissed and I so find.

Decision

11. There being no material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  that  decision  is
    dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal, is affirmed.




Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 26 May 2015
