
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/15842/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 September 2015                 |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         DR MAYOWA ADEWALE OSUNNEYE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr V Ikie, solicitor, Ikie Solicitors LLP
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Monaghan (hereinafter referred to as the FTTJ).

      2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Lambert on 23 April 2015.

      3. The respondent last entered the United Kingdom on 28 December  2013
         with leave to enter as a family visitor. He applied for a residence
         card on 27 January 2014, on the  basis  that  he  was  an  extended
         family member  of  his  brother,  Dr  Adedoyin  Babatunde  Osunneye
         (hereinafter referred to as the sponsor), who is an Irish national.
         That application was refused on 17 March  2014  with  reference  to
         regulation  8(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006.  The  accompanying  reasons  for  refusal  letter
         informed the respondent that he had not provided  any  evidence  of
         his dependency on his sponsor  either  in  Nigeria  or  the  United
         Kingdom or that he was a  member  of  the  sponsor's  household  in
         either country.

      4. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the
         respondent and sponsor gave evidence. The FTTJ  accepted  that  the
         respondent had been dependent on the sponsor both before and  after
         the latter became an EEA national.  The  FTTJ  allowed  the  appeal
         "under the EEA Rules."

      5. The grounds seeking permission took issue with the  fact  that  the
         FTTJ accepted  prior  dependency  notwithstanding  the  paucity  of
         documentary evidence to that effect. Reference was also made to the
         respondent's earnings in Nigeria and whether he  was  dependent  on
         the profit from goods sent by the sponsor  in  order  to  meet  his
         essential outgoings. It was also stressed that Regulation 17(4)  of
         the 2006 Regulations provided a  discretion  to  the  Secretary  of
         State to issue a residence card to an extended  family  member  and
         that discretion had yet to be exercised as it  was  not  considered
         the appellant met the requirements of regulation 8.  Therefore,  it
         was argued, that the FTTJ ought to have allowed the appeal  on  the
         basis that the Secretary of State's decision was not in  accordance
         with the law.  Reference was  made  to  the  decision  in  FD  (EEA
         discretion - basis of appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.

      6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was not  open
         to the FTTJ to allow the appeal outright under the Regulations.

      7. When this matter came before me, Mr  Clarke  informed  me  that  he
         wished to make submissions on the issue of the  respondent's  prior
         dependency. After hearing  submissions  on  this  point  from  both
         representatives, I decided that permission had not been granted  on
         this issue and I declined to grant permission for these  points  to
         be argued for the following reasons.

      8. The Secretary of State's grounds  of  application  amounted  to  12
         paragraphs, 9 of which were devoted to the  issue  of  whether  the
         FTTJ had provided inadequate reasoning for her conclusion that  the
         respondent was previously dependent  upon  the  EEA  sponsor.  FTTJ
         Lambert's grant of permission states as follows; "The issue was the
         Appellant's dependence on the sponsor before  arrival  in  the  UK.
         While the first 9 paragraphs of the grounds  appear  in  effect  to
         amount to no more than disagreement with the  judge's  findings  on
         the evidence, paragraph 10 is clearly arguable. It was not open  to
         the judge having regard to the provisions of  Regulation  17(4)  to
         allow the appeal outright."  FTTJ Lambert concludes that  there  is
         therefore "an" arguable error of law disclosed by the  application.
         I find there to be no  support  for  Mr  Clarke's  submission  that
         permission to appeal was granted in relation to paragraphs  1-9  of
         the application.

      9. I then heard brief submissions from both representatives, in  which
         there was common ground, in relation to FTTJ's  decision  to  allow
         the appeal outright.

     10. In Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) it  was
         found that Regulation 17(4) made the issue of a residence  card  to
         an extended family member a matter of discretion. As in this  case,
         where the Secretary of State has yet to exercise that discretion, a
         judge allowing the appeal  can  do  no  more  than  find  that  the
         decision was not in accordance with the law.

     11. In this case, I find that the FTTJ materially erred in allowing the
         appeal under  the  "EEA  Rules,"  by  which  I  presume  she  meant
         Regulations. I therefore allow the Secretary of State's  appeal  on
         this basis.

     12. I proceed to remake the FTTJ's decision by substituting a  decision
         to allow Dr Osunneye's appeal on the basis that  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  All  the
         findings of the FTTJ as to dependency are preserved.  Therefore  it
         is now a  matter  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise  her
         discretion as to whether or not to issue him with a residence card.



    Conclusions

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    I substitute a decision allowing the respondent's appeal on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law.

    No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason to make  such
    a direction.




    Signed   Date: 19 September 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


