
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15046/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2016                             |On 12 October 2016            |
|Extempore                                     |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                               MD SABUJ UDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss I Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton  promulgated  on  16  March  2016.   The
    appellant requested that that appeal be dealt with on the basis of  the
    papers before the Tribunal and did not appear.  There is no  indication
    from the file that any papers  other  than  those  submitted  with  the
    notice of appeal were provided other than a very short bundle  received
    on 11 December 2015 providing a skeleton argument.

 2. The appellant did not attend before the Upper Tribunal at 10 a.m.,  the
    time fixed for the hearing. I am satisfied from enquiries made  by  the
    by the court staff who spoke to the applicant's solicitors that he  was
    aware of the decision and indeed a copy of the notice of  decision  was
    sent to the address provided by the  appellant  which  appears  on  the
    court records.

 3. Whilst the appellant's solicitors did indicate that the  appellant  was
    aware of the hearing and he was on his way here,  they  also  indicated
    that they were without instructions.  In all  the  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that there is no reason not to proceed in the absence of  the
    appellant.

 4. In summary, the appellant's case is  that  the  appellant  was  refused
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student on 13 March 2015 in that he was not awarded 30  point  for  his
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies, commonly referred to as a  CAS,
    as the CAS had been withdrawn.  He submits that  he  should  have  been
    entitled in the circumstances to a letter giving him 60 days  in  which
    to find another sponsor.

 5. It is somewhat unclear on what basis the CAS was withdrawn.  It is  not
    disputed that there was no valid CAS at the date of decision which is a
    mandatory requirement of the Immigration Rules.  The letter of  refusal
    of 13 March states that the CAS reference  ending  in  OMOMO  had  been
    withdrawn by the sponsor.  If that is so, then it cannot be argued that
    the Secretary of State erred in not issuing a 60-day letter given  that
    that policy applies only where, for example, the sponsor's licence  has
    been withdrawn.

 6. The judge found that:

          i) The appellant did not dispute that the CAS had been withdrawn;



         ii) having had regard to the documents, that the appellant did not
             meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules;

        iii) the removal of the appellant would not be in breach of Article
             8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 7. The grounds of appeal as drafted submit:

          i) the judge failed properly to consider the  provisions  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

         ii) failed to consider the issue of the CAS  being  withdrawn  and
             where there was a duty to give the appellant 60 days in  which
             to submit a new CAS.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    who observed that the judge appeared not to have considered  the  issue
    of the 60 day letter which could constitute an error of law.

 9. The Secretary of State in responding to  that  by  way  of  submissions
    pursuant to Rule 24 provided a letter  dated  14  December  2014.  That
    letter, addressed to the appellant t the address in  Milton  Keynes  he
    has maintained throughout, gives him 60 days in which  to  find  a  new
    sponsor given that his sponsor had had its licence revoked.

10. There is no merit in  the  submission  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    application of the Immigration Rules. Whilst the consideration  of  the
    Rules is succinct, the appellant  simply  cannot  disregard  the  clear
    requirement of the Immigration Rules that he was  required  to  have  a
    valid CAS as a mandatory requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    clearly  did  not  and  on  that  basis  alone  his  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules could not succeed.

11. Turning to the issue of Article 8, this is not challenged and I see  no
    basis  on  which  the  judge's  conclusion  on  that  issue  could   be
    overturned.

12. It is however correct to say that the judge did not deal with the issue
    of the CAS  and  its  withdrawal  and  did  not  consider  whether  the
    appellant would in fairness and in conformity with relevant policy have
    been issued with a 60 day letter.  Whilst it now appears to be the case
    that this did occur, the judge did not deal with that  and  there  does
    not appear to have been a copy of that letter before him.

13. Accordingly, I accept that the judge did err in failing  to  deal  with
    this issue which was expressly referred to in the skeleton argument put
    to him by the appellant and this  amounts  to  an  error  of  law.   It
    therefore follows that that part of the decision must be remade.

14. It is clear on the basis of the evidence before me that  the  Secretary
    of State did indeed serve the appellant with  a  60-day  letter  on  14
    December 2014.  There is also no indication that the appellant obtained
    a CAS subsequent to that letter  or  subsequently  and  accordingly  it
    cannot be argued that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, as she manifestly followed the relevant policy
    and no other basis

15. For these reasons, I remake the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set is aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Signed                                  Date:  11 October 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
