
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15971/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 October 2016                       |On 31 October 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ATIQUR RAHMAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M A Chowdhury, Solicitor instructed by KC
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh, who seeks  to  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated 7 April 2015, refusing his
    application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The claimant first arrived in the United Kingdom in October  2009  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  until  27  August  2013.
    That leave was extended to 30 January 2015.

3.   The college at which the claimant was studying, London  Regal  College,
    had its licence revoked on 11 September  2014.  The  claimant  did  not
    approach another college at that time because he was  awaiting  the  60
    day letter from the respondent.  That letter was  in  fact  unnecessary
    because the claimant had extant leave up until 30 January 2015, and had
    effectively four and  a  half  months  in  which  to  find  alternative
    sponsorship.  In the event the claimant was unable to obtain a new  CAS
    to support his further application to remain as a student.  There is no
    indication  that  he  had  alerted  the  Secretary  of  State  to   any
    difficulties in obtaining such a college, rather he sought to vary  his
    application to be one in respect of private and family life.

4.   The reasons for that particular claim were set out in the  letter  from
    his solicitors dated 18 February 2015.  There was a  request  that  the
    claimant be granted further leave to remain in order to  obtain  a  new
    CAS and continue his study.  He stressed that he  has  paid  a  lot  of
    money for his education and would be bitterly disappointed if  he  were
    unable to complete it.  His family in Bangladesh would be  disappointed
    at him for his failure to make progress.  His contacts  in  the  United
    Kingdom and particularly his friendships are also highlighted.

5.   The Secretary of State, in refusing that application, did not  consider
    that his circumstances were so compelling as to be  entitled  to  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge upheld a subsequent appeal  against  that
    decision and decided that the claimant should be  granted  60  days  in
    order to find another college.  He purported to follow the decision  in
    CDS (Brazil) [2010].

7.   The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against  that  decision  on
    the basis that an incorrect approach has been  adopted  by  the  judge.
    There is no consideration of the Immigration Rules or  276AD,  nor  any
    identification as to what were  compelling  circumstances,  such  would
    warrant consideration outside of the Rules.  No account has been  taken
    as  to  the  public  interest  except  that  the  Judge   fundamentally
    misunderstood the operation of the grant  of  a  sixty  day  period  of
    leave.  Such was important in cases where leave would expire.

8.   I find that those concerns have merit.  The issue  of  further  studies
    and Article 8 was considered by the Supreme Court  in  Patel  &  Others
    [2013] UKSC 72, the rationale in  CDS  was  not  approved.   Indeed  at
    paragraph 57 of the judgment it  was  made  clear  that  Article  8  is
    concerned with private or family life, not with education as such.  The
    opportunity for a promising student  to  complete  his  course  in  the
    United Kingdom, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself  a
    right protected under Article 8.

9.   In these circumstances therefore I find that the approach of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was one made in error  of  law  and  accordingly  I
    uphold the appeal of the Secretary of State  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision is to be set aside and re-made.

10.  I invited Mr Chowdhury to indicate whether any further  evidence  other
    than that already within the  trial  bundle  was  to  be  presented  in
    support of the appeal.  I was informed that there  was  none.   I  have
    regard to the Senior President's Practice Direction to  determine  what
    is the appropriate forum in which the re-hearing should be conducted. I
    see no reason at all why the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, given the absence of any requirement of further evidence
    or argument.  In those circumstances the matter shall  be  retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal and  before myself.  This  is  an  application  made
    outside of the Immigration Rules, specifically for the  narrow  purpose
    of extending time in order to assist the claimant  in  finding  another
    educational sponsor.  The broader context of the application is one  of
    private life having been established in the United Kingdom.

11.  In that connection I have had particular regard to what is set  out  on
    behalf of the claimant in the letter of 18 February 2015, which  is  in
    essence the nature of the application that was made.

12.  In terms of an extension of time to  obtain  a  CAS  it  is  abundantly
    clear that the claimant had four and a half months from the  withdrawal
    of the sponsor licence to find somewhere else.  There is no  indication
    that he was proactive in that process nor indeed  has  he  communicated
    his difficulties to the Secretary of State prior to the decision  being
    made.   The letter from the solicitors is somewhat unclear  as  to  why
    the claimant was unable to obtain a new CAS, speaking of  some  of  the
    colleges  going  through  some  internal  problems  with  the  UK  visa
    authorities.  It is said that the claimant did not  have  his  original
    passport or biometric residence permit as they had  been  submitted  to
    the Home Office and that no university would give a CAS  without  those
    documents.  No doubt had a suitable  college  been  located  a  request
    could have been made for the return of those documents or  at  least  a
    certified true copy of the same.  I can  detect  very  little  evidence
    that the claimant did very much to find another sponsor.  I do not find
    there to be any unfairness in the process as outlined by him.   Largely
    the claimant seeks to rely upon the case of CDS which now must be  read
    in the light of Patel & Others.

13.  Apart from the money expended on his education the claimant  speaks  in
    general terms through his  solicitors  of  friendships  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Looking through the  lens  of  the  current  legislation  and
    judicial decisions on the matter, there is little of  a  compelling  or
    compassionate nature which arises such as to justify departing from the
    relative Immigration Rules.  It is  not  in  issue  that  the  claimant
    cannot meet those Rules.

14.  In the course of the submissions it was suggested that he would  be  in
    danger from his family and from others were he to return to  Bangladesh
    empty-handed.  If there is any substance to that claim, it is one  that
    can be made in person  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a  claim  for
    protection.

15.  Looking at the matter overall  I  find  nothing  in  the  circumstances
    which have been advanced on behalf of the claimant for the  application
    to support the appeal against the decision to refuse.  The claimant can
    return to Bangladesh and make the appropriate application should he  so
    desire.

16.  In all the circumstances therefore the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was lawfully open to  be  made  and  accordingly  the  claimant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the appellant is  dismissed  upon  human  rights  grounds  and
under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 31 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

