
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15581/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 October 2016                            |On 20 December 2016           |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)

                                   Between

                              SACHWINDER SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel, instructed by S.Z. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by Mr Sachwinder Singh  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Courtney  promulgated  on  30  April  2016
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    the effect that the  marriage  which  subsisted  between  him  and  the
    sponsor, Miss Asta Vasiliauskaite,  a  Lithuanian  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK, was a marriage of convenience.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 20 June 2009 with a Tier  4
    (General) Migrant visa until 1 January  2010.   This  was  subsequently
    extended until 12 December 2013 but that leave was curtailed  and  was
    due to expire on 17 June 2012.

3.   On 14 March 2013 the appellant applied for an  EEA  residence  card  as
    the spouse of a Lithuanian national exercising treaty rights in the UK.
    The  couple  attended  a  marriage  interview  on  5  June  2013.   The
    application was refused on 19 August 2013 and Mr Singh's appeal against
    the decision was dismissed by Judge Gibbs on 10 September 2014.

4.   On 18 November  2013  the  appellant  had  again  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card which was refused.  He applied once again on 14 December
    2014 but this application was refused on 1 April 2015 in  a  notice  of
    refusal to issue a residence card.

5.   The Immigration Judge heard evidence from the appellant, from his  wife
    and her daughter and from a further witness and dismissed the appeal.

6.    In  her  decision  the  Immigration  Judge  reminded  herself  of  the
    principles set out in Devaseelan and regarded the determination  of  10
    September 2014 as an authority to the determination of issues  of  fact
    at that time.  The first judge's decision should always be the starting
    point.  These may be revisited in the light of subsequent  developments
    and evidence that was not available to the appellant at the time of the
    appeal.

7.   At paragraph 14 she said it was plain that Judge Gibbs'  findings  were
    factors which could support a conclusion that the marriage was  one  of
    convenience.  The  legal  burden  of  proof  therefore  passes  to  the
    appellant to show that this was not the case.

8.   Evidence was submitted from the appellant consisting of  correspondence
    to himself addressed to an address in Perivale, consisting  of  council
    tax bills,  letters  from  the  council,  a  water  bill,  credit  card
    statements, loan agreement terms, a DVLA registration certificate and a
    policy schedule and poll card.  Correspondence was also submitted  from
    his wife at the same address consisting  of  a  current  account  which
    subsisted for a couple of months in 2016 and payslips from her employer
    from 2014 through to 2016  at  that  address  and  a  poll  card.   The
    Immigration Judge found that the evidence from the spouse was sparse in
    the extreme and was insufficient to demonstrate that the appellant  and
    the sponsor lived together at that address.

9.   There was oral evidence from the appellant and his wife that they  both
    lived at the address.  The Immigration Judge accepted  that  there  was
    confirmation between the two accounts.  There was evidence from another
    tenant in the property to the effect that  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    both lived together at that address  and  shared  the  household  bills
    between them.  The splitting of the bills was challenged  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer and also to some extent  by  the  Immigration
    Judge who concluded that the weight that  could  be  attached  to  that
    evidence was reduced.

10.  There was evidence from the sponsor's child who lives in Lithuania  but
    visits her mother and stepfather  three  or  four  times  a  year.   In
    relation to that matter the Immigration Judge commented that the family
    connection and the age of the witness reduced the weight that could  be
    accorded to her account.  There was also evidence of financial  matters
    which she found was largely consistent.   There  was  a  child  of  the
    relationship born in 2012.  The sponsor had had a miscarriage in  March
    2016 but the Immigration Judge said  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    documentation to show that the appellant was the father.

11.  In conclusion however the Immigration Judge asked herself the  question
    which is set out in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) as "In the light of the totality of  the
    evidence before me including the assessment of the  claimant's  answers
    and any information provided, am I satisfied that it is  more  probable
    than not that this is a marriage of convenience?"  In her judgment  she
    said that the appellant had failed to dispel  the  inference  that  the
    marriage was entered into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing
    residence rights. The  respondent  has  established  that  it  is  more
    probable than not that this was a marriage  of  convenience,  and  thus
    that Mr Singh cannot benefit from EU free movement and residence rights
    as the family member of the sponsor.

12.  Before me Mr Raza relied on the grounds of appeal  and  said  that  the
    key issue arose in paragraph 14 where the Immigration Judge  said  that
    there was a legal burden of proof.  In his submission this was an error
    and was sufficient to  dispose  of  the  appeal.   However  he  further
    submitted that the reasons given  by  the  Immigration  Judge  for  his
    conclusion were inadequate.  The sponsor and  the  appellant  had  been
    married since 2013, there was a child who had been born in 2002 with  a
    miscarriage in 2016. They both  on  the  evidence  lived  at  the  same
    address and there were findings of consistency in the evidence. Against
    that background detailed reasons for concluding that the appellant  had
    entered into a marriage of convenience  were  required  notwithstanding
    the findings of Judge Gibbs.

13. Miss Brocklesby-Weller pointed out that the grounds of appeal  did  not
    include as a separate ground the supposed  error  in  relation  to  the
    burden of proof.  In any event the Immigration Judge  was  entitled  to
    make the decision that she in fact made  having  regard  to  the  whole
    evidence before her.

14. I note that the grounds of appeal include at (1) a ground to the effect
    that in  repeating  the  findings  of  the  previous  Judge  Gibbs  the
    Immigration Judge has given undue weight to the  circumstances  of  the
    time of the previous application and not taken into  consideration  the
    circumstances which were in existence at the time  of  the  appellant's
    application and at the time of  hearing  and  the  evidence  which  was
    produced. I consider that sufficient notice has been given of the point
    argued since it is essentially a matter of weight that is given to  the
    findings of the previous judge.  Each appeal has to  be  considered  on
    its own evidence.

15. Looking at the decision letter  as  whole  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    Immigration Judge in relying, as she was bound to do, on  Judge  Gibbs'
    finding as a starting point then placed a  burden  of  proof  upon  the
    appellant which was too high.  The burden is an evidential  one  not  a
    legal burden.  That in my view then led her into error in which she did
    not properly reason the grounds for  her  decision.  In  particular  it
    seems to me  that  given  the  fact  that  there  is  a  child  of  the
    relationship with evidence of a miscarriage, evidence that they  reside
    together at the same address and no evidence that either  party  reside
    elsewhere there is an obligation on the Immigration Judge  to  set  out
    the reasons for rejecting that evidence. In my opinion she  has  failed
    to do that.

16. At paragraph 16 the Immigration Judge sets out the documentary evidence
    that the  sponsor  lives  at  the  same  address  in  Perivale  as  the
    appellant.  At paragraph 17 it appears that she  accepts  the  evidence
    that the appellant lives at that address. There  is  ample  documentary
    evidence to that  effect.  However  she  describes  the  correspondence
    addressed to the sponsor at  the  address  as  sparse  in  the  extreme
    despite the fact that it apparently included wage slips being  sent  to
    the sponsor at that address for a period of over two years, a poll card
    in  her  name  at  that  address  and  a  letter   addressed   to   the
    parent/guardian of the child at that address.   The  Immigration  Judge
    concludes that the documentary evidence was not sufficient to show that
    they lived together at the same address.

17. It is difficult to understand this conclusion, particularly in light of
    the fact that on the face of the  evidence  the  child  lives  at  this
    address.  It is not suggested that the child lives elsewhere  with  the
    appellant.  Indeed at paragraph 23 the  Immigration  Judge  doubts  his
    involvement in her care and upbringing.

18. There was further evidence from witnesses set out in paragraphs 19  and
    20 that the appellant and sponsor lived together though for reasons set
    out in these paragraphs the Immigration  Judge  casts  doubt  on  their
    evidence.  However even putting their evidence to one side in light  of
    the evidence of the child residing  at  that  address  along  with  the
    documentary  evidence  it  is  difficult  to  follow  the  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant and sponsor do not reside together at the
    same address.

19. For these reasons I have concluded that there was an error of law and I
    shall allow the appeal.  Since there are issues of credibility still at
    large I have concluded that I should remit the case back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing.



Notice of Decision

20.  Accordingly I find that there is an error of law.  I  shall  remit  the
    case back to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:

