
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15834/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2016                                |On 19 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C J HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DEEPAK KHAREL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Bassir, Counsel instructed by JKR Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Nepal born
    on 1 October 1985.

 2. This appeal arises from the decision of the appellant (hereinafter "the
    Secretary of State") to refuse the claimant's application for leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and to remove him from the UK by
    way of directions under section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and
    Nationality Act 2006. The claimant's ensuing appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") was heard by FtT Judge Clarke who, in a decision
    promulgated on 7 January 2016, allowed the appeal. The Secretary of
    State now appeals that decision.

 3. The factual background is not in dispute and can be summarised as
    follows:

      a) The claimant entered the UK on a student visa in June 2011 with
         leave to remain until 12 October 2013.

      b) On 8 October 2013 the claimant applied, in time, for leave to
         remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student. He submitted with his
         application a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") for an
         institution whose license was subsequently revoked, on 30 October
         2013. The claimant was not responsible in any way for the license
         being revoked.

      c) Towards the end of 2013 the claimant became aware that he was not
         in possession of a valid CAS and began making efforts to gain
         admission to an alternative institution.

      d) The claimant wrote to the Secretary of State on several occasions
         (25 January 2014, 23 April 2014 and 9 June 2014) requesting that a
         letter be sent to him  confirming that his application would be
         suspended for 60 days in order to enable him to locate an
         alternative educational sponsor ("the 60 day letter").

      e) On 9 January 2015 the 60 day letter was sent to the claimant. The
         letter stated that consideration of the claimant's application
         would, in accordance with the Secretary of States Rules and
         Guidance, be suspended for a period of 60 working days. Enclosed
         with the letter was an information leaflet to be taken to any new
         sponsor explaining that the claimant had an outstanding application
         and that his previous sponsor's licence had been revoked.

      f) The claimant's passport was in the possession of the Secretary of
         State. A  certified copy of the passport (or the original) was not
         enclosed with the 60 day letter.

      g) On 18 February 2015 the claimant wrote to the Secretary of State
         requesting that his passport be sent to him.

      h) On 6 March 2015 the claimant obtained an offer from a new
         educational sponsor. The offer was conditional on the provision of
         his passport (or a certified copy).

      i) On the same day (6 March 2015) the claimant, via solicitors, wrote
         again to the Secretary of State requesting that he be sent a
         certificated copy of his passport. The letter also asked for an
         extension of a further 60 days.

      j) On 9 March 2013 the Secretary of State sent the claimant a
         certified copy of his passport.

      k) On 12 March 2015 the Secretary of State granted the claimant a 14
         day extension to submit a valid CAS.

      l) The institution that made the conditional offer on 6 March 2015
         withdrew the offer as it no longer had sufficient places available.



      m) The claimant was unable to find another sponsor within the fourteen
         day time frame.

Decision of the Secretary of State

 4. In a decision made on 10 April 2015 the Secretary of State refused the
    claimant's application on the basis that he had failed to provide a
    valid CAS as required under paragraph 245ZX(c) of the Rules. In
    addition, the application was refused with reference to paragraph
    245ZX(d) on the basis that the failure to provide a valid CAS meant
    that the course fee and monthly maintenance requirement could not be
    assessed.

 5. The application was also refused under Paragraph 322(9) of the Rules on
    the ground that the claimant had failed to provide requested
    information within a reasonable time.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge found that the Secretary of State had failed to apply the
    common law duty of fairness. He allowed the appeal to the limited
    extent that the Secretary of State's decision of 10 April 2015 was not
    in accordance with the law and that a lawful decision remained to be
    made.

 7. The judge gave two reasons for finding that the Secretary of State had
    failed to comply with the common law duty of fairness. The first reason
    was that there had been "an inordinate and unexplained delay" before
    the 60 day letter and the certified passport copy was sent to the
    claimant. The second was that the further extension of 14 days was not
    a reasonable period for the claimant to obtain a new CAS.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 8. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge's findings are inadequately
    reasoned and irrational. They submit that no reasons have been given as
    to why the delay in sending the 60 day letter was prejudicial to the
    claimant. They also state the Secretary of State was not obliged to
    give the claimant an additional 14 days and that, by granting the 60
    day suspension, she acted in accordance with her own guidance.

 9. The grounds also contend that the claimant had "reasonable time" to
    produce the necessary documents to support his application and
    therefore that the FtT failed to have due regard to the wording of
    Paragraph 322(9) of the Immigration Rules.

10. Mr Jarvis, on behalf of the Secretary of State, elaborated on the
    arguments made in the grounds of appeal. He acknowledged that there had
    been a lengthy delay on the part of the Secretary of State in providing
    the claimant with the documents he required in order to obtain a new
    sponsor, but argued the delay did not cause any detriment to the
    claimant who had the benefit, as a consequence of the delay, of
    additional time in the UK.

11. Mr Jarvis maintained that the Secretary of State had acted properly by
    sending the sponsor a certified copy of his passport shortly after
    being advised he had found a new sponsor. It was not the fault of the
    Secretary of State that the new sponsor withdrew its offer. Citing EK
    (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517, he argued that the unfairness (to
    the extent there was any) was a result of the new sponsor withdrawing
    an offer that had been promised to the claimant upon submission of his
    passport.  Conduct by a sponsor which has resulted in an "unfair"
    outcome for an applicant does not mean the Secretary of State has
    breached her common law duty to act fairly. Mr Jarvis referred to the
    comment of Lord Justice Briggs in EK at [54] that:

         "a clear distinction must be made between the unfairness in
         outcome, viewed from the standpoint of the applicant....and the
         separate question whether the Secretary of State's participation in
         those circumstances involved a breach of her common law duty to act
         fairly."

12. Mr Jarvis also submitted that the additional 14 days granted to the
    claimant, which went beyond the 60 day period in the Secretary of
    State's policy, was entirely reasonable in the circumstances.

13. Ms Bassir, on behalf of the claimant, argued that the Secretary of
    State had acted unfairly.  She maintained that the claimant was, until
    March 2015, unrepresented. He did not know, and could not reasonably
    have been expected to know, what he would need in order to obtain a new
    CAS and in particular the implications of not being sent his passport
    or a certified copy of the passport.

Consideration

14. It is well established that if, whilst a Tier 4 application for
    variation of leave is pending, a sponsor's licence is revoked (and the
    student was not a party to any reason why the licence was revoked)
    common law fairness requires that the Secretary of State should afford
    the student a reasonable opportunity to vary the application by
    identifying a new sponsor before the application is decided. See EK
    (Ivory Coast) at para. [38]; Alam [2012] EWCA Civ 960 at para. [44];
    Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT
    00211 (IAC); and Thakur (PBS Decision - Common Law Fairness)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC).


15. The Secretary of State has a policy whereby she will give foreign
    students in these circumstances 60 days in order to find a new
    institution to sponsor the application and obtain a new CAS. In Kaur
    (Patel fairness: respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 00344 (IAC) the Upper
    Tribunal made clear that this policy is intended to give effect to the
    principles of common law fairness.


16. As a practical matter, in order to obtain a new CAS an applicant will
    need, inter alia:


      a) a letter from the Secretary of State confirming he has been granted
         a 60 day period to find a new sponsor (the 60 day letter); and


      b) his passport (or a certified copy) as the new sponsor will need
         details of, and to retain a copy of, an applicant's passport.

17. Given that the only way the claimant could obtain his passport (or a
    copy) was by the Secretary of State sending it to him and that without
    this document he was unable to obtain a new CAS, fairness required both
    that the Secretary of State send the claimant his passport (or a
    certified copy) and that she gave him reasonable time, after receiving
    it, to obtain a new CAS.


18. The case law and Secretary of State's own policy identify 60 days as a
    reasonable period to obtain a new CAS. However, the claimant only had
    17 days after being sent a copy of his passport (the 14 day extension
    started three days after the passport copy was sent to him). In these
    circumstances, where the Secretary of State's policy is to give
    students 60 days but the claimant was afforded only 17 days after
    having received the documentation necessary to secure a new sponsor, we
    are satisfied that the judge was entitled to conclude that a 14 day
    extension was not sufficient to afford the claimant a reasonable
    opportunity to obtain a new CAS.


19. Mr Jarvis argued that any unfairness was a result of the conduct of the
    sponsor, who withdrew its conditional offer. He argued that, following
    EK, even if there were unfair consequences for the claimant, the
    Secretary of State did not breach her duty of fairness. We do not find
    this argument persuasive. The unfairness in this case arose from the
    amount of time the Secretary of State afforded to the claimant to
    obtain a new CAS once he had been sent a certified copy of his
    passport. That was a matter for the Secretary of State, not the
    sponsor. As such, the circumstances of this case are not analogous to
    those in EK.

20. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge failed to have due regard
    to Paragraph 322(9) of the Immigration Rules. Rule 322(9) provides that
    leave to remain should normally be refused in circumstances where there
    has been:


         "Failure by an applicant to produce within a reasonable time
         information, documents or other evidence required by the Secretary
         of State to establish his claim to remain under these Rules"

21. The judge did not explicitly address whether the claimant failed to
    produce a new CAS within a reasonable time. He did, however, consider
    whether the Secretary of State gave the claimant reasonable time to
    obtain a new CAS. It is implicit in, and follows from, the judge's
    finding as to the claimant not be being given reasonable time that he
    was satisfied that the claimant did not fail to produce the CAS within
    a reasonable time period. We find, therefore, that the judge has
    substantively addressed the issue raised in Rule 322(9).


22. A further argument made in the grounds of appeal is that the judge
    failed to explain why he found that the delay in providing the 60 day
    letter gave rise to there being a failure by the Secretary of State to
    comply with the common law duty of fairness. There is merit to this
    argument. There was no evidence before the FtT to support a finding
    that, and the judge has not given any reasoning to show why, the delay
    was prejudicial to the claimant. However, although we accept that the
    absence of reasoning on this point amounts to an error of law, we are
    satisfied that the error was not material.


23. For the reasons we have explained, the judge was entitled to conclude
    that: (a) common law fairness required the Secretary of State to give
    the claimant a reasonable opportunity to obtain a new CAS after having
    been sent a certified copy of his passport; and that (b) the 14 day
    extension granted on 12 March 2015 was not sufficient to afford the
    claimant a reasonable opportunity to obtain a new CAS.


24. At the error of law hearing, we raised with parties that, were we to
    find there to be a material error of law, in remaking the decision we
    would want to explore, in addition to the issue of common law fairness,
    the question of whether the Secretary of State had complied with her
    own policy by not sending the claimant a certified copy of his passport
    at the same time as the 60 day letter. However, having found that the
    judge did not make a material error of law it will not be necessary to
    remake the decision.

Decision

25. The appeal is dismissed.

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
    error of law and shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 19 July 2016                  |

