
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15779/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 28 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               YOOFI VAN-DYCK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Oji, instructed directly by the appellant
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
  against the decision of the Secretary of State of 26 March 2014 to remove
  him from the UK as a person who has ceased to have a right to  reside  in
  the UK under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
  (the EEA Regulations). First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissed the appeal
  and the appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

Background

2. The background is that the appellant entered the UK on  1  December  2004
  with a visit visa valid until 11 December  2004.  However  he  failed  to
  leave the UK and on 13 January 2012 he applied for an EEA Residence  Card
  on the basis of his marriage to a French national. On 22 May 2012 He  was
  issued with a Residence Card valid until 22 May 2017. On  26  March  2014
  the  appellant  was  encountered  by  Immigration  Officers   during   an
  enforcement visit to his home. It is alleged that he was  living  with  a
  Ghanaian national with whom he has two children. It is alleged  that  the
  appellant said that his French wife had left the UK.  The  appellant  was
  served with an IS151A and a decision to  remove  him  from  the  UK.  The
  IS151A sets out the reasons for the decision to remove him as being  that
  he has ceased to have  a  right  to  reside  in  the  IK  under  the  EEA
  Regulations because his EEA family member has  left  the  UK  and  is  no
  longer a qualified person under regulation 6 (1) of the EEA Regulations.

3. The appellant requested that his appeal be determined on the  papers  and
  his appeal was so determined by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. His bundle
  of evidence to the First-tier Tribunal included a  witness  statement  in
  which he admitted to having difficulties in  his  relationship  with  his
  wife who was out of the UK  on  a  short  holiday  at  the  time  of  his
  encounter with Immigration Officers. He therefore disputed that his  wife
  had left the UK and contended that she was still employed in the  UK  and
  therefore still a qualified person under the EEA Regulations.

4. The Judge noted that the appellant did  not  dispute  that  he  is  in  a
  relationship with a Ghanaian national and found that the relationship ran
  in parallel to that with  his  French  wife.  The  Judge  considered  the
  evidence including the witness statement of the appellant's French  wife,
  her bank statements and payslips and found that these documents were  not
  genuine having the 'gloss of contemporary and relevant  documents'  [12].
  He  found  that  the  paper  hearing  had  been  requested  so  that  the
  appellant's wife would not have to attend and give evidence and that  the
  appellant's statement did not address the relationship with the  Ghanaian
  woman. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  further  found  that   there  is
  compelling weight to the evidence before him that the claimed marriage to
  the French national 'is no more than a marriage of convenience' and  that
  the relationship has 'all the hallmarks of  a  marriage  of  convenience'
  [13].

5. The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred
  in finding that the appellant  had  submitted  forged  documents  without
  evidence and without it having been alleged  by  the  respondent.  It  is
  furthered  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
  himself as to the facts as he failed to acknowledge  that  the  appellant
  disputes that his wife had left the UK. It is further contended that  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in drawing an adverse inference from  the
  fact that the appellant requested a paper hearing. Ground 4 contends that
  the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding that there was a  marriage
  of convenience in circumstances where the respondent  had  made  no  such
  allegation. It is contended that in failing to invite submissions on this
  issue the First-tier Tribunal Judge committed  a  procedural  unfairness.
  The final ground contends that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
  properly consider the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  ground  that  the
  decision breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

6. The application for permission to appeal made to the First-tier  Tribunal
  was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta on  29  August  2014.  A
  renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  considered  by  Upper
  Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 26 November 2014 who gave his preliminary  view
  that First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox erred in finding  that  the  appellant
  was a party to a marriage of convenience when this had not formed part of
  the respondent's case and without putting the appellant  on  notice  that
  this issue was to be raised and by directing himself that the  burden  of
  proof in relation to this issues is upon the appellant  contrary  to  the
  decision in Samsam (EEA: revocation and  retained  rights)  Syria  [2011]
  UKUT 165 (IAC). Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul proposed to dispose  of  the
  appeal without a further hearing  and  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal unless either party objected  to  that  course  of  action.  The
  respondent submitted a Rule 24 response objecting to the case  proceeding
  in the proposed manner.

Error of law

7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge erred in finding  that  the  documents  submitted  by  the
  appellant were not genuine or forged without any proof. It  is  contended
  that it is for the party alleging forgery to prove it as  decided  in  RP
  (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086. The decision in that  case
  is summarised in the head note as follows;

      "An allegation of forgery needs to be proved by evidence  and  by  the
      person making it. The procedure under s108 of  the  2002  Act  remains
      available  to  respondents.  A  bare  allegation  of  forgery,  or  an
      assertion by an Entry Clearance Officer that he believed the  document
      to be forged can in these circumstances carry no weight. The  Tribunal
      treats a document as forged only on the basis of clear evidence before
      it. KS (Allegations by respondent: proof required?)  Pakistan  [2005]
      UKAIT 00171 should not be read as implying the contrary."

8. In this  case  the  documents  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  wife's
  earnings  were  submitted  in  connection  with  the  paper  appeal.  The
  respondent made no submissions in relation to the documents and  made  no
  allegation of forgery. The Judge's finding that the documents  were  'not
  genuine' must have amounted to a finding that they were forged. The Judge
  did not give adequate reasons for his finding and there was  no  evidence
  before the Judge to support such a finding. The Judge therefore erred  in
  finding that the appellant's wife's documents were forged.

9. The second ground of appeal contends that the Judge  misdirected  himself
  as to the facts as he failed to acknowledge that the  appellant  disputes
  that his wife had left the UK. The third ground contends that  the  Judge
  was wrong to draw adverse inferences from the  fact  that  the  appellant
  requested a paper hearing. I do not see the merit  in  these  grounds  of
  appeal on their own.

10. Ground 4 contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  finding
  that there was a marriage  of  convenience  in  circumstances  where  the
  respondent  had  made  no  allegation  that  there  was  a  marriage   of
  convenience. It is contended that in failing  to  invite  submissions  on
  this issue before making  his  findings  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  committed a procedural unfairness.

11. The Upper Tribunal considered the issue  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
  marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC)  and  concluded
  that there is an evidential burden on an appellant  to  address  evidence
  justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered into for the
  predominant purpose of securing residence rights. However this  can  only
  arise  where  there  is  an  allegation  that  there  is  a  marriage  of
  convenience. Mr Avery submitted that the evidence before  the  Judge  was
  suggestive of a marriage of convenience and he was entitled  to  take  it
  into account. However the evidence referred to by Mr Avery  included  the
  birth certificates of the children the appellant is said to have had with
  the Ghanaian woman. Those birth certificates  were  not  in  the  bundles
  before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, nor indeed were they before me.  Mr
  Avery also submitted that the circumstances in which  the  appellant  was
  encountered were relevant to the  Judge's  findings.  In  this  case  the
  respondent alleged that the EEA family member had left the  UK  and  that
  she was no longer a 'qualified person'.  There was  no  allegation  of  a
  marriage of convenience and the Judge erred in considering  this  without
  giving the parties an opportunity to make submissions.

12. The final ground contends that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
  properly consider the appellant's appeal on the ground that the  decision
  breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.  However
  the First-tier Tribunal Judge had little evidence as to  the  appellant's
  true circumstances at the date of the decision. There was  nothing  about
  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  Ghanaian  national  or   their
  children. In these circumstances I do not see how he could  have  reached
  any meaningful conclusions as to the appellant's private and family  life
  in the UK and I find that he did not err in his findings in  relation  to
  Article 8.

13. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul raised a further  potential  error  in  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision. He suggested  that  Judge  Fox  may
  have erred in directing himself that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
  appellant which is contrary to the guidance in Samsam where the  Tribunal
  said;

      "27. ... As a matter of general principle, we  would  agree  with  the
      appellant's submission and the respondent's concession that where  the
      sole issue in an appeal is whether the Secretary of State has lawfully
      revoked  residence  documentation   on   the   ground   of   lack   of
      qualification, the onus to justify the cancellation is on the revoking
      authority. It would be sufficient to justify such revocation if  there
      has been a change of circumstances since issue that removes the  right
      of residence."

14. This is an appeal against a decision to  remove  the  appellant  on  the
  basis of the respondent's decision to revoke  the  appellant's  residence
  card. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  therefore  erred  in  stating  at
  paragraph 7 that the burden of proof is upon the appellant in this case.

15. I accept Mr Oji's submission that the issue to be decided by  the  Judge
  in this  case  was  whether  the  respondent  had  lawfully  revoked  the
  appellant's residence permit. The Judge failed to make a  finding  as  to
  whether the appellant's wife was still in the UK and  failed  to  make  a
  properly reasoned finding as to whether she was a 'qualified person'.  In
  making the errors set out above the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
  central issue in the case. Given that the errors go to the heart  of  the
  appeal I must set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in
  relation to the EEA Regulations and I go on to remake the decision.

Remaking the decision

16. The appellant submitted a bundle of evidence in advance of  the  hearing
  before me. I also had the bundle submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. According to the witness statement dated  14  April  2014  made  by  the
  appellant's French wife she and the appellant married on 12  August  2011
  under Ghanaian  customary  proxy  marriage  law.  There  is  no  marriage
  certificate in the papers before me. According to his  witness  statement
  in the Upper Tribunal bundle the appellant was divorced from  his  French
  wife on 6 September 2014. He said in his witness statement  that  he  now
  wishes to have his appeal  considered  on  a  retained  right  basis.  As
  evidence of the divorce the appellant submitted a copy of  a  certificate
  of dissolution of a customary marriage dated 27 October 2014  along  with
  an affidavit and an order. However as Mr Avery pointed  out  this  raises
  the issue as to the validity of the marriage in the first place.

18. There is no marriage certificate before me  and  no  evidence  that  the
  customary marriage complies with the requirements of French  law  as  set
  out in the guidance in Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT
  00024 (IAC). There the Tribunal said that a marriage  certificate  should
  be issued by a competent authority in the country where it took place and
  that it must be decided whether the marriage was contracted  between  the
  appellant and the EEA national according  to  the  national  law  of  the
  country of nationality of the EEA national, in this case France. There is
  insufficient evidence before me to be satisfied  that  the  marriage  did
  meet these requirements.

19. I do not accept the appellant's  request  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
  should be varied to cover his changed circumstances. Should  he  wish  he
  can apply to the respondent for evidence of a retained right of residence
  with all of the necessary evidence. Given the lack of evidence as to  the
  Ghanaian customary marriage there is insufficient evidence before  me  to
  be satisfied that the appellant  is  entitled  to  a  retained  right  of
  residence in any event.

20. The issue before me relates to the respondent's decision to  revoke  the
  residence card based on the allegation that the  European  Economic  Area
  national had left the UK and was no  longer  a  'qualified  person'.  The
  allegation is based  on  the  respondent's  record  of  a  visit  to  the
  appellant's home address on 26 March 2014 where he was encountered living
  with a Ghanaian national who he said was his partner  and  with  whom  he
  admitted having two children. It is recorded that he  admitted  that  his
  wife was no longer living in the UK.

21. The appellant's wife submitted a witness  statement  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal dated 14 April 2014. In that statement she  said  that  she  was
  still cohabiting with the  appellant  and  that  they  intended  to  live
  together  permanently   notwithstanding   the   difficulties   they   had
  experienced. She did not deal with the allegation that she had  left  the
  UK or with the appellant's explanation at  paragraph  9  of  his  witness
  statement of 14 April 2014 that she had left for  a  short  holiday.  She
  provided no evidence to support the explanation that she had left the  UK
  for a short holiday, this evidence would have been  easily  obtained  had
  she done so. Her failure to explain this matter damages her  credibility.
  Further, the appellant also said in his witness statement dated 14  April
  2014 that he and his wife had  a  subsisting  and  durable  relationship.
  However he failed entirely to deal with the allegation that he was living
  with a Ghanaian national with whom he had two children  when  Immigration
  Officers visited  his  home  a  month  previously.  The  failure  of  the
  appellant and his wife  to  contradict  or  explain  this  allegation  is
  incomprehensible in light of its significance.  The  appellant  requested
  that his appeal be considered on the papers by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  therefore he chose not to take the opportunity to give oral  evidence  on
  this issue. The appellant's wife did not provide  any  further  statement
  for the Upper Tribunal nor did she attend the hearing therefore I did not
  have the opportunity to hear  her  oral  evidence  on  this  matter.  The
  failure of the appellant  and  his  French  wife  to  give  any  adequate
  explanations for these matters severely damages their credibility.

22. I also take account  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
  underwent a customary divorce in September  2014,  just  5  months  after
  these  statements.  In  the  absence  of  an  explanation  this   further
  undermines the credibility of their claims in April 2014 to be cohabiting
  in the UK.

23. In relation to the  appellant's  wife's  employment  and  residence  the
  appellant submitted copies of a letter from her  claimed  employer,  bank
  statements, payslips and HMRC documentation addressed to his wife at  his
  home address during 2013-2014. However  these  are  all  copies  and  not
  originals and this limits the weight I can  attach  to  these  documents.
  Further, the appellant's French wife did not attend the hearing before me
  to explain or evidence these documents. I consider the documents  in  the
  round in light of all of the other evidence before me.

24. The current evidence that the appellant and his wife have  undertaken  a
  customary divorce in Ghana does not provide any further  evidence  as  to
  the appellant's wife's whereabouts in 2014 or currently or as to  whether
  she was exercising treaty rights at any of the material  times.  Much  of
  the evidence in the Upper Tribunal bundle was already before  the  First-
  tier Tribunal. All of the documents are copies and little relates to  the
  period  after  the  appellant  was   encountered   by   the   immigration
  authorities.  In  any  event  there  is  no  further  evidence  from  the
  appellant's French wife to support these documents.

25. Considering all of the evidence before me I am not  satisfied  that  the
  appellant has addressed the serious allegations made in relation  to  his
  EEA national wife and I am satisfied that the  respondent  has  therefore
  shown that the decision to revoke the residence card  made  on  26  March
  2014 was lawful.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.

I set aside that decision in relation to the EEA Regulations.

I remake the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  under  the  EEA
Regulations.


Signed
                       Date: 26 January 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


