
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16229/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th December 2017                      |On 9th February 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                 stella [k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Harris (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision  promulgated  on  2nd  October  2017,  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  which  the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision to refuse her human rights claim was  dismissed.   I
    directed that the decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal, before  me,
    on the first available date.

2.   At the heart of the appellant's case is a contention that the  presence
    here of her children, and in particular the oldest child, is such  that
    refusal of  her  human  rights  claim  amounts  to  a  disproportionate
    response.  At the time of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the oldest child was 9 years of age and had been present in the  United
    Kingdom for his entire life.

3.   Mr Mills, for the Secretary of State, said that the child  was  now  10
    years old, his birthday having passed in August 2017.  He was  entitled
    to be registered as a British citizen and, as he understood matters, an
    application was pending.  In  those  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
    State intended to take a pragmatic course and concede the  appeal.   Ms
    Harris had nothing she wished to add.

4.   On the basis of the concession made by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and
    having taken into account my  decision  setting  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and the evidence before the Upper Tribunal,  I  allow
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Signed                                  Date 06 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY
The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order and it was maintained by  me
in the Upper Tribunal.  In the light of the  outcome  and  the  decision  to
allow the appeal, and in the absence of any application by either  party  to
maintain anonymity, I discharge the anonymity order made by  me  under  Rule
14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and it shall  cease
to have effect.


Signed                                  Date 06 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been allowed, I make a fee award in  respect  of  any  fee
which has been paid or is payable in these proceedings.  I can see that  the
certificate of fee satisfaction was issued on 25th May 2015.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell






