
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16700/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 April 2016                      |On 16 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MD JOMSHED ali
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is Mr  Jomshed  Ali  who  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh  born  on  1  January  1991.   However,  for  the  sake   of
    convenience I shall continue to refer to the Secretary of State as  the
    respondent and Mr Ali as appellant which are the designation which they
    had before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent dated 16 April 2015 to  refuse  his  application  for
    leave to remain under his Tier  4  (General)  Student  visa  under  the
    points-based  system.   Judge  Amin  allowed  the  appellant's   appeal
    outright under the Immigration Rules.  Permission to appeal was granted
    to the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish on 11  February
    2016 saying that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    should not have allowed the appeal outright but remit to the respondent
    for a fresh decision after allowing for 60 days.

3.   Therefore the appeal should have been allowed to the limited extent  of
    remittal rather than outright.

4.   The judge said he was satisfied that the appellant  has  shown  he  has
    adequate maintenance, funds in accordance with paragraph 245ZX  because
    there is a bank statement and therefore the respondent's refusal of the
    application was not in accordance with  the  law  and  the  appellant's
    appeal succeeds under the Immigration Rules because he did not  receive
    the 60-day letter dated 10 February 2015 and  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

5.   At the hearing there was no appearance  by  the  appellant.   Mr  Avery
    informed me that the appellant was arrested in  November  2015  and  is
    wanted by the Cumbria Police Station. Therefore, he was  not  surprised
    that the appellant has not attended.  His  submissions  were  that  the
    appeal be sent back to the Secretary of State  as  per  the  permission
    judge suggested.

My Findings

6.   It is quite clear that the judge fell into material error  by  allowing
    the appellant's appeal outright under the Immigration Rules instead  of
    sending  it  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for   their   further
    consideration for them to grant the appellant 60 days.

7.   I therefore direct that the appeal be sent back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State awaiting their lawful decision.

Notice of Decision

8.   Remitted to the Secretary of State.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date this 4th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date this 4th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


