
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16888/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2016                          |On 21 March 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               NATHAN WICKLINE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance and no legal representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent was born on 7 June 1984 and is an  Australian  national.
    He met his British partner, Mathew Ferguson, in Sydney in January  2013
    and began a relationship with him on 10 February 2013. They started  to
    live together on 30 March 2013.  The Respondent then came to the United
    Kingdom on 23 May 2013 on a two year youth mobility visa under  Tier  5
    of the Points Based Scheme.

2.   In March 2014 the Resondent's partner returned to  the  United  Kingdom
    and they started living together here. On 24 March 2015 the  Respondent
    applied for further leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship.
    At that time he still had leave to remain under Tier 5 and,  therefore,
    it was a variation of leave application. His application was refused on
    23 April 2015.  He appealed on 7 May 2015 and First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Narayan allowed his appeal on 13 August 2015 on a family life basis.

3.   On 21 August 2015 the Appellant appealed against this decision  and  on
    30 December 2015 the First-tier judge Pedro granted permission  on  the
    basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Narayan  had  made  contradictory
    findings and there was also a lack of reasoning in his decision.

ERROR LAW HEARING

4.   The Respondent did not  attend  the  Error  of  Law  hearing,  was  not
    legally represented and had not  sent  any  explanation  for  his  non-
    attendance.   The  notice  of  the  decision  to  grant  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal was sent to the Respondent by second class post on
    6 January 2016 at the address which he had supplied  to  the  Tribunal.
    Therefore, I am satisfied that he had been notified of his hearing  and
    consider that it is in the interests of justice  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in his absence, pursuant  to  regulation  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

5.   The Home Office Presenting Officer made  some  short  submissions.  She
    noted that the Respondent had failed to establish  that  he  had  lived
    together with his partner for two years or more.  She also  noted  that
    at paragraph 17 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Narayan said:



         "I find that the [Secretary of State for the  Home  Department]  in
         [her] decision in dealing with the relationship akin to marriage or
         civil partnership for at least two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
         application  has  correctly  interpreted  the  information  in  the
         application form and therefore the application falls to be  refused
         under the Immigration Rules"

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer also pointed out that  in  paragraph
    18 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Narayan said:

         "I find it has not been contested that there are no  insurmountable
         obstacles to family  life  between  the  [Respondent]  and  sponsor
         continuing outside the United Kingdom and therefore  the  appellant
         fails to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in  respect
         of family life with his partner."

7.   At paragraph 21 he also found that:

         "There are no exceptional circumstances which have been raised that
         are consistent to the right to respect for private and family  life
         contained in Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
         which may warrant a grant of leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
         outside of the Immigration Rules."

ERROR OF LAW

8.   The Respondent  had  not  cross-appealed  on  the  basis  that  he  was
    entitled to leave to remain under the Immigration Rules. Neither had he
    responded to the grounds of  appeal  in  relation  to  any  exceptional
    circumstances which may  have  justified  the  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Narayan to consider his appeal outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

9.   In paragraphs 22 to  27  of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Narayan undertook such a consideration and, in  particular,  considered
    the  proportionality  of  the  decision  and  Section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10.  However, as correctly submitted the Home Office Presenting Officer,  in
    paragraph 44 of Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo)
    & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the Court of Appeal clearly found that  it
    is only if there is "a reasonably arguable case under Article  8  which
    has not already been sufficiently dealt with by  consideration  of  the
    application under the  substantive  provisions  of  the  Rules  compare
    Nagre, then in considering that case the individual  interests  of  the
    applicant and others whose Article 8 rights are  in  issue,  should  be
    balanced against the public interest including those expressed  in  the
    Rules in order to make an assessment whether the refusal to grant leave
    to remain or leave to enter as the case may be  is disproportionate and
    hence unlawful by virtue of Section 6(1)of the Human  Rights  Act  with
    reference to Article 8".

11    In paragraph 21 of his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Narayan
    expressly found that there were no  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    Respondent's case, which may warrant  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  He  did  not  explain  what  circumstances  of  the
    Respondent's case had not already sufficiently  dealt  with  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  At best, he noted that the Respondent was  planning
    to marry his partner but his plans had been delayed due to his  partner
    not yet being divorced from his previous partner and that  he  and  his
    partner were working here. He did not explain why these factors had not
    been  sufficiently  addressed  in  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  had
    requirments as to the status of relationships and finances.

12.  In addition, reliance should only have been placed on section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 once consideration  of
    the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  was  necessary  due   to
    exceptional circumstances and factors not addressed in the  Immigration
    Rules.

13.  Therefore there were a number of material errors of law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Narayan's decision.

Notice of Decision

1.   The Appellant's appeal  is  allowed  and  the  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Narayan is set aside.

2.   The Respondent's appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    de novo hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Narayan.

Directions

1.   In the light of the non-appearance by the Respondent at  the  error  of
    law hearing, the  matter  should  be  set  down  for  an  initial  case
    management hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                                  Date: 3 March 2016


Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

