
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16137/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2014                           |On 4 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                               sezgin ozdemir
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION NOTICE AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal I will refer to the appellant and the respondent in  the
    same order as they were referred to in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born 25 July 1982.  He applied  to
    vary his leave to remain under the ECAA  (Association  Agreement)  with
    Turkey.  The application was refused in April 2013  as  the  respondent
    was not satisfied the appellant met the requirements of the appropriate
    paragraphs of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Burnett sitting at Newport on 12 November 2013.  At  that  hearing  the
    appellant attended but was not  legally  represented.   A  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer represented the respondent.

3.    In  a  determination  promulgated  in  November  2013  Judge   Burnett
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  ECAA  and  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

4.   The respondent then sought leave to  appeal  on  the  one  ground  that
    there had been a failure  to  give  reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on a material matter.

5.   In amplifying this alleged failure the respondent  contended  that  the
    judge had failed to consider the merits of the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights under Appendix FM to the Rules.  It was noted that the appellant
    had not faced persecution in Turkey due to his sexuality  and  both  he
    and his partner had demonstrated a  willingness  to  return  to  Turkey
    together.   The  judge   had   therefore   failed   to   identify   any
    insurmountable obstacle to their relationship continuing in Turkey  and
    had failed to identify any exceptional circumstances which would render
    the appellant's removal disproportionate.

6.    Paragraph  2  of  the  grounds  simply  amplifies  the   question   of
    "insurmountable obstacles", paragraph  3  refers  to  the  case  of  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

7.   In granting leave to appeal, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blandy
    recorded:-

         "I  do  find  the  grounds  to  be  arguable.   The  Judge  nowhere
         acknowledges the importance of the public interest and I find it to
         be arguably an  error  of  law  to  have  substantially  based  his
         reasoning upon obita comments in the case of Zhang referred  to  in
         paragraph 53 of the determination.  I do find it arguable that  the
         overall decision was inadequately reasoned and permission to appeal
         must be granted."


8.   Hence the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.

9.   Mr Richards  relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  leave.   Mr  Richards
    referred to paragraph  51  of  the  judge's  determination  wherein  he
    indicates "it is debatable whether these requirements in the new  Rules
    (Appendix FM) could be applied to a Turkish national given  the  ECAA".
    Mr Richards indicated that in saying this the  judge  was  wrong.   The
    Ankara Agreement is only a relaxation of the rules regarding settlement
    applications.  No balancing exercise was conducted and  no  element  of
    public interest was discussed.  This amounted to a fundamental error of
    law and the decision should be set aside.

10.  Miss Solanki referred to a skeleton argument that was submitted at  the
    start of the hearing.  Miss Solanki referred to paragraph 51  and  said
    that it did not amount to a material error of law.  Paragraphs 43 to 54
    of the determination show a balancing act and the  public  interest  is
    mentioned at paragraph 50.  The determination is sound upon  the  basis
    that we can now see why the judge came to the conclusion.   There  were
    reasoned conclusions.  The new Rules do not defeat an Article 8 claim.

11.  In reply Mr Richards referred to  paragraph  46  of  the  determination
    indicating a balancing act but nowhere below is such an act conducted.

12.  At this stage I rose to consider the matter  further  and  to  look  at
    Miss Solanki's skeleton argument.  I note that  document  supports  the
    findings of Judge Burnett and that the judge did take into account  the
    new Rules, properly operated the five-stage test set out in Razgar  and
    makes reference to the Ankara Agreement.

13.   Upon  returning  to  court  I  indicated   that   I   considered   the
    determination did contain a material error of law and the  decision  in
    respect of the appellant's human rights claim should be set  aside.   I
    now give my reasons.

14.  It is clear that  at  paragraph  42  of  the  determination  the  judge
    properly recorded that the appellant relied upon his relationship  with
    his  partner,  Mr  Smith.   The  determination  had  previously   noted
    discrepancies and inconsistencies in the evidence of the appellant  but
    this relates more to the appellant's appeal under the Ankara  Agreement
    decision than with regard to the appellant's human rights appeal.

15.  Paragraph 46 of the determination notes the necessity to  carry  out  a
    balancing act but it is certainly not clear from the ensuing paragraphs
    that the judge carried out such an act and certainly does  not  mention
    the public interest.  He does not set out what  that  interest  is  but
    merely  records  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  in  the   appellant's
    evidence.

16.  At paragraph  51  the  judge  records  that  it  is  debatable  whether
    Appendix FM applies to a Turkish national, however that comment is left
    "hanging in the air".  No conclusion is reached and no  examination  of
    Appendix FM is carried out.  Paragraph 48 of  the  determination  shows
    that the judge found that both the appellant and Mr Smith were  willing
    to relocate to Turkey together and the judge  found  that  it  was  not
    dangerous for him to go to that country.

17.  Overall the judge in the  determination  does  not  show  that  he  has
    adequately weighed up the appellant's circumstances as opposed  to  the
    public interest and has not adequately  reasoned  why  the  appellant's
    situation is such that it overrides the interests of the public.   This
    is a material error of law and  the  judge's  decision  in  respect  of
    Article 8  must be set aside.
18.  Prior to the hearing the appellant's new representatives had  lodged  a
    large number of documents and Miss Solanki indicated that she wished Mr
    Smith's mother  to  give  evidence  and  she  was  not  available.   It
    therefore falls within the category of cases mentioned in the  Practice
    Statement of the Senior President for this matter to be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

19.   The  findings  and  decision  of  Judge  Burnett  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's appeal  under  the  Rules  via  the  Ankara  Agreement  are
    preserved and will stand.

20.  No anonymity direction was sought and I do not make one.

21.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  by  any
    judge other than Judge Burnett, the listing to be at the  direction  of
    the appropriate Resident judge.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge N Poole

