
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16139/2015
     IA/16156/2015
     IA/16149/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th January 2016                      |On 18th March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                          mr R Z (first appellant)
                         mrs Y W (second appellant)
                          mr B Z (third appellant)
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Suffield-Thompson  who,  on  6th  August
    2015, dismissed the appellants' linked appeals against the respondent's
    decision to revoke their residence cards under Regulation 8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The grounds argue that the appellants  did  not  receive  a  notice  of
    hearing and that they had requested an oral hearing not  a  paper  one.
    They  had  not  sent  in  their  evidence  as  they  were  awaiting   a
    notification of  a  hearing  date  and  the  email  correspondence  was
    appended to substantiate their assertions.

 3. The first appellant born on 20th September 1983 is a citizen  of  China
    and the second  and  third  appellants  are  his  parents.   The  first
    appellant came to the UK as the partner of an EEA national Ms D  A  and
    was issued with a residence card on 18th April  2013.   The  revocation
    was based on the fact that the appellant was no  longer  in  a  durable
    relationship with a member of an EEA national and was therefore  not  a
    family member and no longer had a right to reside in the UK.

 4. To remain in  the  UK  the  appellant  under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  the  appellant
    would have to prove that he is the partner of an EEA national and he is
    in a durable relationship with that EEA member.

 5. On 16th April 2015 it was pointed  out  in  a  reasons  for  revocation
    letter to the first appellant he was no longer in a relationship and to
    the second and third appellants that  as  their  son  R  Z,  the  first
    appellant,  was  the  unmarried  extended  family  member  of  the  EEA
    national, they were not related to the EEA national, and they were  not
    entitled to hold a residence card defined by Regulation  17(1)  of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  17(1).   They  did  not  fall  to   be
    considered as extended family members and there was no provision  under
    the EEA Regulations to allow them to retain a residence card.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the appeal on 24th  July  2015  and
    recorded that there was no representation for the appellant or for  the
    respondent.  The application for permission to appeal sets out that  in
    fact the first appellant had received confirmation from the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 22nd June 2015 that the appeal was due to be considered  by
    way of an oral hearing.  That hearing, however, took place without  him
    and without a solicitor  being  informed  and  he  was  not  given  the
    opportunity to submit documentation.

 7. At the hearing Mr R Z attended and confirmed that he was not aware that
    any hearing took place.  He had filed some documents  with  his  appeal
    but was waiting for directions  of  how  to  submit  further  evidence.
    Pending criminal proceedings against him  for child  cruelty  have  now
    been finalised and he had been acquitted.

 8. Ms Sreeraman submitted that it would appear the  judge  was  not  aware
    that there had been an email from  the  appellant  confirming  that  he
    wished to have an oral hearing or at least that the  Tribunal  had  not
    given the appellant notice of the pending hearing.  Indeed I noted that
    on the file there is indeed a letter dated  22nd  June  2015  from  the
    Immigration Tribunal (IAC) confirming that  the  appeal  had  now  been
    changed to an oral hearing and to the appellant

      "You will receive correspondence informing you when  a  hearing  will
take place".

 9. There  is  further  correspondence  dated  7th  August  2015  from  the
    appellant explaining that he was  waiting  for  the  hearing  date  and
    preparing for the case and then he received a decision from the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the decision was based on his paper submissions only.



10. Mr R Z submitted that he  was  not  given  an  opportunity  to  present
    evidence before the judge or to counter the letters sent by his  former
    partner to the Home Office without his knowledge.  The  judge  had  not
    had the opportunity to set up facts  as  they  actually  were  and  the
    evidence before the judge was incorrect.   He  submitted  that  without
    clear evidence regarding the custody and contact  there  was  no  clear
    picture as to whether Article  8  should  apply.   His  ex-partner  had
    brought a false accusation against him and he had been kept  away  from
    his children.  He had been acquitted in a criminal court and  had  been
    found not abusive to any of  his  children  and  hoped  to  be  granted
    custody.  It was only fair for the case to be considered  in  front  of
    the court again.

11. He submitted that he made the application for residence of the children
    on 20th August 2014.

12. Mr R Z submitted that there were clearly special circumstances and that
    the judge should have adjourned the matter.

13. In conclusion, it is correct to state that the judge failed  to  notice
    that the appellant had been advised that his appeal hearing would  take
    the form of an oral hearing and although he was served with a notice on
    8th July 2015 informing him that the appeal was to be decided without a
    hearing on the papers, it also gave him a deadline  of  the  same  date
    within which to submit any written evidence.  Similarly the  same  date
    was given to the respondent.

14. There were submissions made from the Home Office dated  4th  June  2015
    applying for the appeal to be struck out  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    likely the children were Austrian nationals and the mother had  custody
    and thus he could not even benefit from claiming a derivative right  of
    residence under Regulation 15A(4) she being the primary  carer  of  the
    children.

15. No further notice regarding a hearing was sent to  the  appellant  save
    for the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  refusing  his  appeal  and  the
    appellant promptly  responded  to  the  Tribunal  on  7th  August  2015
    pointing out that there had been an administrative mistake and  he  was
    waiting for an appeal hearing.

16. It was submitted by Ms Sreeraman that the appellant's case was hopeless
    and that there was no provision under the EEA Regulations with which he
    could avail himself.  It was the appellant's position that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances in this case and it was fair for the judge to
    decide on, not for the Home Office merely to state that  there  was  no
    prospect of the appellant's success.

17. The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 apply.  Rule 25 sets out  that  the  Tribunal  must
    hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes the  proceedings
    except where:

    (a)  each party has consented to, or has not objected  to,  the  matter
         being decided without a hearing;


    (b)  the appellant has not consented to  the  appeal  being  determined
         without a hearing but the Lord Chancellor has refused  to  issue  a
         certificate of fee satisfaction for the fee payable for a hearing;


    (c)  the appellant is outside the United Kingdom and does  not  have  a
         representative who  has  an  address  for  service  in  the  United
         Kingdom;


    (d)  it is impracticable to give the appellant notice of the hearing;


    (e)  a party has failed to comply with a provision of  these  Rules,  a
         practice direction or a direction and  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that in all the circumstances, including the extent of the  failure
         and any reasons for it, it is appropriate to determine  the  appeal
         without a hearing;


    (f)  the appeal is one to which rule 16(2) or 18(2) applies; or


    (g)  subject to paragraph (2),  the  Tribunal  considers  that  it  can
         justly determine the matter without a hearing.


    (2)  Where paragraph (1)(g) applies, the Tribunal  must  not  make  the
         decision without a hearing without first giving the parties  notice
         of its intention to do so,  and  an  opportunity  to  make  written
         representations as to whether there should be a hearing.

    ...

18. The application of the Rules should also be considered in the light  of
    the overriding objective set out at paragraph 2:

    2.-(1)   The overriding objective of  these  Rules  is  to  enable  the
           Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

        (2)   Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-

           (a)    dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
                the importance of the case, the complexity  of  the  issues,
                the anticipated costs and the resources of the  parties  and
                of the Tribunal;

           (b)    avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
                the proceedings;


           (c)    ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
                able to participate fully in the proceedings;


           (d)    using any special expertise of the Tribunal  effectively;
                and

           (e)     avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with   proper
                consideration of the issues.

    I note that the parties should ensure so far as  practicable  that  the
    parties are able to participate fully in the proceedings.

19. It is clear that on two counts the judge fell into  error  because  the
    judge failed (through no fault of his or her own)  to  appreciate  that
    this had indeed been changed to an oral consideration and as  this  had
    been missed by the Tribunal there was no notice of hearing sent to  the
    appellant on the file.

20. There is on file a letter dated 4th July 2015 sent from the  ex-partner
    of the appellant and I note dated and stamped on 7th July 2016 which is
    an impossibility, detailing physical and emotional abuse perpetrated on
    her repeatedly through their relationship.   This  confirmed  that  the
    appellant and she had separated.

21. The judge quite rightly sets out the appellant's case but notes that it
    is based upon his "limited written evidence" [10] and it  would  appear
    that the evidence is obtained from the appellant's appeal documentation
    and the letter cited above from the ex-partner.

22. At the hearing before me the appellant stated that some of the evidence
    in the facts recorded were incorrect but he did confirm that he and his
    partner had separated as detailed in his notice of appeal and  that  he
    had been subsequently acquitted of child cruelty  at  his  Crown  Court
    case which endured for five days.  He had separated in early  2014  and
    he was then charged for three counts of common assault but found guilty
    only on one. He stated  he  continued  to  fight  for  custody  of  his
    children but at present the person  who  has  primary  custody  is  the
    mother.

23. I find that there was a procedural error in that a hearing should  have
    been allowed by the First-tier Tribunal although I have located no  fee
    recorded in order that the matter be amended to an oral hearing.   That
    said it is correct, as the judge recorded  at  paragraph  15,  that  to
    remain in the UK under Regulation 8(5) he would need to be in a durable
    relationship with an EEA national and he is not.

24. Under the EEA Regulations


    8.- "Extended family member"
    (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person who is
    not a family member of an EEA national under regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or
    (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
    (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
    a relative of an EEA national,his spouse or his civil partner and-
         (a) the person is residing in a country other than the United
    Kingdom ] 1 [...]2 and is
         dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of his household;
         (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
         accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes to
         join him there; or
         (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has joined
         the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to be
         dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.

    (3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
    a relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his civil partner and,
    on serious health grounds, strictly requires the personal care of the
    EEA national his spouse or his civil partner.


    (4) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
    a relative of an EEA national and would meet the requirements in the
    immigration rules (other than those relating to entry clearance) for
    indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a
    dependent relative of the EEA national were the EEA national a person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.


    (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
    the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and can
    prove to the decision maker that he is in a durable relationship with
    the EEA national.


    (6) In these Regulations "relevant EEA national" means, in relation to
    an extended family member, the EEA national who is or whose spouse or
    civil partner is the relative of the extended family member for the
    purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is the
    partner of the extended family member for the purpose of paragraph (5).


    20.- Refusal to issue or renew and revocation of residence
documentation

    (2) The Secretary of State may revoke a registration certificate or a
    residence card or refuse torenew a residence card if the holder of the
    certificate or card has ceased to have, or never had, a right to reside
    under these Regulations.

25. The first appellant's claim is bound to fail in that regard as he is no
    longer  a  partner  of  an  EEA  national  and  is  not  in  a  durable
    relationship. The second and third appellants' claim is also  bound  to
    fail as they were never a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or
    civil partner.  The first appellant  and  the  EEA  national  were  not
    married and they were his parents not her parents.

26. I should make it clear that the appellant is no long awaiting  a  trial
    for criminal charges and has  been  acquitted  of  any  case  of  child
    cruelty.  However any  issue  in  respect  of  a  derivative  right  of
    residence cannot be founded by the facts as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal and as they  remain.   Essentially  the  appellant's  ex-
    partner is still the carer  and  primary  carer  of  the  children  and
    although there are court proceedings pending they do not give rise to a
    right under Regulation 15A of the European Economic  Area  Regulations.
    Once again the appellant's claim in this respect was bound to fail.

27. I turn to a consideration of  the  human  rights  points  made  in  the
    judge's decision and note that in fact  Article  8  is  not  applicable
    because of Amirteymour and Others (EEA Appeal:Human Rights) [2015] UKUT
    00466 (IAC).  This confirmed that where, in response to an  application
    to remain under the EEA Regulations, and where no  Section  120  notice
    had been served and/or there was no  removal  decision,  the  appellant
    could not raise human rights grounds.  A valid  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules should be  made.   The  appellant's  application  was
    under the EEA Regulations only and not in relation to Article 8 and  as
    set out in Amirteymour it is necessary for  the  appellant  to  make  a
    separate application under Article 8.  There is not a  suggestion  that
    the appellant is to be removed and thus the Secretary of State, in this
    instance, was making a decision which would affect the  children  under
    Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

28. I therefore find that there was an error of law and I set aside  and  I
    remake the decision, but  in  the  light  of  my  findings  above,  the
    appellants'  claims  were  bound  to  fail.   The  second   and   third
    appellants, it would appear, have returned to China and as stated above
    their appeals can have no prospect of success either.

Order

The appeals of appellants are dismissed under the EEA Regulations.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made  because  of  the  sensitive  nature  of  the  information
included and because there are minors involved.


Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
