
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16254/2014
                                                               IA/16583/2014
                                                               IA/16589/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 22 April 2015                     |On 18 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      mr farhan asif (first appellant)
                 mr muhammad rehan ashraf (second appellant)
               mrs yasmin (dependant of the second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Michael Biggs, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

 1. The appellant before  us  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department who appeals against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 8 December 2014.  The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department is hereinafter referred as "the Secretary  of  State".   The
    respondents are hereinafter referred to as "the  applicants".   By  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  the  applicants'  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision dated  26  March  2014  to  refuse  their
    applications for further leave to remain as Tier  1  Entrepreneurs  was
    allowed.

Background

 2. The applicants are nationals of Pakistan.  The first applicant was born
    on 10 December 1984, the second applicant was born on 8 June 1984,  the
    third applicant is the second applicant's wife and his dependant.

 3. The first applicant entered the UK in July 2007 pursuant  to  leave  to
    enter as a student.  He was later granted further leave to remain as  a
    Tier 1 Migrant.  The second appellant entered the UK in September  2006
    pursuant to leave to enter and remain as a student and was then granted
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 Migrant.  The first and  second  applicants
    are not related, but met while they were students in  the  UK.   On  14
    March 2013 the first two applicants applied for further leave to remain
    as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants, as  an  entrepreneurial  team.   Mrs
    Yasmin applied for further leave to remain as  the  second  applicant's
    dependant.

 4. The first and second applicants were called  to  an  interview  by  the
    Secretary of State.  They attended that interview on 20 February  2014.
    They were interviewed separately.

 5. The applications of 14 March 2013 were  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 24 March 2014, which generated a right of appeal  pursuant  to
    Section 82(1)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act").

 6. The applicants exercised their  right  of  appeal.   The  hearing  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal on 8 December 2014.  In  the  course  of
    that appeal hearing the first and second applicants gave oral evidence.



 7. The First-tier Tribunal found as follows:

         "71. I am also satisfied that both appellants  have  satisfactorily
             demonstrated that they are a genuine entrepreneur and can meet
             the Immigration Rules as set out under paragraph 245DD"

    and at paragraph 73:

         "73. Mrs Yasmin, the wife of Mr Ashraf, was also refused  leave  to
             remain as a dependant of a Tier 1 Migrant.  As  her  husband's
             application has been granted, it follows that  she  should  be
             granted leave in line with that of her husband".

Submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State

 8. The submissions on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  were  sharply
    focused: it was first contended by Miss  Everett  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in reaching its decision had relied on inadmissible  evidence.
    It had  in  particular  relied  on  post-application  evidence  in  the
    following paragraphs of its decision: 62; 63;  64;  66  and  67.   Miss
    Everett submitted that this evidence was new evidence and she submitted
    was prohibited by the terms of Section 85A(4) of the 2002 Act.  It  was
    not disputed by Mr  Biggs  that  in  these  paragraphs  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had had regard to post application evidence.

 9. In support of her above submission Miss Everett directed our  attention
    to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ahmed  and  Another  (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC).  In Ahmed it was held, by
    a panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal  chaired  by  Mr  Ockelton,  the  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal, that:

         "1.  Where a provision of the Rules (such as that in para 245DD(k))
             provides that points will not be awarded if the decision-maker
             is not satisfied as to another (non-points-scoring) aspect  of
             the Rule, the non-points-scoring aspect  and  the  requirement
             for points are inextricably linked.

         2.   As a result, the prohibition on new evidence in  s  85A(4)  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  applies  to
             the non-points-scoring aspect of the rule: the prohibition  is
             in relation to new  evidence  that  goes  to  the  scoring  of
             points".

10.  For  the  foregoing  reasons  Miss  Everett  submitted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision contained a material error of  law.  Accordingly  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having  considered   material
    inadmissible evidence, that the Secretary of State's decision  was  not
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules could not be sustained.

11.  The second branch of her argument related to the following findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 59 and 60 of its decision:

         "59. Turning initially to the allegation that the proposed business
             was not genuine, I note that despite the  fact  that  both  Mr
             Asif and Mr Ashraf were interviewed, this allegation  was  not
             put  to  them  at  the  interview.   The  respondent   clearly
             therefore had every opportunity of questioning the  appellants
             about this matter, but chose not to do so.  I therefore do not
             find it is reasonable that this  matter  therefore  is  raised
             only in the refusal letter, given that the appellants did  not
             have an opportunity of  responding  at  an  earlier  time  and
             providing further documentation.

         60.  Similarly, there is  no  requirement  in  the  rules  for  any
             letters to be provided from family members confirming that the
             amount given is a gift.   Again  had  this  been  put  to  the
             appellant at interview,  then  the  appellant  would  have  an
             opportunity of providing this additional evidence."

12.  Her position with respect to the above findings  was  interlinked  with
    the first branch of her argument and can be  summarised  as  this:  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to have regard to Section 85A(4) of  the
    2002  Act  which  prevented  the  submission  of  further   documentary
    evidence.  On that basis the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal that
    the first two applicants did not have an opportunity of responding  and
    providing further documentation was wrong in law.  They were  prevented
    from putting forward such further evidence  by  the  terms  of  Section
    85A(4).  If the applicants were not in a position to put  forward  such
    further evidence there had been no unfairness to them on the basis  set
    forth by the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly she submitted that  this
    was a further material error of law.

Reply on behalf of the Applicants

13.  The applicants opposed the Secretary of State's appeal on a  number  of
    bases.  There were three chapters to Mr Biggs' submissions:

       .  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude  that   the
         applicants had been treated procedurally unfairly, and that the  24
         March 2014 decisions were Wednesbury unreasonable.  The appeal  was
         therefore properly allowed to this extent, and to this extent there
         had been no material error of law.

       .  Ahmed  did  not  prevent  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  oral
         evidence, and on the basis of  the  oral  evidence  the  judge  was
         entitled to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

       . Ahmed was wrongly decided.

14. In development of his argument in terms of his first  head  it  was  Mr
    Biggs' submission that the Secretary of State had failed to observe her
    duty to act fairly in all the circumstances.  As to what fairness meant
    in the circumstances of this case he  referred  us  to  the  well-known
    passage in the judgment of Lord Mustill in Ex-Parte Doody [1994]  AC531
    at 560 D-G where the following guidance as  to  the  principles  to  be
    applied when considering fairness was given:

         "What does fairness require in the present case?  My Lords, I think
         it unnecessary to refer by name or to quote from, any of the often-
         cited authorities in  which  the  courts  have  explained  what  is
         essentially an intuitive judgment.  They are far  too  well  known.
         From them, I derive that: - (1) Where an Act of Parliament  confers
         an administrative power there is a  presumption  that  it  will  be
         exercised in a manner which is fair in all the  circumstances.  (2)
         The standards of fairness are not immutable.  They may change  with
         the passage of time, both in the general and in  their  application
         to decisions of a particular type. (3) The principles  of  fairness
         are not to be applied by rote identically in every situation.  What
         fairness demands is dependent on the context of the  decision,  and
         this is to be taken  into  account  in  all  its  aspects.  (4)  An
         essential feature of the context is the statute which  creates  the
         discretion, as regards both its language and the shape of the legal
         and administrative system within which the decision is  taken.  (5)
         Fairness will very often require that a person who may be adversely
         affected  by  the  decision  will  have  an  opportunity  to   make
         representations on his own behalf either  before  the  decision  is
         taken with a view to producing a favourable result; or after it  is
         taken, with a view to procuring  its  modification;  or  both.  (6)
         Since  the  person  affected   usually   cannot   make   worthwhile
         representations without knowing what factors may weigh against  his
         interests fairness will very often require that he is  informed  of
         the gist of the case which he has to answer".

    In particular Mr Biggs relied on what was  said  at  point  6  by  Lord
    Mustill: he argued that in the absence  of  the  first  two  applicants
    being told what the gist of the Secretary of State's position was  when
    she had them brought in for interview then they were not in a  position
    to make worthwhile representations in the course of the interview.

15.  It  was  his  position  that  the  argument  based  on  unfairness  was
    particularly strong in this case given  the  legal  and  administrative
    system within which the decision was  taken  (see:  factor  4  in  Lord
    Mustill's observations).  This was the  case,  in  that  if  Ahmed  was
    correctly decided, the applicants would not be able to  rely  upon  any
    evidence not submitted with the 14 March  2013  application.   This  he
    argued intensified the Secretary of State's duty  to  act  fairly,  and
    generated a duty to give an interviewee  notice  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case and a meaningful  opportunity  to  be  heard  and  respond
    thereto.

16.  In conclusion in terms  of  this  first  chapter  of  his  argument  he
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  correctly  held  that  the
    Secretary of State did not  act  in  accordance  with  her  obligations
    regarding fairness and thus her decisions were vitiated by  public  law
    error and the appeal was therefore bound  to  be  allowed  pursuant  to
    Section 86(2) and  84(1)(e)  of  the  2002  Act.   To  that  extent  he
    submitted there had been no material error of law and the appeal should
    be dismissed.

17.  Turning to the second chapter of his argument  he  generally  submitted
    that if Ahmed was  correctly  decided  the  principle  decided  therein
    should be confined to the exclusion of documentary  evidence  that  was
    not submitted with the application, but not oral evidence given  before
    the Tribunal.

18.  It was he argued  unlikely  that  Parliament  would  have  intended  to
    preclude the Tribunal hearing oral evidence in appeals from immigration
    decisions on points based system applications.  Indeed, were this to be
    the effect of Section 85A the  fairness  and  utility  of  a  statutory
    appeal in cases such as the instant was doubtful.

19.  Further, the structure of Section 85A(4) indicated that  oral  evidence
    was admissible.  The exceptions within this sub-section only applied to
    evidence "adduced by the appellant".  However, while a witness  may  be
    tendered by an appellant, often the key oral evidence is  that  adduced
    during cross-examination of the witness by the  respondent.   Moreover,
    of course, it was not uncommon for First-tier Judges to  ask  questions
    of witnesses.  It would be odd he submitted that if in those situations
    the Tribunal was obliged to ignore the witness's evidence-in-chief, but
    considered the witness' answer to the judge or the Secretary of State's
    representative.

20.  He went on to  submit,  on  the  basis  of  his  foregoing  contentions
    regarding the proper understanding of the decision in Ahmed,  that:  on
    the oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, which was accepted by
    it, the first and second applicants' business was held  to  be  genuine
    and thus the  rejection  of  the  14  march  2013  application  by  the
    Secretary of State pursuant to 245DD(k) was properly held  wrong.   The
    appeal was therefore correctly allowed by the First-tier Tribunal under
    the Immigration Rules.  Although the First-tier Tribunal had considered
    documentary evidence not submitted with the  respondent's  application,
    this could not have affected the outcome of  the  appeal  and  thus  he
    submitted the error was not material.

21.  Finally elaborating upon his third ground Mr  Biggs  said  this:  Ahmed
    turned on the construction of the words "to refuse  an  application  on
    grounds not related to the acquisition of 'points' under  the  'points-
    based system' in Section 85A(4)(c) of the 2002 Act.  The words "related
    to" he submitted were crucial.

22.  The Tribunal in Ahmed had given the expression "related to" its  usual,
    broad meaning.  However, that meaning led to  what  he  submitted  were
    absurd results, and undermined access to justice.   In  development  of
    that submission he said  this:  such  an  interpretation  prevented  an
    appellant from rebutting allegations which were, as in this case,  made
    for the first time  in  a  refusal  letter,  and  in  many  such  cases
    nullified the utility of the statutory appeal system.   Given  this  he
    submitted, Parliament was unlikely to have intended that the expression
    "related to" should be given the construction applied to it  in  Ahmed.
    The correct interpretation he  submitted  of  the  provision  was  more
    narrow: only a refusal on a ground or grounds directly related  to  the
    application of points under the Rules  should  be  insulated  from  the
    adduction of new evidence.

23.  For all of the foregoing reasons he submitted that  the  appeal  should
    be dismissed.

Discussion

24.  We turn first to the issue of the public law error.   We  believe  that
    there is substantial force in the argument advanced by Mr Biggs.

25.  We believe it is a reasonable inference that the reason for  the  first
    two applicants being invited for interview by the  Secretary  of  State
    was that the Secretary of State had formed a preliminary  view  on  the
    papers before her, as submitted with the application, that the proposed
    business was not genuine.  We are unable to identify any other possible
    reason why the first two applicants should  have  been  called  in  for
    interview and no other possible reason was suggested by Miss Everett.

26.   That  being  the  reason  for  the  interview,   then   applying   the
    observations of Lord Mustill in Doody, we are persuaded as a matter  of
    fairness that the Secretary of State was required to inform  the  first
    two applicants that the reason for them being interviewed was that  she
    had at least formed a preliminary view doubting the genuineness of  the
    proposed business.  This was necessary  in  order  for  the  first  two
    applicants to understand that  they  required  in  their  responses  to
    questions to address this particular issue.

27.  We are satisfied that in the absence of knowing  the  reasons  for  the
    interview it would  have  been  difficult  for  the  first  and  second
    applicants to make worthwhile representations.

28.  Moreover, we agree with the  submission  made  by  Mr  Biggs  that  the
    legislative context of this interview made it even more important as  a
    matter of fairness to advise the first two applicants of the reason for
    the interview.  The decision in Ahmed means that this was the last real
    opportunity for the first two applicants to satisfy  the  Secretary  of
    State as to the genuineness of the proposed business as they would  not
    be in a position to rely upon evidence submitted later than the date of
    application at any hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

29.  Miss Everett's submissions in relation to the public  law  error  issue
    were to the effect that: first the Secretary of State had not made  her
    mind up at the stage of the interview and only made a decision  on  the
    genuineness of the proposed  business  having  looked  at  all  of  the
    evidence in the round and at the stage of issuing the  refusal  letter.
    Therefore she contended there was no reason to  inform  the  first  two
    applicants at the interview or prior thereto that  the  genuineness  of
    the proposed business was doubted.

30.  We accept that the Secretary of State did not make her  decision  until
    all the evidence was before her and therefore her decision was not made
    until the date of the decision letter.  However, if as we have held she
    suspected on the basis of the application and the  accompanying  papers
    that the proposed business was not genuine (that being her  reason  for
    having an interview) that was sufficient in itself to engage  the  duty
    of fairness and to require her to inform the first  two  applicants  of
    the reasons for the interview.

31.  Miss Everett also submitted that a  view  on  the  genuineness  of  the
    proposed business might not be arrived at until some stage  during  the
    course of the interview.  Thus the first two applicants  could  not  be
    informed of any view prior to the interview.

32.  Again as we have said the only reason we can identify  for  having  the
    interview is that a preliminary view had been formed that the  business
    was not genuine and so we do not accept this submission.

33.  Beyond what we have stated  above,  regarding  the  interview  and  the
    ability of the first two applicants to give meaningful answers there is
    a  further  aspect  of  fairness  which  we  believe  requires  to   be
    considered.  Had the first two applicants been informed of the  reasons
    for the interview they would also have had an  opportunity  to  produce
    further documentation in response to that preliminary view.  We observe
    that in Ahmed the Secretary of State also  interviewed  the  applicants
    and was prepared to accept further documentation at  that  stage  (see:
    paragraph 2 of the decision).

34.  In the whole circumstances we are satisfied that if the interviews  had
    been conducted fairly it might have made a difference to  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State.  However, with respect to this argument,  we
    are not persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal decided this  case  upon
    the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law,  rather
    on a fair reading of the whole decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    concluded that the applicants should be  successful  in  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The observations  made  regarding  the  public  law
    error have not caused the First-tier Tribunal to hold the decision  was
    not in accordance with the  law.  This  may  have  been  an  oversight,
    alternatively it may have been that the First-tier  Tribunal  took  the
    view that it  was  not  necessary  to  rule  on  the  issue  given  its
    conclusion in terms of the Immigration Rules.

35.  With respect to the second chapter of the applicants' argument  we  are
    persuaded for the reasons advanced by Mr  Biggs  that  Ahmed  does  not
    prevent the hearing of oral evidence.  We note that  Miss  Everett  for
    the Secretary of State did not submit to us that a proper understanding
    of  the  decision  in  Ahmed  resulted  in  such  oral  evidence  being
    inadmissible.

36.  In particular we are persuaded that if such oral evidence could not  be
    led then the fairness and utility of a statutory appeal in  such  cases
    as the instant one would be doubtful.

37.  The next question in this chapter of Mr Biggs'  argument  is  this:  is
    the First-tier Tribunal's finding as to the credibility  of  the  first
    two applicants, having heard their oral evidence, a sufficient basis to
    sustain its finding that the Secretary of State's decision was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules?

38.  At paragraph 25 the First-tier Tribunal found that the  evidence  given
    by both of the first two applicants was truthful.  Mr  Biggs'  argument
    was that on  the  basis  of  that  finding,  and  that  finding  alone,
    notwithstanding the consideration by the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    inadmissible evidence in terms of Ahmed, the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    entitled to find in the applicants' favour in terms of the  Immigration
    Rules. There had thus been no material error of law.

39.  Initially we were attracted by this submission, however, on  reflection
    we are not convinced by it.

40.  In considering the evidence the First-tier Tribunal would have taken  a
    holistic approach to it and looked at the evidence in  the  round.   In
    reaching its view on the credibility of the first two applicants we are
    unable to assess to what extent  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  view  was
    formed on the basis of the evidence which was inadmissible in terms  of
    Ahmed.  We are persuaded that it is impossible to say  what  conclusion
    the First-tier Tribunal would have reached  on  their  credibility  and
    therefore on the genuineness of the proposed business  had  the  First-
    tier Tribunal not had regard to the evidence which it was not  entitled
    to take into account.

41.  Moreover the inadmissible evidence must, it appears to  us,  given  its
    materiality to the issue of the genuineness of the business, have  been
    a significant factor in the First-tier Tribunal's decision in terms  of
    the Immigration Rules. Accordingly we reject  the  submission  made  on
    behalf of the applicants that there was no material error by the First-
    tier Tribunal in considering the inadmissible evidence.

42.  Turning to the final branch of Mr  Biggs'  submissions  it  is  perhaps
    convenient at this point to set out the relevant  statutory  framework:
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         "85A

         Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions

         (1)  This section sets out  the  exceptions  mentioned  in  Section
             85(5).

         (2)  Exception 1 is that in relation to  an  appeal  under  Section
             82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind  specified  in
             Section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal  may  consider  only  the
             circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.

         (3)  Exception 2 applies to an appeal under Section 82(1) if -

             (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of  a  kind
                  specified in Section 82(2)(a) or (d),

             (b)  the immigration decision concerned an  application  of  a
                  kind identified in Immigration Rules as  requiring  to  be
                  considered under a "points-based system", and

             (c)  the appeal relies wholly or partly on  grounds  specified
                  in Section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

         (4)  Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
             adduced by the appellant only if it -

             (a)  was submitted in support of, and at the time  of  making,
                  the application to which the immigration decision related,

             (b)  related to the appeal insofar as  it  relies  on  grounds
                  other than those specified in sub-section 3(c),

             (c)  is adduced to prove  that  the  document  is  genuine  or
                  valid, or

             (d)  is adduced in connection with the  Secretary  of  State's
                  reliance on  a  discretion  under  Immigration  Rules,  or
                  compliance with a requirement  of  Immigration  Rules,  to
                  refuse an  application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of "points" under the "points-based system"".

43.  The material sections of the decision in Ahmed for the purposes of  the
    instant case are:

         "5.  The purpose of that provision is quite clear. It is that where
             a Points Based application is made and refused, the assessment
             by the Judge is to be of the  material  that  was  before  the
             decision-maker  rather  than  a  new  consideration   of   new
             material. In other words the appeal if it is successful is  on
             the basis that the decision-maker with the material before him
             should have made a different decision, not on the basis that a
             different  way  of  presenting  the  application  would   have
             produced a different decision.

         6.   As is apparent from her judgment, the judge took into  account
             material other than that which was before the  decision-maker.
             In a spirited defence of her procedure Mr Asme  has  submitted
             that the way in which the letter was divided  into  Non-Points
             Based and Points Based matters demonstrates that in  assessing
             whether the business plans were genuine the decision-maker was
             refusing the application on grounds which were not related  to
             the acquisition of points under the Points  Based  System.  If
             that is right, Mr Asme submits, then the Judge was at  liberty
             to look at further evidence. We  are  satisfied  however  that
             that is a submission  which  cannot  succeed.  There  are  two
             connected reasons for that.

         7.   The first is that in paragraph 245DD(k) of  the  Statement  of
             Changes in the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended)  is  the
             following:

                  "If the Secretary of  State  is  not  satisfied  with  the
                  genuineness of the application in  relation  to  a  points
                  scoring requirement in Appendix A those points will not be
                  awarded."

             That clearly links the assessment of the  genuineness  of  the
             scheme to the acquisition of points  and  rules  out,  in  our
             judgment,  the  submission  that   the   assessment   of   the
             genuineness of the scheme was a  ground  not  related  to  the
             acquisition of points under the Points Based  System.  On  the
             contrary, the wording  of  the  Rule  links  the  two  matters
             inextricably.

         8.   Secondly, as we pointed out to Mr Asme in the  course  of  his
             submissions, if he were  able  to  show  that  the  Judge  was
             entitled to look at the genuineness  of  the  scheme  for  the
             purposes of the appeal before her, she would nevertheless  not
             be able to reach a decision that because of her view about the
             genuineness of the scheme, points should  have  been  awarded.
             That is because that would itself link the genuineness of  the
             scheme to the acquisition of points,  and  she  is  prohibited
             from hearing evidence which does  go  to  the  acquisition  of
             points.

         9.   For those reasons we  are  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of
             State's grounds of appeal are made out. The Judge erred in law
             in reaching her conclusion.  It  is  impossible  to  say  what
             conclusion she would have reached if she had  not  taken  into
             account the evidence which she was not entitled  to  hear.  We
             set aside her determination. The position then is that we  are
             required to substitute a decision or remit  the  case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal for a decision to  be  made.  However,  Mr
             Asme has told us after taking instructions that at that  point
             the appellants would wish to withdraw their appeal against the
             Secretary of State's  decision  and  make  a  new  application
             supported by the documents which are now available to them, no
             doubt during the course of the business which they  have  been
             seeking to run ever since they set it up at the end  of  2012.
             We will accept that withdrawal. The result is that the  First-
             tier Tribunal Judge's judgment  having  been  set  aside,  the
             decision of the Secretary of State  is  now  unchallenged  and
             stands as a refusal of the applications made at  beginning  of
             2013".

44.  We are satisfied that the analysis in Ahmed in the  above  sections  of
    the decision is correct.

45.  It seems to us that the identification of the purpose of the  provision
    and the analysis of the provision which flows from  the  identification
    of its purpose is persuasive.

46.  In our view on a proper construction of the language of  the  provision
    it was intended by Parliament that "the appeal, if successful, it is on
    the basis that the decision-maker with the material before  him  should
    have made a different decision".

47.  We find that the reasons advanced by the Upper Tribunal in Ahmed as  to
    why "related to" should have a broad meaning are  when  taken  together
    cogent.

48.  We do  not  agree  with  the  submission  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    applicants that  the  reasoning  in  Ahmed  leads  to  absurd  results.
    Applicants are not prevented  from  rebutting  allegations  made  in  a
    refusal letter.  They can give evidence as to why the material produced
    to the Secretary of State with the application should not have led  the
    Secretary of State to hold for  example:  that  the  business  was  not
    genuine.  We believe that it is not absurd  to  have  an  appeal  right
    which only allows consideration of the material  before  the  decision-
    maker and does not allow new material to be considered.  Such an appeal
    system is not a denial of access to justice as was submitted to us.

49.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules is,
    for the reasons we have earlier stated, subject to material  errors  of
    law, namely: the consideration of inadmissible evidence and accordingly
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot be maintained and we set
    it aside.

50.  We remake the decision as follows: for the  reasons  earlier  given  we
    are satisfied that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. It follows that the original decision  of  the
    Secretary of State remains outstanding with the practical  effect  that
    the Secretary of State has to remake it.



Signed   Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
