
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16776/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th September 2015                |On 14th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                              Md FAJLUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa of Kalam, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  brings  this  appeal,
but in order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to  as  they  were
in the First Tier Tribunal. This is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against the decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Knowles,  promulgated  on
17  March  2015,  which  allowed  the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
respondent's decision dated 20 March 2014 to refuse the appellant  leave  to
remain in the UK and to give directions for his removal.

Background

3.    The appellant was  born  on  15  April  1979  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.

4.    On 17 February 2014,  the  appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
remain in the UK as  a  student.  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
application on 20 March 2014. The appellant appealed against  that  decision
on 7 April 2014  on  grounds  which  related  entirely  to  his  pursuit  of
education in the UK. In addition, he argued that  his  pursuit  of  academic
study in the UK created private life within the meaning of  Article  8  ECHR
which would be breached by his removal.

5.    On 10 October 2014, the appellant  filed  a  statement  of  additional
grounds under Section 120 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2004. In that Section 120 notice, the appellant claimed  that  he  qualified
for leave to remain as a partner under Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM to  the
Immigration  Rules  following  his  marriage  to  a  British  citizen  on  3
September 2014.

The Judge's Decision

6.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision of 20 March  2014  to
the First Tier Tribunal. First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Knowles  ("the  judge")
allowed the appeal against  the  respondent's  decision,  finding  that  the
appellant fulfilled the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
Rules. In doing so, the judge found that  the  appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in terms of Appendix  FM  was  made  when  the  Section  120
notice was served on 10 October 2014.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 18 May 2015, First Tier  Tribunal
Judge Lever granted permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

         "It is arguable that the judge had not applied the  correct  period
         of production of financial documents,  that  being  the  six  month
         period prior to the date of application."

The Hearing

8.    Mr Tarlow, for the  respondent,  focused  on  [54]  and  [55]  of  the
judge's decision and referred me to  Paragraph  2(a)(i)  of  Appendix  FM-SE
which specifically sets out a requirement for payslips  covering  "a  period
of six months prior to the date of application..."  He  told  me  that  that
provision was written in unambiguous and straightforward terms and  was  not
capable of the interpretation given to it by the  judge  in  [54]  and  [55]
and, that had a correct interpretation been placed on  that  provision,  the
appeal could not have been allowed under the Immigration Rules.

9.    Mr Mustafa argued for the appellant that there is a  conflict  between
primary and secondary legislation. He referred to Section 85(2) and  Section
85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  He  relied  on
Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 and SS Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,
and argued that there is no error in the judge's  decision.  The  judge  was
obliged to consider all matters placed before him because of  the  operation
of Section 85 of the 2002 Act and said that the  apparent  conflict  between
primary and secondary legislation  can  only  be  resolved  by  a  purposive
interpretation of the Immigration Rules.

Analysis

10.   There is  no  conflict  between  primary  and  secondary  legislation.
Section 85 of the 2002 Act  requires  a  tribunal  to  consider  any  matter
raised in the grounds of appeal and, to an extent, that is  what  the  judge
did. Unfortunately, in considering all of  the  matters  raised,  the  judge
incorrectly interpreted Paragraph 2 of Appendix FM-SE.

11.   There is force in Mr Tarlow's submission that Paragraph 2 of  Appendix
FM-SE is written in unambiguous terms. It demands payslips covering  "(i)  a
period of six months prior  to  the  date  of  application..."  There  is  a
difference between the date of application and the date of  lodging  of  the
Section 120 notice (in this case, seven months after the  date  of  decision
appealed against). The harsh truth is that although the  appellant  and  his
wife have produced a sequence payslips covering a  six  month  period,  they
have produced payslips for the wrong period. The  application  was  made  in
February 2014. The payslips should therefore date  from  September  2013  to
complete the six months sequence required by Paragraph 2 of Appendix  FM-SE.
The judge correctly found (at [54]) that the earliest payslip  (and  so  the
commencement  of  the  six  month  period)  is  dated  October   2013.   The
straightforward terms of Appendix FM-SE cannot be fulfilled.

12.   I therefore find that the decision promulgated on  17  March  2015  is
tainted by a material error of law and must be set aside.

13.   Although I set aside the decision promulgated  on  17  March  2015,  I
preserve the findings made by Judge Knowles and  so  go  on  to  decide  the
appeal of new.

14.   The judge found that the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  credible
witnesses, that they are married and  that  the  sponsor  is  pregnant  with
their first child. The original decision was  made  in  terms  of  paragraph
322(1) of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 322 (1) of the rules sets  out  a
mandatory refusal because the variation of leave was sought  for  a  purpose
not covered by the Rules. At [48], the judge found that  that  decision  was
"unassailable". No challenge is raised to that decision. The focus  in  this
case was on Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM.

15.   It is beyond dispute that the date of application was  February  2014.
It is equally beyond  dispute  that  a  sequence  of  payslips  starting  in
October 2013 was produced. October 2013 is five months prior to the date  of
submission of the application. Because the payslip for  September  2013  has
not been produced, the appellant  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules.

16.   It is submitted that the appellant's rights  in  terms  of  Article  8
ECHR are breached and that the facts and circumstances of  this  case  merit
consideration of Article 8 out-with the Rules.

17.   R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v SSHD (Article  8
- MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) in which it  was  held
that there is nothing in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin),  Gulshan
(Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)
or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) to indicate  that
a threshold test was being suggested as opposed  to  making  it  clear  that
there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there was anything  which
has  not  already  been  adequately  considered  in  the  context   of   the
Immigration Rules and which could lead to  a  successful  Article  8  claim.
These authorities must not be read as  seeking  to  qualify  or  fetter  the
assessment of Article 8. This is  consistent  with  para  128  of  R  (MM  &
Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, that there is no utility in  imposing  a
further intermediate test as a preliminary to a consideration of an  Article
8  claim  beyond  the  relevant  criterion-based  Rule.  As  is  held  in  R
(Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), there is no  prior  threshold
which dictates whether the exercise  of  discretion  should  be  considered;
rather the nature of the assessment and the reasoning which are  called  for
are informed by threshold considerations.

18.   In Khan (2015) CSIH 29 the Inner House found in  favour  of  immigrant
spouses who challenged refusals to grant leave to remain.  The  Court  ruled
that there was no human rights rule that an  immigrant,  who  married  a  UK
national at a  time  when  their  immigration  status  was  uncertain,  must
establish "exceptional  circumstance"  before  removal  could  amount  to  a
breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

19.   The only reason that the appellant does not  fulfil  the  requirements
of the Immigration Rules is because one month's payslip is missing.  All  of
the other requirements of the Immigration Rules are met. It is not  disputed
that the appellant is married to a British  citizen  and  that  their  first
child is due on 15 October 2015.

20.   Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  is  a
factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  determining   proportionality.   I
appreciate that as the public  interest  provisions  are  now  contained  in
primary  legislation  they  override  existing  case  law,  Section  117A(2)
requires me to have regard to the considerations  listed  in  Sections  117B
and 117C.  I am conscious of my statutory duty to take  these  factors  into
account when coming to  my  conclusions.   I  am  also  aware  that  Section
117A(3) imposes upon me the duty of carrying out a  balancing  exercise.  In
so doing I remind myself of the guidance contained within Razgar.

21.   Maintenance of fair  and  effective  immigration  control  is  in  the
public interest but against that, the appellant can speak  English  and  the
appellant is financially independent so that  Section  117B(2)  and  117B(3)
weigh in the appellant's favour.

22.   The appellant formed his relationship with his wife  at  a  time  when
his immigration status was precarious, but that  is  of  limited  relevance.
Section 117B(4) is not engaged because the appellant has never been  in  the
UK unlawfully. Section 117B(5) relates to the establishment of private  life
whilst immigration status is precarious (not family life).  Section  117B(6)
has no relevance to this case.

23.   The effect of implementation of the respondent's decision is that  the
appellant would be removed to Bangladesh  and  separated  from  his  British
citizen wife and, by the time removal is effected, separated from a  British
citizen child. The appellant (and his wife) would have to face a  period  of
uncertainty whilst the appellant applies for entry clearance from abroad.

24.   In EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 41 the House of  Lords  said  the
Tribunal should "recognise that it will rarely be  proportionate  to  uphold
an order for removal of a spouse if there is a close and genuine  bond  with
the other spouse and that spouse cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  follow
the removed spouse to the country of removal or if the effect of  the  order
is to sever  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  parent  and
child".

25.    In Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40 the House of  Lords  said  that
in deciding whether the general policy  of  requiring  people  such  as  the
Appellant to return to apply for entry in accordance with the rules of  this
country was legitimate and  proportionate  in  a  particular  case,  it  was
necessary to  consider  what  the  benefits  of  the  policy  were.   Whilst
acknowledging the deterrent effect of the policy the House of Lords  queried
the underlying basis of the policy in other respects and made it clear  that
the policy should not be applied in a rigid, Kafka-esque manner.  The  House
of Lords went on to say that it would be  "comparatively  rarely,  certainly
in family cases involving  children"  that  an  Article  8  case  should  be
dismissed on the basis that it would be proportionate and  more  appropriate
for the Appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

26.   In Beoku-Betts (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 38 the House  of  Lords  accepted
that the Tribunal is concerned with  the  effect  of  the  decision  on  all
members of the family.

27.   When I weigh all of these matters, I find that there are more  factors
weighing in the appellant's favour  than  those  against  the  appellant.  I
cannot see that it is in the public interest to separate the appellant  from
his pregnant wife because the absence of one piece of paper means  that  the
rigid terms of one clause in the Immigration Rules are not met when  all  of
the other Rules are met.

28.   I therefore find that there are  good  grounds  for  considering  this
case out-with the Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  respondent's  decision
amounts to a disproportionate breach to the  appellant's  right  to  respect
for family life in terms of Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

29.   There was a material error on a point of law in the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision  is  set
aside

30.   I remake the decision.

31.   I allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
