
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16289/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 March 2014                               |On 28 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                               MR IRFAN ILYAS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative or appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  13  June  1975.   He
    appeals against the respondent's decision of 24 April 2013 refusing  to
    vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Coleman at  a  hearing
    on 9 October 2013.  On that occasion the appellant did not  attend  and
    an adjournment was sought on the basis of his health.  The judge having
    considered  the  matter  refused   the   adjournment,   whereupon   the
    representative took no further part in the proceedings.

3.   The appeal was dismissed in all respects.

4.   Grounds of appeal were submitted, it being contended on behalf  of  the
    appellant that it was unfair and unjust in all  the  circumstances  for
    the adjournment not to have been granted because he has  been  deprived
    of the opportunity of  presenting  his  case  properly  and  presenting
    important documents.  It was also asserted that the Judge erred in  law
    in respect of the burden of proof in what was said at paragraph 22.  It
    was upon that somewhat narrow  basis  that  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

5.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of the grant of leave.

6.   The appellant did not attend nor  was  he  represented.   There  was  a
    letter from his legal representatives dated  3  March  2014  indicating
    that they were unable to contact the  appellant  and  have  no  further
    instructions from him.  Accordingly, they are not representing  him  at
    the hearing.  I asked my clerk to contact the solicitors  in  order  to
    obtain the telephone number of the appellant  so  that  direct  contact
    could be made with him.  Unfortunately, they had not kept  his  number.
    Nevertheless, I am satisfied that due notice  was  given  to  both  the
    appellant and his legal advisers as to the hearing of this case.

7.   On the subject matter  of  the  adjournment,  this  was  based  upon  a
    medical report from the Castlebury Medical Centre dated 2 October 2013.
     It reads as follows:

         "Mr Ilyas tells me that he has fallen down the stairs  and  injured
         his back.  He is in a  lot  of  pain  and  is  unable  to  mobilise
         properly.  He is finding it difficult to work  and  feels  that  he
         will be unable to attend the hearing on 9 October 2013.  I would be
         grateful if you can excuse him on that day.


         The drugs  that  are  being  administered  are  ibuprofen  and  co-
         codamol."

8.   There was a radiology  request  attached  to  the  report  raising  the
    question as to whether there was a fracture  of  the  coccyx.   It  was
    noted that the appellant was walking.

9.   That application for adjournment was refused before the hearing on  the
    basis that it was not said in the report that the appellant was  unable
    to attend the hearing.  It is presumed that with the  passage  of  time
    the symptoms would settle and would be less uncomfortable on 9 October.

10.  The  appellant's  representatives  renewed  their  application  for  an
    adjournment at the hearing.   The  outcome  of  a  radiology  scan  was
    awaited.  There was no new medical evidence .  The  appellant  had  not
    seen the solicitor since 19 September.  He fell on  29  September,  the
    day before he was supposed to see his solicitors to prepare the case.

11.  The appellant needed to give a lot of evidence to proceed in  the  case
    and had a great many documents and wished to make a long statement.  It
    was thus submitted on behalf of  the  appellant  by  Ms  Vasharat,  who
    represented him before the First-tier Tribunal, that it would be unjust
    and unfair to proceed.

12.  It is contended on behalf of the respondent that  it  would  seem  from
    the medical evidence that the appellant was  able  to  be  sufficiently
    mobile to see the doctor and go for an X-ray.

13.  The Judge asked Ms Vasharat what evidence was to be  produced  and  she
    was unable to assist with that detail.

14.  The Judge concluded  that  it  was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed.

15.  I remind myself that it is of  fundamental  importance  in  considering
    whether or not the Judge should have granted  such  an  adjournment  to
    consider what  unfairness  did  or  potentially  may  arise  from  that
    decision.  One helpful point perhaps would be to consider what were the
    documents that were required to be presented  and  whether  indeed  the
    appellant, having been prevented from doing so, what prejudice arose in
    that respect.

16.  No documents have been submitted and  no  indication  given  since  the
    hearing on 9 October 2013.  The appellant himself did  not  attend  and
    can give no assistance as to those matters.

17.  Given the nature of the medical report, I  do  not  find  that  it  was
    eloquent in indicating that the appellant was unable to walk or  unable
    to  attend  the  hearing,  rather  that  he  was  in  some  discomfort.
    Medication  was  however  that  of  painkillers  rather  than  anything
    stronger.

18.  I note from the file that certainly in  June  of  2013  the  solicitors
    were acting for the appellant.  It is  surprising  therefore  that,  in
    that time until the time of the alleged accident, no instructions  were
    taken in connection with the claimed documents.

19.  I find that it was properly open to  the  Judge  to  have  refused  the
    adjournment and I note that there are no documents submitted in support
    of the appeal itself.

20.  The circumstances that give rise to the appellant's appeal is  that  he
    contends that it would be in breach of his human rights for him  to  be
    removed from the jurisdiction.

21.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 May  2004  as  a  student.
    He made various applications to extend his stay, the final  stay  being
    extended to 27 January 2013.

22.  On 26 June  2008  his  wife  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  his
    dependant and on 3 April 2009 his son was born.

23.  On 25 January 2013  the  appellant  made  the  further  application  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with his wife and child as dependants.  As
    was noted by the Judge, at paragraph 3 of the determination, it was not
    entirely clear from the covering letter why it was  the  appellant  was
    seeking to remain in the United Kingdom.  The application said that  he
    had no ties with Pakistan but he spoke English and Urdu  and  had  last
    visited Pakistan in January 2010, having been back about four  or  five
    times during his time in the UK.  He  had  been  awarded  a  Master  of
    Business Administration from the University of Wales.

24.  The Judge, in considering the question of  ties  with  Pakistan,  dealt
    with the same at paragraph 19 of the determination.  The appellant  had
    visited Pakistan four or five times since coming to the United Kingdom,
    the last visit being as recently as February 2011.  He  had  lived  his
    whole life in Pakistan up to the age of 29  and  speaks  Urdu.   He  is
    married to a Pakistan national.  There is a bank  account  in  Pakistan
    which is active.

25.  The Judge noted that the appellant's wife had no  individual  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and that  the  child  was  not  a  British
    subject.

26.  In those circumstances, it was clear that  neither  the  appellant  nor
    any  members  of  his  family  could  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  As the Judge indicated at paragraph 22,  there  was
    the necessity for any two stage process considering human  rights,  the
    first step being a consideration of the Rules and the  second  being  a
    consideration of the general principles of human rights outside of  the
    Rules.

27.  It is argued that the Judge had misdirected himself as  to  the  burden
    of proof in paragraph 22.

28.  The Judge said as follows:-

         "In such a general Article 8 appeal the burden of proof is  on  the
         appellant to show that his family or private  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom such as to engage Article 8 and  that  such  a  private  or
         family life would  be  interfered  with  by  the  decision  herein.
         Furthermore the appellant must prove that the interference would be
         disproportionate to the lawful and legitimate aim of the  Secretary
         of State in maintaining immigration controls."

29.  It is contended in the grounds that it was for the appellant  to  prove
    that the decision interfered with  his  private  or  family  life  with
    consequences sufficient to engage the Article.  If such interference is
    shown, the burden is on the respondent to justify it, by  showing  that
    it  is  proportionate.   It  is  argued  that  there  was  a   material
    misdirection by the Judge.  It is  contended  that  the  Judge  has  in
    effect reversed the burden of proof.

30.  Although technically inaccurately  expressed,  it  is  clear  from  the
    determination when read as a whole, that the Judge has  considered  the
    issue of proportionality in the correct way.

31.  In paragraph 24 the Judge notes that there is no specific  evidence  of
    the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.  He has been in the
    United Kingdom for nine and  a  half  years  studying  and  achieved  a
    masters degree.  He has  put  down  roots  with  his  local  community,
    although there was little specific evidence of that fact.

32.  The Judge went on to indicate as follows:-

         "I therefore proceed to consider whether or not  that  interference
         with their private life is disproportionate to the  legitimate  aim
         of the Secretary of State maintaining immigration control.  In this
         case I can find no reason to say  that  it  would.   The  appellant
         entered the United Kingdom in a temporary capacity  as  a  student.
         He must have known that that gave him no right  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom indefinitely.  He had lived all his  formative  life
         in Pakistan.  He still retains ties with  Pakistan.   He  had  been
         back to visit Pakistan four or five times  and  the  last  time  as
         recently as February 2011 with his wife and child.  There is  clear
         evidence that at least until February 2010 he was  running  a  bank
         account in  Pakistan  and  he  was  obtaining  monies  from  there.
         Although he will have to resettle himself in Pakistan, there is  no
         evidence of any particular hardship in doing so.  He  has  acquired
         national recognised qualifications in the United Kingdom  including
         MBA.  That must assist him in re-establishing himself in Pakistan."

33.  The Judge went on to comment:-

         "There is nothing in the appellant's case or any of the matters  he
         has put forward in his grounds of appeal which would indicate  that
         there is anything unusual about  the  appellant's  situation  which
         will mean that the normal Immigration Rules should not apply to the
         appellant."

34.  I find there is nothing objectionable to that approach.

35.  Even accepting the difficulties of the appellant  in  his  injuries  in
    October,  there  have  been  no  further  documents  submitted  and  no
    statement of evidence.  It is far from clear from the paperwork  as  to
    why it was that the appellant seeks to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,
    let alone a stay that would invoke Article 8 of the ECHR.

36.  I note for the sake of completeness a case relied upon by Mr  Avery  on
    behalf of the respondent, namely Naseem & Others (Article  8)  Pakistan
    [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC).

37.  The Tribunal in that  case  considered  a  number  of  cases  in  which
    applications were made to remain and refused.  The examples  which  are
    given are various and are largely  fact  specific.   However,  in  most
    cases the facts of the matter are not  dissimilar  from  those  of  the
    appellant.  In most of those also, leave to appeal was dismissed.

38.  Looking at the matter overall, therefore, there is no indication as  to
    what of the documents  are  to  be  relied  upon  and  none  have  been
    produced, notwithstanding a number of  months  have  elapsed  from  the
    grant of permission to the hearing.

39.  I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  been  duly  notified  of  the
    hearing.  He has had every opportunity therefore of placing before  the
    Tribunal his comments as to why the refusal to  adjourn  the  case  was
    unfair  and/or  it  might  materially  affect  the   outcome   of   the
    proceedings.

40.  I find, therefore, that it was open to the Judge  to  refuse  to  grant
    the adjournment and, on the basis of the evidence as then presented,  I
    do not find that the appellant could have  succeeded  substantively  in
    his appeal on  the  evidence  as  then  produced.   The  circumstances,
    without more, are not such as to engage Article  8  to  the  extent  of
    finding that removal was disproportionate.

41.  In all the circumstances, therefore, the appeal is dismissed such  that
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand, namely  that
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules  is  dismissed  and  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR is also dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

