
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16164/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 October 2016                     |On 11 October 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    [O O]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam, Counsel, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  Flynn  whose  promulgated  decision  of  18  January   2016
       dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of
       02 April 2015 to remove her from the UK under s.10 of the Immigration
       and Asylum Act 1999 (as it was) on the basis that she was an  illegal
       entrant or a person subject to administrative removal.

    2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, date of  birth  26  September
       1982. She entered the  United  Kingdom  on  30  December  2006  as  a
       student. She had a daughter born in the United Kingdom  on  14  March
       2008, and a son born on 3 November 2009. Throughout this time she had
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom. On 8 December 2009 she made an
       application for leave to remain outside  of  the  immigration  rules,
       which was rejected on 11 February 2010.  The  Appellant  subsequently
       made further applications for leave to remain which were rejected, as
       were her requests  for  reconsideration  of  those  decisions.  On  2
       October 2014 the Appellant was issued with a notice informing her  of
       her immigration status in the United Kingdom  and  her  liability  to
       detention and removal. On the same date the Secretary of State issued
       a one-stop notice to the  Appellant.  The  Appellant's  response  was
       received on 28 January 2015. Following receipt of this  response  the
       Respondent made a decision on 2 April 2015 to refuse the  Appellant's
       application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

    3. For much of this  time  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Wilsons
       Solicitors. There is a letter of authority  contained  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal bundle dated 18 July 2013. Mr Duffy, at the appeal  hearing,
       confirmed that the Respondent had identified  Wilsons  Solicitors  as
       the Appellant's legal representatives since  sometime  in  2013.  The
       decision that was the subject of the appeal was in fact addressed  to
       Wilsons Solicitors at  113  Wigham  House,  Wakering  Road,  Barking,
       Essex, 1G11 8QN. The  IAFT-1  application  form  (the  form  used  to
       initiate an appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal) was signed and dated by Wilsons Solicitors  on  behalf
       of the Appellant on 21 April 2015. Section 5 of this  form  contained
       details of Wilsons  Solicitors  including  their  address  at  Wigham
       House. The correspondence address, as required under section 1 of the
       form, gave the same address (i.e. 113 Wigham House).

    4. Despite being  in  possession  of  this  information  the  First-tier
       Tribunal does not appear to have had Wilsons Solicitors on record  as
       the Appellant's representatives. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  in
       fact have any representative on record as representing the Appellant.
       It is unclear why this is so. It may be that Wilsons  Solicitors  did
       not provide a letter of authority to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
       reasons however remain unclear and on the evidence  before  me  I  am
       unable to reach any conclusion as to why the First-tier Tribunal  did
       not have Wilsons Solicitors on record.

    5. On 12 November 2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  issued  a  Notice  of
       Hearing. This Notice of Hearing indicated that the Appellant  had  no
       legal representative. The address to which the Notice of Hearing  was
       sent was "Ms [O O], 113 Wigham House, Wakering Road, Barking,  Essex,
       IG11 8QN." The Notice of Hearing indicated that the appeal was to  be
       held at Taylor House on 5 January 2016 at 10 AM.

    6. There was no appearance by the Appellant or any representative at the
       appeal hearing. At paragraphs 2 and  3  of  her  decision  the  judge
       stated:

           "The Appellant did not appear at the hearing and no one attended
           on her behalf. I was satisfied that notice of the date, time and
           place of hearing was sent to the Appellant on 12  November  2015
           and  it  was  not  returned  to  the  tribunal  undelivered.  No
           explanation was provided for the failure  of  the  Appellant  to
           appear and no application  was  made  for  an  adjournment.  The
           Respondent did not seek an oral hearing.

           I was accordingly satisfied that it was  appropriate  to  decide
           the appeal without an oral hearing in accordance with rule 25 of
           the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  &
           Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and I proceeded to do so."

    7. The judge then recounted the Appellant's immigration history and  the
       reasons given by the Respondent for rejecting her application. In the
       judge's conclusions she noted the absence of any evidence before her,
       contrary to directions issued by the Tribunal on  12  November  2015,
       and proceeded to decide  the  appeal  solely  on  the  basis  of  the
       evidence that was already  on  the  file.  At  paragraph  14  of  her
       decision the judge found the failure of the Appellant to  submit  any
       evidence or to  appear  at  the  oral  hearing  constituted  a  clear
       indication that she accepted that the Respondent's  decision  was  in
       accordance with the law. The judge briefly concluded that  there  was
       nothing before her to  suggest  that  either  the  Appellant  or  her
       children met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM. The
       judge consequently dismissed the appeal under the immigration  rules.
       The  judge  then  briefly  considered  the  appeal  outside  of   the
       immigration rules taking  into  account  the  factors  identified  in
       section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and
       applying the five-step test as laid down in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
       The judge concluded that the interference in the private life  rights
       of the Appellant and  her  children  was  not  sufficient  to  engage
       Article 8,  and  that  any  such  interference  was,  in  any  event,
       proportionate.

    8.  The  grounds  of  appeal,  whilst  discursive,  contended  that  the
       Appellant did not  have  a  fair  hearing  as  neither  she  nor  her
       solicitors had received the Notice of  Hearing.  The  grounds  stated
       that the solicitor's offices were situated  in  a  serviced  building
       with numerous  offices  and  only  correspondence  sent  to  'Wilsons
       Solicitors' would be allocated to the solicitor's office. In granting
       permission to appeal Upper Tribunal judge McWilliam stated,  "...  it
       is arguable that there is  a  procedural  irregularity  in  that  the
       notice of the hearing and the decision of the FTT  were  sent  to  an
       address that the FTT recorded as the Appellant's address  whereas  it
       appears to be the address of  her  solicitors.  It  was  not  clearly
       addressed to a legal firm and I note that the solicitors are  in  the
       sixth floor of the building, which was not made clear in the  notice.
       The application to the FTT was very much  out  of  time,  but  it  is
       arguable that the decision of the FTT was not properly  addressed  to
       the Appellant or her solicitors."

    9. Mr Alam, who was on record as being the  barrister  representing  the
       Appellant, was occupied in  another  hearing  room  when  the  appeal
       hearing was due to start. Having regard to the documentation  on  the
       Tribunal file, I was satisfied that, even despite Mr Alam's  absence,
       I was able to deal justly and fairly with the  appeal  in  Mr  Alam's
       absence and in  accordance  with  the  overriding  objective  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I informed  Mr  Duffy
       that the Notice of Hearing sent on 12 November 2015, whilst  sent  to
       the address provided by the Appellant  for  correspondence,  had  her
       name in the first line and did not make  any  reference  to  'Wilsons
       Solicitors'. The Notice  of  Hearing  indicated  that  there  was  no
       representative on record. Mr Duffy, fairly in  my  opinion,  accepted
       that there was a reasonable probability that the Notice  of  Hearing,
       because it was not addressed to Wilsons Solicitors, may not have been
       received by them, it being sent to an address in a serviced  building
       with various different offices. It is clear that if the single notice
       of hearing was not received  by  Wilsons  Solicitors,  the  Appellant
       herself would have been unaware of the time, place and  date  of  her
       appeal hearing.

   10. I am consequently satisfied that, through no fault of  her  own,  the
       Appellant was unaware of the hearing of her appeal  before  the  FTT.
       The importance of attending ones appeal  hearing,  and  of  providing
       evidential support in order to advance  one's  arguments,  cannot  be
       understated.  I  am  satisfied  that  a  procedural  impropriety  has
       occurred in these proceedings that prevented the  Appellant  and  her
       representatives from attending the hearing and  giving  evidence  and
       making submissions. I hasten to add that this is no criticism of  the
       FTT judge. The judge was fully entitled to conclude, on the  evidence
       before her, that the Appellant had  been  properly  served  with  the
       notice of hearing. The  FTT  judge  was  not  however  aware  of  the
       problems with the service of the Notice of Hearing as outlined above.



   11. For the reasons given  above  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law on the basis
       that there has been a procedural  impropriety.  The  matter  will  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
       judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.

The matter will be remitted for a full fresh hearing at Hatton Cross  before
a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  11 October 2016
