
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16403/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 October 2016                      |On 28 October 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                  AMOS [C]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holder, promulgated  on  10  March  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The  Appellant's  case  included  reference  to  the   Appellant's
         girlfriend's pregnancy.  In the analysis set out by the Judge under
         the heading "Findings" the Judge has referred at paragraph 31(f) to
         finding that the Appellant does not have a child and that there  is
         no documentary evidence confirming that his girlfriend is pregnant.
          The Judge has not made a finding in relation to  the  question  of
         the pregnancy of the Appellant's girlfriend.


         Reference is made in the permission  application  and  accompanying
         documentation to evidence having been given at the hearing  of  the
         pregnancy  of  the   Appellant's   girlfriend.    The   Appellant's
         girlfriend  states  that  in  the  appeal  she  gave  new  evidence
         following  the  discovery  on  18th  February  2016  that  she  was
         pregnant.  The appeal was heard on 23rd February 2016.


         An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the absence of a
         finding of fact by the Judge in relation to this evidence  and  the
         bearing of it upon the Judge's findings in relation to  whether  or
         not there would be a breach of Article 8 outside the Rules."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  He was not  represented,  and  had
    not been represented in the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Appellant  made
    oral submissions, following which Mr. Kotas made submissions  to  which
    the Appellant replied.  I was satisfied that the  Appellant  understood
    that the issue before me in the first instance was whether or not there
    was an error of law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holder.


Submissions

 4. The Appellant said that this issue had been ongoing for some  time  and
    had affected his family greatly.  He came  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
    study and to further his life, as well as to support his father who  is
    terminally ill.  He had just celebrated the  two  year  anniversary  of
    being with his girlfriend.  It was hard to prepare for the  baby  given
    that he was out of work.  There had just  been  oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing regarding the  pregnancy.   A  home  pregnancy  test  had  been
    conducted which had shown a positive result,  but  there  had  been  no
    documentary evidence before the judge.


 5. Mr. Kotas submitted, making every  allowance  for  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  was  not  represented,  that  there  was  no  error  of  law
    identified in the grounds of appeal.  Permission had  been  granted  on
    the basis that a material mistake of fact had been made.   He  referred
    to paragraph 31, and stated that this was  correct.   Evidence  of  the
    pregnancy went to the relationship and the quality of the relationship.
     The judge had not doubted the nature  of  the  relationship  -  I  was
    referred to paragraph 31(d).


 6. In relation to an Article 8 claim, it was hard to see how, if there was
    an error of law, that it was material.  He questioned  what  difference
    it would have made even had the judge made a  clear  finding  that  the
    Appellant's girlfriend was a few days  pregnant.   There  had  been  no
    challenge to the statement at  paragraph  32(b)  that  the  Appellant's
    girlfriend had indicated that she was willing to  go  to  Zimbabwe.   A
    finding that she was pregnant would not have overturned the finding  at
    paragraph 32(b) that she  was  willing  to  go  to  Zimbabwe  with  the
    Appellant.


 7. In response the Appellant submitted that there was a life  coming  into
    the world which needed to be cared for and, with  his  limitations,  it
    had been hard.  In relation to paragraph 32(b) he submitted that he had
    not been represented at the First-tier  Tribunal  and,  on  grounds  of
    compassion and humanity, the reality was that he needed to  look  after
    his child.  His girlfriend was British  born  and  studying  here.   He
    asked how he could be expected to move her  to  Zimbabwe,  a  state  in
    turmoil and anarchy, to raise a child with British heritage.


Error of Law


 8. I have carefully considered the grounds of appeal bearing in mind  that
    the Appellant is not represented.  I accept that it is not drafted such
    that it points to an error of law, but permission has been  granted  on
    the basis that the judge failed to make a finding in  relation  to  the
    question of the pregnancy of the Appellant's girlfriend.


 9. I have carefully considered the  decision.   In  paragraph  [16],  when
    recounting  the  evidence,  the  judge  states  that  the   Appellant's
    girlfriend "said that she believes  that  she  is  pregnant.   She  has
    undertaken home pregnancy tests but has not had a test  at  a  doctor's
    surgery."


10. In paragraph 31(f), when considering the public  interest  aspect  with
    reference to  section  117B(6)  the  judge  states  "I  find  that  the
    Appellant does not have a child and there is  no  documentary  evidence
    confirming that his girlfriend is pregnant".


11. While this is correct, I find that there was oral evidence  before  the
    judge that the Appellant's girlfriend was  pregnant.   The  wording  in
    paragraph 16 that the Appellant's girlfriend  "believes"  that  she  is
    pregnant is slightly odd, given that the judge  then  states  that  she
    gave evidence that she had undertaken a home pregnancy test.  The judge
    has not  made  a  finding  that  the  Appellant's  girlfriend  was  not
    credible.  He has not given any reason for why he has not accepted  her
    evidence that she was pregnant.  Subsequently he has made no finding as
    to whether or not she is  pregnant,  stating  only  that  there  is  no
    documentary evidence of the pregnancy, but  without  reference  to  the
    oral evidence.


12. I find that this is a relevant issue on which the judge has  failed  to
    make a finding.  I find that his failure to do so is an error of law.


13. However, I do not find that it is a material error  given  the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant's girlfriend was prepared to go to  Zimbabwe
    with the Appellant.  In paragraph 16 the judge recounts the Appellant's
    girlfriend's evidence.  "She said that she would go back  with  him  to
    Zimbabwe if she had to."  In paragraph 32(b) he makes  a  finding  that
    she had indicated that she was prepared to go  to  Zimbabwe  with  him.
    The Appellant's girlfriend knew at the hearing that she  was  pregnant.
    Nevertheless, she indicated that she was prepared  to  go  to  Zimbabwe
    with the Appellant.  I find that the Appellant's girlfriend  stated  at
    the hearing that she was prepared to go to Zimbabwe with the Appellant,
    and she gave this evidence knowing that she was pregnant.


14. Therefore I find that, even had the  judge  made  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant's girlfriend was a few days pregnant,  this  would  not  have
    affected the finding in paragraph 32(b) that she was prepared to return
    to Zimbabwe with the Appellant.  The Appellant has not challenged  this
    finding in the grounds of appeal and  neither  did  he  do  so  at  the
    hearing before me.  I therefore find that the error is not material, as
    a finding that the Appellant's girlfriend was pregnant would  not  have
    affected the finding that the Appellant's girlfriend was prepared to go
    to Zimbabwe, and would therefore not have changed the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.


Decision


15. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
    I do not set it aside.


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


17. I do not make an anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date 27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

