
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16732/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2015                      |On 22 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     GO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel instructed by JDS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because the appellant  claims  to  be  the  victim  of  "sex
    trafficking". Although there  is  considerable  and  legitimate  public
    interest in the subject we see no such interest in the identity of  the
    appellant. Further, although  we  make  no  findings  about  this,  the
    appellant could be risk if she is identified as a victim of trafficking
    who has reported her experiences  to  the  authorities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing her leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    The case was brought  on  several  grounds  in  which  the  appellant's
    apparent ill health featured but during the course of the  argument  it
    became clear that the appellant claimed to be and  might  have  been  a
    victim of trafficking.

 3. We were told by Miss Fijiwala that there is a note on her  papers  from
    counsel who represented  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal indicating that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  intended  to
    decide that  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because the Secretary of State had not followed
    her policy in cases where serious trafficking  allegations  were  made.
    This policy requires the Secretary of State to arrange for the case  to
    be examined by a specialist body before any further decision  is  made.
    The Secretary of State was therefore rather surprised when  the  appeal
    was dismissed and we are grateful, although not in the least surprised,
    that Miss Fijiwala has pointed this out to us.

 4. Mr Ume-Ezeoke for the appellant started to  outline  his  case  on  the
    basis that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  but  was
    politely interrupted by Miss Fijiwala to indicate that from  her  point
    of view he was pushing at an open door.

 5. We have reflected on the right approach.  It is a matter for us  rather
    than the parties but we can see no sensible  basis  of  doing  anything
    other than that suggested by Ms Fijiwala. Obviously  the  Secretary  of
    State will look at the findings that have been made but  Miss  Fijiwala
    says that the idea is to look at the whole case again once the  outcome
    of the trafficking enquiries have been made. They might illuminate  any
    further findings so it is better that no findings stand.

 6. We therefore find, as is agreed by the  parties,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred by failing to conclude that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  We set aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.  We substitute a decision that  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law  and  the
    consequence of that is that the Secretary  of  State  has  not  made  a
    lawful decision and it is for her to make a  lawful  decision  in  this
    case.

Notice of Decision

 7. The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
    aside. We substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal to  the
    extent that the Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with
    the law and needs to be made again.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2015                   |

