
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16659/2015
     IA/17441/2015
     IA/17443/2015
     IA/17446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th July, 2016, given                     |On 9th August, 2016           |
|Extempore. Signed 4th August, 2016            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     O T T H           (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                 E N O                   (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                        O O H       (THIRD RESPONDENT)
                 I O H                   (FOURTH RESPONDENT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVitie, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Ms Jabin of Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  first  respondent  is  Mr  O  T  T  H  (I  apologise  if  I  have
    mispronounced his names at all).  He was born on [ ] 1973 and he is the
    principal respondent.  The second respondent is E N O born on [ ]  1975
    and the wife of the principal respondent, their son O O H born on  [  ]
    2008 and their daughter I O H born on [ ] 2012.   All  the  respondents
    are citizens of Nigeria.

2.   They appealed the decision of the claimant, to  refuse  to  grant  them
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, to the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    their appeal was heard in Bradford by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Robson
    on 27th October, 2015.

3.   The judge made findings,  but  having  done  so  he  then  went  on  to
    consider the respondents' Article  8  claims  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  However, he did not first consider whether the  respondent,  or
    any of them, met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He gave no
    consideration to the reasonable test set out in the  Rules  and  simply
    allowed the appeals on the basis that the respondent's son had been  in
    the United Kingdom for seven years and has autism.

4.   The judge appears to have not taken into  account  the  fact  that  the
    respondent's eldest child is not a British citizen and, as at the  date
    of the application, had not been in the United Kingdom for seven  years
    and given that the respondents ability to meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules was not considered, it was necessary for the judge to
    indicate precisely what  exceptional  circumstances  there  were  which
    justified the grant of leave outside  the  Rules.   Unfortunately,  the
    judge simply took into account the fact that the third respondent,  the
    principal respondent's eldest child had now been in the United  Kingdom
    for some seven years.

5.   The claimant sought to permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and
    at the hearing before me today both representatives indicated that they
    agreed that the judge had erred in law and  had  no  objection  to  the
    matter being remitted for hearing afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  by
    a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson.

6.   Ms Jabin agreed that the findings at paragraphs 90, 95, 97, 98  and  99
    were unaffected by the challenges and they stand.  A time  estimate  of
    one and a half hours is respectfully suggested.


Notice of Decision

The determination is set aside, save that  the  findings  of  the  judge  at
paragraphs 90, 95, 97, 98 and 99 shall stand.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to
the First tier Tribunal for hearing afresh by a judge other than First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Robson.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First Tier Tribunal made a direction  that  the  respondent  be  granted
anonymity.  I have not been asked to vary  or  remove  this  direction.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant
and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
