
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 November 2016                          |On 05 December 2016            |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Musammat Parvin Begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hasan of KC Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing on human rights grounds an appeal by a citizen
of Bangladesh against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  refusing  her
leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly
allowed the appeal with reference to EX.1 of Appendix  FM  and  allowed  it
because, in the First-tier Tribunal's judgment, there  were  insurmountable
obstacles to the family life of the appellant and sponsor continuing in the
event of the respondent's removal to Bangladesh.

 2. Although the decision is entirely clear the  reasons  for  it  are  not
    clear.  The respondent's partner does not  wish  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom because he has contact with children from another relationship.
     He does not live with those children.  Although no doubt frequent  and
    important it is contact on  an  occasional  basis.  They  do  not  live
    together.  He has no obvious strong ties  with  Bangladesh  but  is  an
    industrious and educated man.

 3. It is very difficult to see why there are insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family  life  continuing  in  the  event  of  removal.   Insurmountable
    obstacles is a hard test to satisfy and for my part I  cannot  see  how
    the First-tier Tribunal has reached the conclusion that it did.  It may
    be permissible on the evidence but I am satisfied as a matter of law it
    is not explained sufficiently.

 4. I have to ask what to do to rectify the fault and  both  parties  agree
    that, in the event of my finding an error of law, is to send  the  case
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  redetermined.   This  is  partly
    because there has been a significant change in circumstances  which  is
    highly pertinent to a human rights appeal.  The  respondent  has  given
    birth to a child and that child is a British citizen. It follows that a
    whole new raft of matters has to be considered and considered afresh in
    a way that would be  inappropriate  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  the
    opportunities for further appeal are more restricted.

 5. It follows therefore that I find there is an error of  law  and  having
    established an error of law I send it back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with the agreement of the parties to be determined again.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  erred  in  law.  It  is  insufficiently
reasoned. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  direct
that the appeal be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 December 2016                |





