
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16946/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th June 2014                               |On 10th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       MISS BEEBEE NOOREZAH GOBINDRAM
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gregor Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    M, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Camp) to  allow  the  respondent's  appeal
   against  refusal  of  her  application  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card  as
   confirmation of a right of residence as the extended family member of  an
   EEA national exercising European Community Treaty rights  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

2. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the respondent. I was  however
   satisfied that notice of the time, date and place of the hearing had been
   served, on the 21st May 2014, by first-class  post  at  the  address  for
   service that appeared on the original Notice of  Appeal.  I  was  further
   satisfied that the respondent had been notified, in like manner, that the
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal may be determined in her absence if she  (or
   her representative) did not attend the hearing.  I  therefore  considered
   that it was appropriate to proceed in the  respondent's  absence  with  a
   view to meeting the overriding objective of disposing of appeals  fairly,
   quickly, and efficiently.

Background

3. The respondent is a citizen  of  Mauritius  who  was  born  on  the  18th
   November 1981. She  claims  to  have  met  Mr  Mihaly  Ujj,  a  Hungarian
   national, in May 2007, and to have  begun  cohabiting  with  him,  at  an
   address in the United Kingdom, in June  2007.  The  respondent  made  her
   application on the 24th September 2012. She at that time stated that  she
   was living with Mr Ujj at an address in Brentwood, Essex.

The primary decision

4. In an explanatory letter to the respondent, dated the  29th  April  2013,
   the appellant's official noted that  there  had  been  no  response  when
   Immigration Officers had knocked at the door of the address given in  the
   application form, and that "... neighbours confirmed that  the  occupants
   at the address is a Mauritian family consisting of husband and  wife  and
   their  two  children"  [the  appellant's  explanatory   letter   to   the
   respondent, dated the 29th April 2013]. The  decision-maker  refused  the
   application, "due to the failure to issue the confirming the relationship
   between the EEA national and the main applicant".

5. The  decision-maker  did  not  state  the  date  upon  which  Immigration
   Officers had visited the address in Brentwood. However, it must obviously
   have occurred at some time during the seven-month period between the 24th
   September 2012 and the 29th April 2013.

The appellant's case

6. The respondent's  explanation  for  the  outcome  of  the  visit  by  the
   Immigration Officers at the address in  Brentwood  is  contained  in  her
   letter, addressed "to whom it may concern" and dated the 19th March 2014,
   which appears at  enclosure  G  of  the  bundle  of  documents  that  she
   submitted to the First-tier Tribunal. In that letter, she claimed to have
   moved from Brentwood to Peterborough on the 8th May 2012; that is to say,
   some 4 months before she made her application for a Residence  Card.  She
   also claimed to have informed the Home Office of her change  of  address,
   and said that she "believed" that she had also  mentioned  that  she  was
   living in Peterborough  when  she  made  her  application.  She  did  not
   therefore "understand why the Immigration went to visit  [her]  at  [her]
   previous address when they should have come at Peterborough instead".

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

7. It is clear from paragraph 9 of the  determination  that  the  respondent
   gave oral testimony before the judge whereby she adopted the contents  of
   her letter (above) and stated that she did not know why her  old  address
   was on her application form. The judge also heard the oral  testimony  of
   the sponsor, in which he "confirmed that the contents  of  his  statutory
   declaration were  correct"  [paragraph  11].  He  also  corroborated  the
   respondent's testimony that they had moved to Peterborough in May 2011.

8. The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 15 to 17:

    [15] This is, in essence, a very straightforward  appeal.  The  address
    given by the appellant (on her behalf by her solicitors) was an address
    from which she and the sponsor had moved. Immigration officers  visited
    that address and, not surprisingly, concluded that  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor did not live there. [16] I am satisfied, from the oral  and
    documentary evidence adduced, that the appellant and the  sponsor  live
    together and have done  for  some  7  years.  They  are  in  a  durable
    relationship. [17] The appellant had consequently satisfied me that she
    is the partner of an EEA national who is exercising  Treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.

Error of law analysis

9. With all due respect to the judge,  the  position  was  nothing  like  as
   "straightforward" as he suggested. The Tribunal was faced  with  evidence
   that the respondent had given an address at which  she  and  her  sponsor
   were said to be living at the time of application. However,  by  her  own
   admission, they were was  not  living  at  that  address  at  that  time.
   Moreover, the respondent was unable to provide  an  explanation  for  why
   this address appeared in her application. Her  representative  apparently
   suggested that it was a "mistake" on the part of the solicitors  who  had
   completed her application form [paragraph 14]. However, there was  not  a
   shred of evidence to support that contention. There is  in  any  event  a
   rebuttable  presumption  that  solicitors   act   upon   their   client's
   instructions,  and  thus   have   the   necessary   authority   to   make
   representations  on  their  behalf.  In  circumstances  such  as   these,
   therefore, it  was  especially  important  that  the  judge  should  have
   scrutinised the documentary evidence in order to see whether it  provided
   support for the respondent's claim that she had formerly lived  with  the
   sponsor at an address in Brentwood and/or  was  living  with  him  at  an
   address in Peterborough at  the  time  when  the  application  was  made.
   However, beyond reciting the very general submission of  the  appellant's
   representative that there was "documentary evidence  of  the  address  in
   Peterborough", the judge simply glossed over the  issue  entirely.  I  am
   therefore satisfied that it is not possible to understand the reasons why
   the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal, and that this was an error of
   law that can only be cured by setting aside its decision and  determining
   the matter afresh.

Redetermination of the appeal

10. I am satisfied that this is an appropriate case in which to  remake  the
   decision on the basis of the evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. I am also satisfied that the respondent was  informed  of  this
   possibility by way of the directions that were served, with the Notice of
   Hearing,  on the 21st May 2014 (see paragraph 2, above).

11. At page 2 of the respondent's bundle of documents,  there  is  a  letter
   from the sponsor, addressed to the UK Border Agency, and which  is  dated
   the 5th September 2012. In that letter, it is stated that the sponsor and
   the respondent have been living at an address in Peterborough "since  May
   2012". I place little weight upon the  contents  of  this  letter  for  a
   number of reasons. The sponsor does not appear to have referred to it  in
   the oral testimony that he gave to the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed,  the
   First-tier Tribunal noted  that  the  sponsor  had  "confirmed  that  the
   contents of his statutory declaration made on  the  30  April  2008  were
   still correct" [paragraph 11]. If that evidence is to be taken literally,
   then the sponsor was saying that he was still living at  the  address  in
   Brentwood, Essex, because this is  the  address  that  he  gave  in  that
   declaration. Moreover, there is no explanation for  the  timing  of  this
   letter. It  is  dated  some  four  months  after  the  supposed  move  to
   Peterborough, and some three weeks before the  respondent  had  submitted
   her application. It is thus unclear what might have prompted it.

12. The sponsor's payslips and bank statements are addressed to  him  at  an
   address in Peterborough. However, his bank statements date  back  to  May
   2011 (see page 31) which is a full year before  he  supposedly  moved  to
   that address with  the  respondent.  Moreover,  there  are  no  documents
   addressed to them jointly at that address. The documents that  show  that
   they at one time held a joint tenancy and a  number  of  joint  household
   utility accounts each relate to the address in Brentwood, Essex. The most
   recent of these is dated as long ago as 2010.

13. I am not therefore satisfied, on a balance of  probabilities,  that  the
   respondent and the sponsor are (or were at the  date  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's decision) living together in a durable  relationship  that  is
   akin to marriage. As such a relationship is a pre-condition  to  extended
   family  membership,  it  follows  that  the  decision   to   refuse   the
   respondent's application for a Residence Card was and  is  in  accordance
   with the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

Decision

14. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to allow the appeal  against  refusal  of  the  appellant's
   application for an EEA Residence Card is set aside, and is substituted by
   a decision to dismiss that appeal.

Anonymity is not directed


Signed                                  Date


David Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

