
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 17 June 2015                          |             On 1 July 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                          mrs matea berdos gossage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Chipperfield, (Counsel instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing to consider whether or not there is  an
    error of law in the determination promulgated on  7  November  2014  by
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cohen)  (FtT)  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse
    further leave to remain and to issue removal directions.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines and her date of birth  is
    21 April 1968.  She initially entered the UK on 9 September 2004 with a
    visit visa. An application for further leave to remain as the spouse of
    Mr Andrew Gossage , a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  UK,  was
    refused. The appellant did not lodge an appeal and as  of  3  September
    2005 she remained in the UK  unlawfully.   On  28  September  2012  the
    appellant made an application  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of family and private life.

3.   The respondent refused the application in a detailed  letter  dated  20
    March 2014 and having regard to  the  Immigration  Rules  dealing  with
    private and family life together with Article  8  ECHR  and  considered
    whether or not there were  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances
    outside of the Rules.

FtT Decision

4.    In  a  decision  the  FtT  set  out  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    respondent's response together with details of the  evidence  given  by
    the appellant and her sponsor. The FtT considered  family  and  private
    life under the Rules and concluded that she did not meet the  Rules  on
    the basis of the marriage/partner route and neither did  she  meet  the
    requirements under EX.1. She did not meet the Eligibility  criteria  as
    she remained unlawfully in the UK since 2005 [22]. The FtT  found  that
    the appellant had not lost all links with the Philippines where she has
    mother, brother and sister [17].  The  FtT  found  that  she  left  the
    Philippines in order to work  to  provide  financial  support  for  her
    family.

5.   The FtT found there was family life in the UK and private life  in  the
    UK such that the removal would cause an  interference  with  Article  8
    rights [21].  The issue before the FtT was proportionality.  It  placed
    weight on the appellant's poor  immigration  history  (overstaying  for
    seven years prior to making  any  application)  and  the  contradictory
    evidence given by the appellant and sponsor as to  why  an  application
    was not made at an earlier stage [22].

6.   The FtT took into account that the appellant was financially  supported
    by the sponsor in the UK. It considered the language barrier to  be  an
    invalid reason for not relocating to the Philippines.  The FtT relied a
    personal visit to the Philippines in concluding that the vast  majority
    of the population speak "perfect English".  It  rejected  the  evidence
    that it would be impossible for the sponsor to find  employment  there.
    It was accepted that the  sponsor  has  an  elderly  father  living  in
    Norwich who he visits regularly,  but  found  that  his  brother  could
    provide support for their father.  There was no evidence of family ties
    beyond the normal level.  The appellant and sponsor would  be  able  to
    continue their involvement in church in the Philippines. There were  no
    insurmountable obstacles  preventing  the  sponsor  relocating  to  the
    Philippines where they could continue family life.   Alternatively  the
    FtT found that the appellant could return to the Philippines from where
    she could make an application for entry clearance to return to  the  UK
    based on her marriage notwithstanding that at present the parties would
    not meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.

7.   The FtT placed weight on the fact  that  the  sponsor  entered  into  a
    relationship with the  appellant  knowing  her  precarious  immigration
    history,  that she faced removal and had no continuing right to  remain
    in the UK.

8.   In the decision  at [25] the FtT concluded as follows;

         "in light of my findings above, I find that the family and  private
         life that the appellant has established in the UK  is  sufficiently
         serious  to  warrant  her  exclusion   from   the   UK   as   being
         disproportionate.  I find that the appellant's case is one  of  the
         small minority of cases that it was anticipated  would  be  allowed
         under Article 8 in cases including Huang and EB (Kosovo)".



9.  At the end of the decision at [26] &[27] the FtT placed  weight  on  the
public interest in removal because of the  appellant's  immigration  history
and failure to comply with the law and Immigration Rules over a  significant
period of time.  The FtT dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Application

10.  It was argued  that  the  FtT  made  factual  errors  material  to  its
    consideration of EX.1 and Article 8.  It  referred  to  visits  to  the
    sponsor's father "monthly" when in fact the evidence given was that  he
    visited his father "once a week" and helped with  chores.   The  second
    factual error  at  [18]  was  reference  to  the  appellant's  "teenage
    children".  The appellant has no children. The error was material as it
    reflected on links with the Philippines.

11.  The FtT  failed  to  consider  relevant  factors  including  that;  the
    appellant worked in the Philippines for three years  only  between  the
    ages of 17 and 22, she left the Philippines aged 23 in 1991 and  worked
    in Spain prior to coming to the  UK.   She  had  been  outside  of  the
    Philippines for some 23 years and last visited for a wedding  in  2004,
    the crucial role of the church, her husband's role in the church and as
    a support worker, their ages, the lack  of  experience  of  working  or
    living in the Philippines and the  effect  of  the  separation  between
    father and son.

12.  It was argued that the Tribunal Judge ought  not  to  have  taken  into
    account his own personal knowledge of language in the Philippines.

13.  The inclusion [25] showed a lack of consideration of  relevant  matters
    as the conclusion set out in that paragraph cannot be  reconciled  with
    the findings made and decision to dismiss the appeal.  In  summary  the
    factual errors and lack of consideration amounted to a failure to apply
    anxious scrutiny to the appellant's claim.

Permission to Appeal

14.  Designated Judge McClure refused permission on 31  December  2014.   He
    stated that the factual errors would not have been determinative or had
    a significant effect on the case taking account of  all  the  evidence.
    There  was  sufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  in  the  Philippines.   The
    Tribunal was entitled to take into account the appellant's  immigration
    history  and  finding  the  appellant  had  continued   ties   in   the
    Philippines.  The  Tribunal  considered  all  the  circumstances  under
    Article  8  and  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  decision   was
    proportionately justified.

Renewal application for permission

15.  An application for permission  to  appeal  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle on  23  April
    2015.   Judge  Doyle  considered  that  [25]  of   the   decision   was
    contradictory and found there was sufficient in the grounds to make out
    an arguable case that there  was  an  error  in  the  approach  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 argument.  Directions were made for the matter to
    be heard do novo.

Rule 24 Response

16.  The respondent opposed the appeal.  Read as a whole  the  determination
    was clear and the judge accepted the appellant built up  a  significant
    and lengthy family life worthy of respect.  However, weight was  placed
    on the disregard of the Immigration Rules and immigration history.  The
    respondent considered the grant of permission to be  a  mistake  as  no
    error of law was established.

Error of Law Hearing
Submissions
17.   Mr Chipperfield submitted that the appellant could have no  confidence
    that the FtT  considered her  appeal  with  the  appropriate  level  of
    anxious scrutiny having regard to the  factual  errors,  the  erroneous
    inclusion of [25] which may or may not have occurred from the FtT using
    a template format and failing to edit the determination  properly.   Mr
    Bramble realistically accepted that the determination read as  a  whole
    appeared  confused  and  rushed.   However,  he  submitted  that  clear
    findings of fact showed that  it  engaged  with  all  of  the  relevant
    evidence. Whilst not the best structured decision, it  was  undoubtedly
    apparent what the FtT's view of  the  appellant's  claim  was  and  the
    decision reached, as set  out  in  the  final  paragraph.   Mr  Bramble
    submitted that [25] was an obvious cut and paste error;  it  failed  to
    reflect the tenor of the bulk of the determination.

Discussion and decision
18.  My focus is on whether or  not  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision and whether or not that error was material to the  outcome  of
    that decision.  There are no concerns raised as to the conduct  of  the
    FtT during the hearing. It is not suggested that there  was  unfairness
    or bias towards the appellant.  In essence the  appellant  argues  that
    the FtT has been careless in its preparation and consideration  of  her
    claim.  Mr Bramble realistically acknowledged the same.   That  said  I
    need to consider whether or not the carelessness manifested in the  two
    factual errors and the inclusion of [25] are of such significance as to
    lead me to conclude that the appellant did not have a fair hearing.   I
    have in mind the guidance in ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844.  I  take
    the view that for a fair hearing the FtT needs to ensure that  adequate
    attention is paid to the evidence and the record of evidence, and  that
    no  significant  errors  arise  procedurally  such  as  to  amount   to
    unfairness to the appellant.

19.  I find that the two factual errors are of  no  significance.   The  FtT
    found that the appellant's links in the Philippines were to her mother,
    brother and sister [17].  As to the sponsor's father,  whether  or  not
    the visits were monthly or weekly, is of little significance in my view
    given that the FtT has clearly taken into account and engaged with that
    evidence at [23] and found that there was a brother who could care  for
    their father.  As to the inclusion of [25] I am satisfied that this  is
    clearly an error arising from careless use of cut and  paste.   I  find
    nothing at all in the decision to indicate that  the  FtT  intended  to
    allow the appeal.  All of  the  findings,  discussion  and  conclusions
    support the decision made in [26] and[ 27] to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

20.  I now consider whether the totality  of  the  concerns  raised  by  the
    appellant in her grounds are such that she did not have a fair hearing.
     It is clear that there has been a degree of carelessness by the FtT in
    its  consideration  and  preparation  of  the  decision  and   reasons.
    However, the findings made are entirely  sustainable  on  the  evidence
    before the FtT.  It is not disputed that the appellant is not  able  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules with  regard  to  family
    and private life.  The FtT's consideration under Article 8 ECHR and its
    conclusions as to proportionality  are   entirely  sustainable  on  the
    evidence.  In particular weight  was  placed  on  the  facts  that  the
    appellant entered into a relationship at a time  when  her  immigration
    status was  precarious,  she  remained  in  the  UK  unlawfully  for  a
    significant period of time, she has continuing links in the Philippines
    and there were no reasons why the sponsor could not either join her  in
    the Philippines and continue family life there or  that  the  appellant
    could  return  to  the  Philippines  from  where  she  could  make   an
    application for entry clearance based on her marriage.  The  FtT  found
    no exceptional circumstances and none have been put to me  to  indicate
    that there are grounds for consideration of leave outside of the Rules.

21.  Accordingly I have decided that there is no material error  of  law  in
    the Tribunal decision.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 29.6.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD






I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 29.6.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

