
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16192/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2014                         |On 20th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                           MR SYED SAULAT BUKHARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Pride Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 16th March 1982.

2.    He  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  dependant  of  a  Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The application was refused on  7th  May  2013
    because his wife  had  been  refused  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant and so the respondent was not satisfied that  he
    fulfilled the requirements laid down in paragraph 319C(h)  and  319C(b)
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  It was also  refused  on
    the basis that he himself did not have the required leave originally as
    is required under the Rules.

3.   Subsequently the  appellant's  wife  challenged  her  decision  through
    judicial review.  It was held that the decision,  so  far  as  she  was
    concerned, was unlawful and fell to be remade.  Leave was  subsequently
    granted to her to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against the decision against him,  which
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine on 18th  February
    2014.  It was found that he did  not  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Nevertheless it was considered that his removal under  the  Section  47
    removal notice would be contrary to law.  Thus the appeal  was  allowed
    in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   The Secretary of State sought to appeal against that  decision  on  the
    basis that an incorrect application of Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  00640  and
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 had been made by the Judge.

6.   The matter came for hearing in  pursuance  of  that  permission  before
    myself and Lord Matthews, sitting as a Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  on
    10th June 2014.  We upheld the challenge made to the  decision  by  the
    respondent.  The decision was set aside to be remade in  the  light  of
    our written decision arising  from  the  hearing.   The  decision  fell
    therefore to be remade upon a rehearing.

7.   Very much at the heart of the original appeal lies the  case  of  Zhang
    [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin).

8.   The nature of the case reflected the application of  paragraph  391C(h)
    of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant in that case,  as  indeed  the
    applicant in this case, fell foul of the requirement set out under  the
    original version of the Rules, namely that he  could  not  make  an  in
    country application because he  had  not  been  granted  the  requisite
    category of leave to enter initially.  The appellant  in  the  case  of
    Zhang was required to return to her home country on the same  basis  in
    order to make an out of country  application  simply  because  of  that
    narrow requirement of the Rules.

9.   Mr Justice Turner, in the case of Zhang, made it  entirely  clear  that
    the application of a blanket requirement to leave the  country  imposed
    by paragraph 319C(h)(i) of the Immigration Rules was unsustainable.  It
    was not consistent with the ratio of the decision in Chikwamba.

10.   Following  the  comments  in  Zhang,  the  respondent  indeed  changed
    paragraph 319C(h) of the Immigration Rules with effect from 1st October
    2013.  It no longer imposed the same  requirement  and  an  application
    could be made in country.

11.  As the appellant in the present case had made the application prior  to
    the change in the Immigration Rules, it is contended on behalf  of  the
    respondent that the refusal on that basis was lawful as he was  subject
    to the old Rule and not to the new one.

12.  We commented in our decision at paragraph 10 as follows:-

         "Although we recognise the important point  of  principle  in  this
         case, it is a matter of some concern that the  Secretary  of  State
         seeks to maintain a decision on a version of the Immigration  Rules
         which it was agreed should not continue and should be amended.   We
         find that to be disconcerting and it may have the  result  of  some
         unfairness.  It seems to us, looking at the matter in  a  practical
         way, that the appeal should be  dealt  with  in  a  pragmatic  way,
         namely, that the claimant should submit  a  fresh  application  for
         leave to remain, relying  on  the  new  Regulation,  and  that  the
         respondent should make a decision upon that without delay.  We  are
         told, however, by Mr Melvin that no such fresh application will  be
         considered until the conclusion of this  present  appeal.   We  ask
         that commonsense prevails."


13.  The matter thus came before me in pursuance of the  joint  decision  to
    rehear the appeal.  Mr Iqbal, who represents the appellant, invited  my
    attention to his skeleton argument that he had produced on the previous
    occasion.  Mr Kandola, who represents the  respondent,  indicated  that
    there had been no  reconsideration  of  the  decision  since  the  last
    attendance because no  fresh  application  had  been  made.   Mr  Iqbal
    indicated that he had made no fresh application because of the specific
    indication that had been reflected in a comment by Mr  Melvin  that  it
    would not be considered even if it had been.

14.  It seems to me that this  is  a  most  unfortunate  situation  to  have
    arisen.  The appellant's wife has the leave that she sought,  there  is
    family life and there is no suggestion that has been made that a  fresh
    application if made would not be successful.  There seem,  however,  to
    be barriers being erected around this matter.

15.  Mr Iqbal indicated that if  the  appellant  made  a  fresh  application
    outside the protection given to him by his 3C  leave  he  would  suffer
    considerable prejudice not of his making.  The first prejudice would be
    that if he made his application within 28 days of the cessation of  the
    3C leave that would be considered but he would have no in country right
    of appeal were it to be made against him.  Secondly  he  would  not  be
    entitled  to  continue  working  and  contributing  to  the  home   and
    supporting his family as he does at present.

16.  The stress of this particular  matter  has  taken  its  toll  upon  the
    appellant, as I have been informed  by  Mr  Iqbal  and  indeed  by  the
    appellant himself.  The stress of the uncertainty  of  his  status  has
    badly affected his wife, who has for the last six months been receiving
    counselling for her stress and depression.  The family are renting at a
    high rate every month and  cannot  take  out  a  mortgage  because  the
    appellant's passport has remained with the Home Office for the past two
    years.  I am invited to  find  that  it  is  an  intolerable  situation
    essentially over a very narrow point of principle.

17.  Mr Kandola invited me to dismiss the  appeal  against  the  Immigration
    Rules on the grounds that the correct Rules were applied.   The  remedy
    he submits was for the appellant to make a fresh application.  Mr Iqbal
    invites me to  find  that  the  decision,  taken  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules, was unlawful and unfair such that it should  not  be
    upheld in any event.  As to Article 8 he invites me to find that it was
    grossly disproportionate for the Secretary of State to rely upon a Rule
    which it has been accepted was defective and oppressive  such  that  it
    had to be changed.  There was little distinction between  the  case  of
    the appellant and that of Zhang in his submissions.

18.  He invites me to find in the alternative that the decision of  7th  May
    2013 is fundamentally flawed.  There were two reasons for the decision.
     One is the issue of the appropriate leave to enter.  More particularly
    it is predicated on the refusal of  the  appellant's  wife,  a  refusal
    which was judged upon judicial review to have been unlawful such as  to
    call for a review of that matter and the grant of leave,  albeit  on  a
    slightly different basis to the original application, made in  all  the
    circumstances.

19.  Mr Iqbal invites me to declare the decision  of  9th  May  2013  to  be
    unlawful and to remit the matter back to the Secretary of State  for  a
    lawful decision to be made.  He undertakes to supply to  the  Secretary
    of State a fresh application to meet the new Rules.

20.  Looking at the matter as a whole,  I  find  that  that  submission  has
    considerable merit.  The Secretary of State has granted the appellant's
    wife status in leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  It  is  entirely
    clear from the reasoning of the decision of 7th May 2013 that the  fact
    that the appellant's partner's application for leave to remain had been
    refused was a significant factor in the refusal.  Clearly  that  taints
    all matters on that decision.  It would not be realistic, as I so  find
    to separate the technicality of leave  from  the  practicality  of  the
    partner's refusal.  It having been found upon judicial review that that
    refusal  of  the  partner  was  unlawful  and  unjustified  it  follows
    therefore that such matters taint the decision of 7th May  2013  as  to
    lawfulness.  Although the Secretary of State is entitled to rely on the
    matter of principle, when that principle results in visible  unfairness
    to an individual, unfairness which was accepted as a  proper  criticism
    of the old Rule by its change into the new format it  seems  that  that
    also calls into question the very fairness of the decision.

21.  In the circumstances therefore I find that  the  decision  of  7th  May
    2013 is not in accordance with the law.  To that extent the  appeal  is
    allowed.  The decision in the matter is remitted to  the  Secretary  of
    State for a fresh decision to be made in the light of such  application
    under the new Rule as may be made to the Secretary of State.

22.  In those circumstances it  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  make  positive
    findings in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Family life  exists  as
    between the appellant and his wife and a small child.  She has leave to
    remain and is setting up an accountancy business freelance.  She relies
    essentially  upon  the  earnings  of  the  appellant  which   are   not
    inconsiderable.  The stress of  the  pending  separation  for  lack  of
    clarity as to the appellant's status has had a marked  and  deleterious
    effect upon her health and I note evidence to that effect.  She and the
    appellant are living under unacceptable strain. Given  the  finding  in
    Zhang that the expectation of making an out of country application  was
    unreasonable and unjustified, it was difficult to imagine  what  public
    interest there is in terms of proportionality to enforce  any  removal.
    In the circumstances I find that it is disproportionate to  remove  the
    appellant from the jurisdiction pending a proper and  reasoned  outcome
    to his immigration application.

23.  Mr Kandola, on behalf of  the  respondent,  has  agreed  that  a  fresh
    application by the  appellant  would  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    reconsideration process.  In the circumstances it seems to  be  in  the
    interest of both parties for the matter to be  reconsidered  under  the
    Immigration Rules rather than my allowing  the  appeal  outright  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

24.  In all the circumstances therefore the appeal both in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the removal notice shall be allowed to the extent
    that the matters  be  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  her
    decisions to be made.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed both under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  ECHR
to the extent that the matter be remitted to the Respondent for a fresh  and
lawful decision to be made.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge King

