
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16573/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 December 2016                       |On 4 January 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              MR MUBSHAR RAMZAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India.  He has permission to challenge  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O R Williams sent on 30 June 2016
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  2
    April 2015 refusing him leave to remain as a Tier 4 student.

2.   The appellant did not attend and provided  no  explanation  in  writing
    for his absence.  He did, however, send to the Tribunal on 30  November
    2016, the day before the hearing, a letter with a bundle  of  documents
    including a Royal Mail receipt.  He did not include in this letter that
    he wished to attend.  In such circumstances I decided to  proceed  with
    the hearing in the absence of one of the parties.

3.   The appellant's only  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    deciding the case on the basis that  in  2015  the  appellant  had  not
    submitted a CAS within the period of 60 days when he  was  informed  by
    the respondent that he had that number of days to secure another CAS.

4.   The appellant's grounds must fail.  The only evidence  he  has  adduced
    in support of his claim that he submitted the new  CAS,  from  Dockland
    Academy London (the CAS itself being dated 7 March 2015) shows that  it
    was only submitted on 18 July 2016.  That is nearly a year outside  the
    60-day period.  Hence it is plain that the new CAS was not produced  to
    the respondent within the 60 day period and neither the respondent  nor
    the FtT Judge can be blamed for failing to  have  regard  to  it.   The
    Immigration Rules prescribe  that  a  current  CAS  must  accompany  an
    application.  It did not.  The  FtT  Judge  in  any  event  could  only
    concern himself with the evidence in front of him and on that  evidence
    no current CAS had been submitted within the 60 days.

5.   For the above reasons the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

