


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16282/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 16 July 2014                             |On : 4 August 2014           |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         temitope benedicta enahoro
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Aina of John & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Ms  Enahoro's  appeal
against a decision to refuse to issue her  with  a  residence  card  as  the
family member of an EEA national, under the Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  For the  purposes  of  this
decision, we shall refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and  Ms
Enahoro as the appellant, reflecting their positions as  they  were  in  the
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born  on  21  November  1970.  On  14
September 2012 she made an application for a residence card  as  the  spouse
of an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.
She claimed to be the spouse of a Slovakian national, Jan  Tokar,  whom  she
had married by way of a proxy marriage  under  Nigerian  customary  marriage
laws on 15 January 2012.

The appellant's application was refused on 25 April  2013.  The  respondent,
in refusing the application, noted that as evidence that she was related  to
an EEA national she had provided a marriage  certificate  dated  19  January
2012 that stated that she married the EEA national on 15 January  2012.  The
respondent noted that no  history  had  been  submitted  to  show  that  the
relationship  existed  prior  to  her  being  issued   with   the   marriage
certificate. The respondent did not  accept  that  the  marriage  was  valid
since there was no evidence to show  that  either  party  had  travelled  to
Nigeria to attend the  wedding  and  it  was  not  accepted  that  customary
marriage  via  proxy  was  considered  to  be  valid.  Furthermore,  it  was
considered that the various conditions which needed to be  fulfilled  for  a
customary marriage to be valid in Nigeria had not been  fulfilled,  such  as
the need for consent and for a dowry. The respondent  also  found  that  the
appellant had failed to demonstrate that she was in a  durable  relationship
with, and thus an extended family  member  of,  the  EEA  national  for  the
purposes of regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations.

The appellant's grounds of appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  asserted
that the marriage was valid in the United Kingdom because it  was  valid  in
the place where it was celebrated, namely Nigeria. It was  asserted  further
that the appellant was in a  durable  relationship  with  her  EEA  national
spouse. The grounds also raised Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tootell  on  7
January 2014. The  appellant  attended  and  gave  oral  evidence.  Her  EEA
national spouse was not present and was said to be in Bradford,  further  to
a disagreement they had had just  before  Christmas.  She  was  nevertheless
content to proceed with the appeal in his absence. She  gave  evidence  that
she had been in a relationship with her husband since  June  2010  and  that
they had started cohabiting  in  2012,  after  the  wedding.  Her  husband's
cousin and her own parents had been present at the wedding in Lagos.

Judge Tootell allowed the appeal, finding that the appellant's marriage  was
valid. She noted the absence of any allegation from the respondent that  the
marriage certificate was inauthentic and the lack  of  any  suggestion  that
the authority issuing the marriage certificate in Nigeria did not  have  the
legal  power  to  confirm  the  facts  to  which  it  had  attested  in  the
documentation. She found that the respondent  was  wrong  to  consider  that
proxy marriages were not valid under Nigerian law and  she  considered  that
the relevant conditions for a customary marriage to  be  valid  in  Nigeria,
such as consent to the marriage and evidence of the payment of a dowry,  had
been fulfilled. She concluded that since the marriage was  considered  valid
under Nigerian law the appellant fell within subparagraph (b) of  the  head-
note to Kareem and was accordingly validly married to an EEA  national  and,
as such, was entitled to a residence card.

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had failed to follow the approach  in
Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 with  respect  both
to the consideration of the recognition of the marriage under Slovakian  law
and to the validity of the marriage under Nigerian law.

Permission to appeal was granted on 11 April 2014.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before us on 16 July 2014. We handed Mr Aina a copy of  the
Upper Tribunal decision in TA and Others (Kareem explained) [2014] UKUT  316
and gave him an opportunity to read  it.  Having  done  so  he  nevertheless
confirmed that he was maintaining that there was no  error  of  law  in  the
judge's decision and he produced an internet  article  from  the  "Migration
Information Center" which he said  addressed  the  status  of  the  marriage
under Slovakian law.

We heard submissions from both parties and  concluded  that  the  judge  had
materially erred in law such that her decision had  to  be  set  aside  with
respect to her finding on the validity of  the  marriage.  She  had  clearly
misunderstood what Kareem decided in regard to the consideration of the  law
of the EEA national's country and had, by concluding that there was no  need
to go on to consider the validity  of  the  marriage  under  Slovakian  law,
adopted an approach which the Upper Tribunal in TA  had  specifically  found
to be wrong. The internet article produced by Mr Aina had  not  been  before
the judge and  neither  had  there  been  any  other  evidence  relating  to
Slovakian law. As the Upper Tribunal  found  in  TA,  the  determination  of
whether  there  was  a  marital  relationship  for  the  purposes   of   the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must always  be  examined  in  accordance
with the laws of the Member State  from  which  the  Union  citizen  obtains
nationality. Accordingly the judge's decision could not stand.

Mr Aina confirmed that there was no further evidence to be produced  in  the
appellant's appeal and accordingly it was agreed by all parties  that  there
was no reason why we could not proceed to heard submissions in order to  re-
make the decision.

Mr Aina relied upon the internet article  from  the  "Migration  Information
Center" in submitting that the  appellant's  marriage  would  be  recognised
under Slovakian law. He submitted that the marriage was recognised as  valid
in  Nigeria  and  the  Slovakian  authorities  could  not  go   behind   the
conclusions  of  the  Nigerian  authorities  in   that   respect.   In   the
alternative, the appellant was  in  a  durable  relationship  with  the  EEA
national.

Mr Avery submitted that the internet article was inadequate as  evidence  of
the recognition of the appellant's marriage under Slovakian law and that  it
could not be argued that the  appellant  and  the  EEA  were  in  a  durable
relationship since it was accepted that they were separated.

Mr Aina, in  response,  submitted  that  the  respondent  had  not  produced
evidence to rebut the suggestion that  the  marriage  was  recognised  under
Slovakian law. He submitted that it was possible to be  separated  but  also
in a durable relationship. At that point he  asked  that  in  the  event  we
found the marriage not to be a valid one we remit the appeal to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for evidence to be considered as  to  the  durability  of  the
relationship. However we reminded him that he had advised us that there  was
no further evidence and that there was therefore no purpose to be served  by
remitting the appeal when all issues could be determined  by  ourselves.  He
accepted that that was the case.

Consideration and Findings

In TA, the claimants sought to argue that the decision in Kareem involved  a
two stage process for consideration of the validity of a  marriage  for  the
purposes of the 2006 Regulations, whereby it was only if there was doubt  as
to whether a marriage had been lawfully contracted in the country  in  which
the marriage took place (ie Nigeria) that it  was  necessary  to  go  on  to
consider whether the marriage had been contracted  in  accordance  with  the
national law of the sponsor's EEA country. The Upper Tribunal  unequivocally
rejected that approach, concluding that:

      "Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages -  EU  law)  [2014]
      UKUT 24, the determination of whether there is a marital  relationship
      for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must always
      be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State from which
      the Union citizen obtains nationality."

Accordingly, even if it were the case  that  the  appellant's  marriage  was
recognised as valid under Nigerian law (and we  shall  address  that  matter
later), she still has to demonstrate that the marriage is  recognised  under
the law of the country of her EEA national sponsor, namely Slovakia.

The only evidence produced by the appellant in that respect  consists  of  a
print-out from the internet of an article  from  the  Migration  Information
Center entitled "Marriage between a Slovak citizen and a foreign  national".
In Kareem,  when  referring  to  the  evidence  required  to  establish  the
validity of marriage in the EEA national's country, the  Tribunal  found  as
follows:

    "It should be assumed that, without independent and  reliable  evidence
    about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of the EEA country
    and/or the country where the  marriage  took  place,  the  Tribunal  is
    likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence has been  provided
    to discharge the burden of proof. Mere production  of  legal  materials
    from the EEA country or country where the marriage took place  will  be
    insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such  law  is
    understood or applied in those countries. Mere  assertions  as  to  the
    effect of such laws will, for similar reasons, carry no weight."

The article relied  upon  by  the  appellant  is  no  more  than  a  general
guidance. It does not contain references to  the  relevant  legislation  and
gives no details of the authority  or  expertise  of  the  author.  Further,
whilst it states that marriage  between  a  Slovak  citizen  and  a  foreign
national concluded with a  competent  authority  in  a  foreign  country  is
recognised in the Slovak Republic if valid in the country in  which  it  was
concluded, it makes  no  reference  to  customary  or  proxy  marriages  and
whether they  are  recognised  under  Slovakian  law.  Indeed,  the  article
commences by stating that "A Slovak citizen may marry a foreign national  in
Slovakia or in a foreign country in front of  that  country's  authorities",
which  suggests  that  proxy  marriages  are  not  in  fact  recognised.  In
addition, the article provides a list of documents to  be  submitted  before
the wedding ceremony, with no accompanying evidence from  the  appellant  to
confirm that the relevant documents were submitted in  accordance  with  the
requirements. In the circumstances, we consider  that  the  evidence  relied
upon by the appellant in  respect  to  the  status  of  her  marriage  under
Slovakian law is wholly inadequate and does not  go  anywhere  near  meeting
the requirements as set out in Kareem.

We are accordingly in no doubt that the appellant has failed to  demonstrate
that her marriage to the EEA national sponsor, even if recognised  as  valid
under Nigerian  law,  was  contracted  according  to  the  national  law  of
Slovakia. On that basis alone we are not satisfied that  the  appellant  has
shown that she is in a marital relationship with a qualified person for  the
purposes of the EEA Regulations and it is not, therefore, necessary  for  us
to consider the validity of the marriage under Nigerian law.

However for the sake of completeness we would add  that  we  do  not  accept
that the documentary  evidence  produced  by  the  appellant  satisfactorily
establishes that she has contracted  a  valid  marriage  in  Nigeria.  Judge
Tootell accepted that there was evidence of  her  father's  consent  to  the
marriage and  we  assume  that  that  evidence  consisted  of  an  affidavit
purporting to have been sworn by him at the Customary Court. However,  there
is no evidence of such consent from the appellant's family,  nor  indeed  of
their presence at the ceremony. Likewise, whilst Judge Tootell  found  there
to be evidence of the payment of a dowry, we cannot see that  there  is  any
such evidence other than the reference in the appellant's  statement  and  a
letter dated 18 January 2012 purportedly from Barrister Sikiru Adisa  Busari
referring to a dowry being paid but providing no details. As is  made  clear
in Kareem, such requirements have to be met  in  the  case  of  a  customary
marriage (see paragraph 54) and, as in that case, the evidence before us  is
extremely weak. When taken together with the absence of  any  evidence  that
the relationship between the appellant  and  the  EEA  sponsor  had  existed
prior to the issue of the proxy marriage certificate, despite such a  matter
being raised in the  refusal  letter,  and  the  lack  of  evidence  of  the
relationship existing subsequent to the date of the certificate, as well  as
the absence of any evidence from the  EEA  sponsor,  we  consider  that  the
evidence overall of an existing marriage is highly dubious  and  unreliable.
However even taking the case at its highest we  do  not  consider  that  the
appellant  has  fulfilled  the  documentary  requirements  for  a  customary
marriage and we are  not  satisfied  that  she  has  demonstrated  that  she
entered into a valid marriage in Nigeria.

Accordingly, we do not accept that the appellant is married to Mr Tokar  and
as such she is not entitled to a residence card as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
national. In the absence of any  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and
durable relationship and in the light of the appellant's own  evidence  that
she and her sponsor have separated, it is plain that  she  cannot  meet  the
regulations as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  the
Regulations. We find therefore that she is not entitled to a residence  card
under the EEA Regulations.

The appellant cannot succeed on Article 8 grounds.  For  the  reasons  given
above we do not accept that there is any family  life  between  her  and  Mr
Tokar. She cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE
of the immigration rules. There is no evidence before  us  to  suggest  that
there are any arguable grounds for looking beyond the  rules  in  regard  to
private life, pursuant to the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -
correct  approach)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640.  Any  requirement  for  the
appellant to leave the United Kingdom would not be in breach of Article 8.

Accordingly  we  would  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  under   the   EEA
Regulations and on Article 8 grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  We  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Ms Enahoro's appeal on all grounds.











                               Signed   [pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
