
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
ia/16903/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2017                       |    On 05 February 2018           |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                         mrs hiraben hasmukh vadher
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr I Singh, instructed by Ishwar Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India. Her date of birth is 12  September
    1955.  She came to the UK in 2008 having been granted leave to enter as
    the spouse of  a  British  citizen,  Hasmukh  Laxmikant  Vadher,  under
    paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant made an in-time application for leave  to  remain  on  21
    January 2014 (her leave expired on 24 January 2014).   The  application
    was returned to her as invalid because according to the respondent  the
    payment page had not been  properly  completed.   She  resubmitted  the
    application with a cheque on 11 February  2014.   The  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on  29  March  2014.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision. Her appeal was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Crawford in a decision  of  18  July  2014  following  a
    hearing  on  11  July  2014.   It  was  accepted  by  the   appellant's
    representative that she did not have an  English  language  certificate
    and therefore she could not meet the requirement  of  the  Rules.   The
    judge dismissed the appeal under Article 8. He found that the appellant
    has family and private life here with her husband, a  British  citizen,
    and adult son.  However, he concluded that there are no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with her husband  continuing  in  India.    He
    found that  the  appellant  would  not  be  removed  from  the  UK  for
    approximately seven weeks and would have time to study for the  English
    language test and if necessary she could study for the test  in  India.
    The judge found that there were no exceptional  circumstances  why  the
    appellant should not be removed from the UK and therefore removal would
    not breach her Article 8 rights.

3.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford on 12 September  2014.   The  matter
    came before a panel comprising  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanson and Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty  on  30
    June 2015.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  24  July  2015  the  panel
    concluded that the  first  application  on  21  January  2014  was  not
    accompanied by a fee and was not an application for the purposes of the
    Immigration Rules with reference to the case of Kaur [2013] UKUT 00381.
     It followed that she did not have valid  leave  at  the  date  of  her
    application on 11 February 2014. Her leave was not extended by  section
    3C of the 1971 Act.  There was no right  of  appeal  according  to  the
    panel.  Judge Crawford had no jurisdiction  to  determine  the  appeal.
    The Tribunal set aside the decision of Judge Crawford.

4.     The Court of Appeal on 28 September 2016 by order of Vos  LJ  granted
    permission to appeal to the appellant.  The decision states:

         "It appears arguable that the SSHD wrongly persuaded  the  UT  that
         the FtT  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal  because  the
         application had been completed and paid only after the  Appellant's
         LTR had expired.  It is arguable (indeed that much may be  accepted
         by the SSHD) that, in fact, the proper payment page  was  completed
         with the application made three days before the  Appellant's  leave
         LTR expired..."

5.   It was agreed by the parties that the issue for  us  to  determine  was
    whether there is an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Crawford. Mr Wilding conceded that  the  appellant  had  properly
    completed the payment form rendering her application of 21 January 2014
    valid and therefore there was an in-time  application.   There  was  no
    jurisdiction issue for us to decide.

6.   Mr Wilding stated that in his view the proportionality  assessment  was
    "somewhat light" and that it was "odd" that the  judge  considered  the
    case of Razgar v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27  in  the  final  paragraph  (see
    paragraph 19 of Judge Crawford's decision).

7.   We conclude that the judge made a material error of law when  assessing
    the appellant's rights under article 8 and proportionality. The judge's
    decision lacks essential detail.  There  is  no  proper  assessment  of
    proportionality whereby the  judge  considered  matters  in  favour  of
    removal and all those against.   There  is  no  identification  of  the
    public interest and what weight the judge attached to  it.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant's husband had lived in the UK for 32 years.
    He was employed and owned the family home. It is  not  clear  from  the
    decision what if any weight he placed on these factors.  As a matter of
    fact the appellant had entered the UK lawfully as a spouse and made  an
    in-time application. The judge attached weight to  immaterial  matters,
    namely that the appellant would not be  removed  for  seven  weeks  and
    therefore would have time to complete  the  relevant  English  language
    test.  The judge directed himself on Razgar, but is not  apparent  from
    the decision that he properly applied the guidance.

8.   We set aside the decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8. The parties conceded that we could  go  on  to  re-make  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence  now  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    appellant has, since the hearing  before  Judge  Crawford,  passed  the
    relevant English language test and would therefore, as accepted  by  Mr
    Wilding, be able to meet the relevant Immigration Rule  (paragraph  284
    of the Rules).

9.    Mr Wilding conceded that it would be difficult for him  to  advance  a
    case that the decision was proportionate considering that the appellant
    now meets the Rules. We agree.  The appellant  has  significant  family
    and private life here. She has been here lawfully at all  times.  There
    is no suggestion  from  the  respondent  that  her  circumstances  have
    changed since the decision of Judge Crawford. The family remains  self-
    sufficient and  there  is  no  language  problem.  She  now  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules. Whilst removal is in  the  public  interest,
    the balance of the scales weighs very  heavily  against  removal.   The
    appeal is allowed under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date: 1 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
