
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/16498/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 19th January 2016                     |             On 16th February 2016   |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    H I A
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, Counsel for 12 Bridge Solicitors, Hounslow

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 21st September  1992.   He
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 20th March 2014  refusing
    him entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  based  on  fourteen  years'
    residence and on human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Thanki on 8th June  2015.   He  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8  of  ECHR  in  a
    decision promulgated on 18th June 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M Holmes on  17th  August
    2015.  The  permission  states  that  it  is  well  arguable  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules
    either as a parent or as a partner and that  the  judge's  approach  to
    paragraph EX1 was flawed.  The permission goes on to state that  it  is
    also well arguable that the judge's whole approach  to  the  Article  8
    appeal was flawed and that he either misunderstood or  misapplied  both
    paragraph 276ADE sections 117A to D and the guidance to be found in  SS
    (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and EV (Philippines) and  Others
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The permission states that arguably his  decision
    is also not consistent with AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260.
    This is a family who could live together in safety in Turkey  and  even
    those members who are  British  citizens  also  appear  to  be  Turkish
    citizens.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. The Presenting Officer made her submissions relying on the  grounds  of
    application.  She referred to paragraph 65 of  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision submitting that this must be incorrect.  The judge  refers  to
    Appendix FM and the partner route but having done this goes straight to
    EX1 which he is unable to do as  he  has  not  approached  EX1  by  the
    correct route.

 6. The Presenting Officer also submitted that  the  Appellant  is  married
    Islamically and this is not recognised in United Kingdom law.

 7. The Presenting Officer then referred to paragraph  67  and  the  parent
    route.  The judge states that the Appellant qualifies but he  makes  no
    finding on sole responsibility and it is clear that the Appellant  does
    not have sole responsibility as  his  child  lives  with  him  and  the
    Appellant's partner, the child's mother.

 8. The Presenting Officer went on to deal with the judge's approach to the
    claim outside the Immigration Rules.  She referred to paragraph  69  of
    the decision, in which the judge states that the Appellant is  entitled
    to be considered under Article 8  ECHR.   He  makes  no  finding  about
    compelling circumstances and gives no good reason for  considering  the
    matter outside the Immigration Rules.  I was referred to the said  case
    of SS (Congo) and Others and paragraph 33 thereof.  This makes it clear
    that for a case to be considered outside the  Immigration  Rules  there
    have to be very compelling reasons but the judge has  not  referred  to
    any compelling reasons.  At paragraph 44 of the said case of SS (Congo)
    and others there is narrated the correct approach. If a judge is  going
    to deal with a claim outside the Immigration Rules he has  to  identify
    the Rule and the substantive content thereof to see if  an  application
    for leave to remain or leave to enter  satisfies  the  conditions  laid
    down in those Rules and he has  to  assess  the  force  of  the  public
    interest given expression in these Rules.  She submitted that the judge
    has done none of this.

 9. The Presenting Officer then went on to deal with Section 117B  of  Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 and the  balancing
    exercise which the  judge  should  have  entered  into  when  assessing
    proportionality.  She submitted  that  the  judge  refers  to  this  at
    paragraph 68 of  his  decision.   He  refers  to  Section  117B  before
    considering whether the case should be looked  at  outside  the  Rules.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that that is not the  correct  way  to
    consider Section 117B and I was referred to the case of Bossade  [2015]
    UKUT 415 (IAC) at paragraph 34 which states that Sections 117A to D are
    concerned only with proportionality and justification.   There  has  to
    have been an interference with the right to  respect  for  private  and
    family life and then it has to be decided whether such interference  is
    proportionate.  This paragraph states that Part 5A  considerations  are
    not and do not purport to be a complete code for  the  conduct  of  the
    proportionality assessment required by Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that children cannot be treated  as  a
    trump card.  She submitted that no consideration has been given  as  to
    whether it would be reasonable for the children in this case to  go  to
    Turkey with their parents.  At paragraph 68 of the decision the  First-
    tier Judge states "I find that it would be unreasonable to expect these
    British children to go and live in Turkey and in  the  circumstances  I
    have applied  the  requirements  of  Section  117B  accordingly."   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that this is  a  bare  assertion  with  no
    explanation.  The circumstances of this case have not  been  considered
    and reasonableness has not been considered.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge has failed to consider the  said  case  of  EV  (Philippines  and
    others [2014] EWCA Civ 874 which narrates what  should  be  taken  into
    account relating to children and their best interests and the  case  of
    AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 206 (IAC) has not been considered.  This  deals
    with people who have a precarious  immigration  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom, (the Appellant in this case.)  At paragraph 39 of that case it
    is stated there is no reason to infer  that  any  interruption  of  the
    education of the elder child upon removal to Malawi would be  any  more
    significant than that faced by  any  child  forced  to  move  from  one
    country to another by virtue of the  careers  of  their  parents.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that this has  to  be  factored  into  the
    decision as has public interest and this has not been done.

11. The Presenting Officer then referred me to the case  of  Forman  [2015]
    UKUT 412 (IAC) at paragraph  17  which  gives  an  explanation  of  the
    correct analysis of Sections 117A and B.  I was also  referred  to  the
    case of Deelah [2015] UKUT 515  (IAC)  at  paragraph  20  and  the  six
    considerations  under  Section  117B.   This  case  states   that   the
    characteristic  which  links  the  considerations  listed  in   Section
    117B(1), (2), (3) and (6) is that of public interest.  Public  interest
    is multi-layered.  Public interest has to be taken into account in  all
    cases and Section 117B(6) does not prevail over the other  sections  of
    Section 117B.  She submitted that the judge has not taken  any  of  the
    relevant cases into account.  She  submitted  that  all  these  factors
    should have been taken into account and as that has not been  done  the
    decision has to be set aside.

12. Counsel for the Appellant referred me to the case of Treebhawon  [2015]
    UKUT 674 (IAC) and submitted that there may be an error of law  in  the
    decision but it is not material.  He submitted that at paragraph 68  of
    the decision Section 117B(6) is referred to and the judge  states  that
    this provides that  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal where:

    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         a qualifying child and

    (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

    He submitted that the judge  found  the  Appellant  has  a  significant
    relationship with his partner's children and also  finds  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect these British children to go and live in Turkey.
     Counsel submitted that in the  circumstances  the  judge  applied  the
    requirements of Section 117B correctly.  At paragraph 23 of the case of
    Treebhawon it states:

         "Ordinarily, a court or Tribunal will first consider an Appellant's
         Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules, the  purpose
         of this exercise being to decide whether  the  relevant  qualifying
         conditions are satisfied by the person concerned.  This exercise is
         performed without reference to  Part  5A.   The  latter  regime  is
         engaged directly only where the decision making process reaches the
         stage  of  concluding  that  the  person  does  not   satisfy   the
         requirements of the Rules.  Thereafter, in any consideration of the
         case outwith  the  framework  of  the  Rules  and  subject  to  the
         application of the Razgar test, Part 5A will fall to be applied  in
         the decision maker's determination of the proportionality question.
          It follows that in any case where the parent concerned  is  unable
         to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Rules  Section  117B(6)  may
         conceivably apply.  The outcome will depend on the facts  as  found
         by the tribunal."

    Counsel submitted that when this is followed the judge in our case  has
    made  no  error  and  the  requirements  of   Section   117B(6)   apply
    accordingly.  I was referred to the said case of Forman at paragraph 17
    and Counsel submitted that at paragraph 18 of Forman it is  made  clear
    that the judge has to have regard to all the elements of  Section  117B
    and in this case paragraph 117B(6) has been satisfied so  the  rest  of
    the public interest issues do not require  to  be  considered  and  the
    Appellant's appeal must succeed.  He submitted that this  Appellant  is
    not being deported, his child is British and the two other children  of
    his partner are British and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  these
    children to leave the United Kingdom.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    gives weight to the Appellant's wife's daughter's evidence and the fact
    that she is sitting her GCSEs.  I was asked to find that this  argument
    is sustainable and there is no material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  Counsel  submitted  that  it  must  be  disproportionate  to
    separate the Appellant from the three children and his  wife.   Counsel
    asked me to make my decision based on this submission only,  submitting
    that it must succeed on this basis. I stated that I would not be  doing
    that. I asked for further submissions.

13. Counsel submitted that the judge has noted that the  Appellant  was  in
    the United Kingdom precariously when his relationship started and  when
    he had his child but he then considered the terms of the case of Razgar
    and at paragraphs 70 and 71 of the decision found  that  the  Appellant
    has significant family and private life in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge refers to the significant impact on the children  if  he  has  to
    move from the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 72 the judge refers to  the
    Appellant being  illegally  in  the  United  Kingdom  until  2013.   He
    submitted that the judge has taken  everything  into  account  and  has
    found it would not be reasonable for this family to go to Turkey.   The
    Appellant's wife has her  own  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    Appellant has cousins and family members in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge took into account the letters of  support  on  file  and  Counsel
    submitted that his overall decision was made by looking at the facts in
    the round and he arrived at a decision open to him.

14. Counsel then referred to the said case of SS (Congo) and submitted that
    the judge had the Immigration Rules in mind when he considered  Article
    8.  At paragraph 68 he considers paragraph 276ADE but the Appellant has
    not been in the United  Kingdom  for  twenty  years.   The  judge  then
    proceeds with the Article 8 consideration considering how difficult  it
    would be for the appellant to integrate into life in  Turkey  when  his
    family and children are in the United Kingdom.  Counsel submitted  that
    the judge was entitled to do this.

15. I was referred to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the said case of SS (Congo) and
    the minimum income requirements for  the  terms  of  the  Rules  to  be
    satisfied.  He submitted that the Home Office have a wide discretion to
    grant leave to remain or leave to enter outside the Rules.  Even if the
    Rules cannot be satisfied an applicant may have a good claim and may be
    entitled to enter the United Kingdom and  may  be  entitled  to  remain
    here.  This entitlement would be  based  on  their  Convention  rights,
    Article 3 and Article 8.  He submitted that the Secretary of State  has
    to act in a manner compatible with an individual's Convention rights.

16. I was referred to paragraphs 29 and 30 of the said case of  SS  (Congo)
    which state that  leave  to  remain  or  leave  to  enter  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules  should  only  be  granted  in  exceptional   cases.
    Reference is made to family life established in the United  Kingdom  at
    the time when the presence of one or other of the partners was known to
    be precarious.  Counsel  submitted  that  in  this  case  it  would  be
    disproportionate not to allow  the  appeal.   At  paragraph  31  of  SS
    (Congo) it states it cannot simply be assumed that a strict legal  test
    of exceptional circumstances will  be  applicable  when  examining  the
    application of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.   The  relevant
    general balance of public interest considerations and  an  individual's
    interests will vary between different parts of the Rules.  It  is  only
    if the normal balance of interest  relevant  to  the  general  area  in
    question is such as to require particularly great weight to be given to
    the public interest, as compared with the individual interests at stake
    that  a  strict  test  of  exceptionality  will  apply.   He  submitted
    therefore that the Appellants in this case can succeed under Article  8
    even though the requirements of the  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied.   He
    submitted that there is no error of law in the judge's decision  or  if
    there is it is not a material error of  law.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings of fact have not been challenged  by  the  Respondent.
    He submitted that the  judge  deals  with  paragraph  276ADE  and  then
    considers Article 8.

17. With regard to the Immigration Rules and the partner route he submitted
    that although the Appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules
    suitability is not a problem in this case.  With regard to Appendix  FM
    he submitted that the financial requirements have  not  been  satisfied
    but the judge can still allow the claim under the partner Rule as  this
    is an exception.

18. He submitted that the judge has stated that it would be  difficult  for
    all the family to return to Turkey and settle and he is  aware  of  the
    finances.  He submitted that this is not an error of law.  With  regard
    to the judge failing to look at  sole  responsibility  and  the  parent
    route he submitted again that there is no problem with suitability  and
    again the exceptions can be considered.

19. Counsel submitted that it would not be reasonable for the Appellant  to
    go back to Turkey with the rest of his family.   The  judge  has  found
    this and given proper reasons for his findings.  He submitted that  the
    judge dealt with the matter properly and found that the Appellant meets
    the suitability criteria for both partner and parent.

20. I was asked to consider the said case of EV (Philippines) and the  fact
    that in this case there are three British children.  He submitted  that
    the best interests of the children have been properly considered by the
    judge and this appeal by the Secretary of State  should  be  dismissed.
    He submitted that there is no material error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that she accepts that suitability  and
    eligibility are  satisfactory  but  EX1  does  not  apply  because  the
    financial requirements cannot be satisfied.  She submitted that EX1  is
    parasitic to the Rules  and  if  the  terms  of  the  Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied EX1 cannot apply.  She submitted that there is no mention  by
    the judge about the English language test.  She went on to  state  that
    the judge has not considered sole responsibility and the Appellant does
    not have sole responsibility for the children.  She submitted that this
    is a mandatory requirement.

22. She submitted that the judge therefore has to find  compelling  reasons
    for allowing the appeal outside the Rules.  I was referred to the  said
    case of SS (Congo) at paragraph 32.  This states that the Rules provide
    significant guidance about the relevant public interest  considerations
    which should be taken into account when a court or  Tribunal  seeks  to
    strike a proper balance of interest under Article 8 when making its own
    decision.  She submitted that in this case the  Rules  are  a  complete
    code.  She submitted that this claim should not  have  been  considered
    under Article 8 of ECHR.  I was referred to paragraph 43 of SS  (Congo)
    which refers to this issue.  Paragraph 44 states that the  way  forward
    should always be to identify first,  the  substantive  content  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rules and  to  assess  the  force  of  the  public
    interest given expression in these Rules.   Secondly  if  an  applicant
    does not satisfy the requirements in the substantive part of the  Rules
    then he  may  seek  to  maintain  a  claim  for  a  grant  outside  the
    substantive provisions of the Rules pursuant to Article 8 but  only  if
    there is a good arguable case under Article 8  which  has  not  already
    been sufficiently dealt with by consideration of the application  under
    the substantive provisions of the Rules.  She submitted  that  in  this
    case there is no good arguable case under Article  8  which  could  not
    have been sufficiently dealt with by consideration of  the  application
    under the substantive provisions of the Rules.  She submitted that  the
    Rules are a complete code.  The Appellant is relying on family life and
    this has to be considered under Appendix FM.  To consider private  life
    outside the Rules there have to be  compelling  circumstances  and  she
    submitted there are no compelling circumstances in this  case  and  the
    judge did not do this when dealing with the case outside the Rules.

23.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  if  there  are   compelling
    circumstances, that is when Section 117B has to be taken into account.

24. The Presenting Officer submitted that if Counsel is correct and Section
    117B(6) applies, reasonableness has to be  considered.   She  submitted
    that the judge has not considered whether the Appellant and his  family
    can go to Turkey and whether the children can be  educated  there.   At
    paragraph 68 of the  decision  the  judge  refers  to  the  significant
    relationship of the  Appellant  with  his  partner's  children  but  no
    reasons have been given for them not  being  able  to  go  to  live  in
    Turkey.  At paragraph 68 little weight  is  given  to  the  Appellant's
    private life as the judge states that the Appellant's private life  was
    formed when he was in the United  Kingdom  illegally  since  1996.   At
    paragraph 70 of the decision the judge  refers  to  Article  8  and  at
    paragraph 72 he goes on to state that the Appellant has  established  a
    strong family and private life in the United  Kingdom.   She  submitted
    that it is clear that what the  judge  has  done  is  consider  Section
    117B(6) separately and not as part of the proportionality exercise.

25. The Presenting Officer submitted that  there  is  an  English  language
    certificate on file although this has  not  been  referred  to  by  the
    judge.

26. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and to set the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    aside.

Decision and Reasons

27. The permission in this case is clear and I quote "It is  well  arguable
    that the appellant could not succeed in his application under  Appendix
    FM either as a parent or as a partner and that the judge's approach  to
    paragraph EX1 is flawed."  The financial terms of the Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied and the appellant does not have sole responsibility  for  the
    child.  These are substantive elements of the Rules so  the  judge  has
    not approach Appendix FM  by  the  correct  route.   EXI  is  not  free
    standing.

28. The judge misapplied paragraph 276ADE before stating  at  paragraph  68
    that the appellant's claim does not meet its requirements.

29. The judge at paragraph 69 states that the appellant is entitled to have
    his claim considered under Article 8 outside the Rules.   He  makes  no
    mention of the said case of SS Congo and Another and gives  no  reasons
    for considering the claim outside the Rules. He does not refer  to  any
    "compelling reasons".

30. It is clear that the judge has not  properly  considered  the  relevant
    case law, in particular SS Congo and  Others,  EV  Philippines  and  AM
    Malawi.  The judge should have identified the  substantive  content  of
    the Rules and then assessed the force  of  the  public  interest  given
    expression in those Rules.  In this case the appellant does not satisfy
    the requirements of substantive parts of the Rules and it  is  only  if
    there is a good arguable case which has  not  been  sufficiently  dealt
    with under the Rules that Article  8  can  be  considered  outside  the
    Rules, and then the appellant's and his family's rights can be balanced
    against public interest and Part 5A can be taken into account.

31. The judge should have considered the  claim  which  he  has  considered
    outside the Rules, within the Rules.

32. If it was appropriate for the judge to consider the claim  outside  the
    Rules, which I do not accept is the case here, the judge would  require
    to consider all the public interest considerations within section 117B.
     The judge has not carried out a proper balancing exercise. He has  not
    properly considered effective immigration  control  and  he  has  given
    considerable  weight  to  the  appellant's   relationship   which   was
    established when he was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   Little
    weight should have been given to this appellant's private life.

33. The judge also considered the appellant's child as a  trump  card.   He
    states that it would not be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  join  the
    appellant in Turkey but he has not adequately reasoned this finding and
    has not given adequate reasons  for  the  other  family  members  being
    unable to go to live in Turkey.

34. Counsel for the appellant submitted  that  the  appeal  should  succeed
    based on section 117B(6) and that nothing else needs to  be  considered
    but section 117B(6) does not prevail over the other sections of section
    117B.  Section 117B(6)(b) has not, in any case, been properly  reasoned
    by the judge.  The decision does  not  explain  why  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant's child and his  partner's  children
    to leave the United Kingdom. The circumstances in Turkey  re  schooling
    etcetera have not been considered. Section 117B(6) cannot be  satisfied
    without there being clear reasons why it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

There are material errors of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
promulgated on 18 June 2015. It must be set aside.

No findings of the First-tier Tribunal can stand. Under s.12 (2) (b) (i)  of
the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and  extent  of  judicial
fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal. The  member(s)  of
the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to  include
Judge Thanki.

Anonymity has been directed.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


