
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16570/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th December, 2013                        |On 27th February, 2013       |
|and 7th February, 2014                        |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                        MRS JOANNA LAMBACO FARNWORTH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     (On 13th December, 2013) Mr Said, a Solicitor's
Clerk
     (On 7th February, 2014) Ms Faryl, of Counsel, instructed by Leigh
                    Bailey Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines, who  was  born  on  25th
    June, 1982, and who on 9th March, 2013 applied to  the  respondent  for
    her leave to be varied.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 22nd October,  2012,  on  a
    family visit visa valid from 10th October, 2012, to 10th  April,  2013.
    She had a previous family visit visa valid from  25th  April,  2012  to
    25th October, 2012 and had previously entered  the  United  Kingdom  on
    27th April, 2012.  She had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  earlier
    occasions.  She entered the United Kingdom on  8th  March,  2011  on  a
    visit visa valid for 12th January, 2011 to 12th July, 2011 and  earlier
    on another visit visa valid from 3rd August, 2009 to 3rd August, 2010.

3.   On 14th May, 2013, the respondent refused to vary leave to  remain  and
    gave directions for her removal.   The  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant enjoyed a genuine family life with her husband and with their
    child who was born to the  appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  4th
    January, 2013.  The application was  refused  by  the  respondent  with
    reference to Appendix FM of Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules,
    HC 395, as amended,  because  the  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a visit visa and did not have sole  parental  responsibility
    over her 9 month old baby.  The  respondent  relied  on  paragraphs  E-
    LTRPT2.2, 2.3 and 3.1 of Appendix FM.   Additionally,  the  application
    was refused under  paragraph  276ADE  because  the  appellant  did  not
    qualify.

4.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  her  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne who in a determination  dated
    8th  October,  2013  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules and dismissed her human rights appeal.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  from  her  husband,  a
    British subject.  The  appellant  explained  that  she  had  originally
    intended to visit her mother-in-law for three months and when  she  had
    applied for her visa on 24th September, 2012, her British  husband  was
    working and living in Japan.  He had  started  living  and  working  in
    Japan in 1996.  The appellant had been living  in  Davao  City  in  the
    Philippines with her sister and two children.  She married her  husband
    on 5th February, 2007 but they had  never  lived  together  permanently
    because she was unable to obtain a visa to live in Japan and he was not
    able to obtain a visa to live in the Philippines.  They met every month
    in Thailand.  The appellant's husband moved back to the United  Kingdom
    on 25th October, 2012 to be with his  wife.   The  appellant's  husband
    explained that he was currently unemployed and  in  receipt  of  income
    support.  He had no right of abode in the Philippines and was not happy
    to live in Davao City in  any  event,  because  it  was  dangerous  for
    "whites and Westerners".  The judge noted a  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office bulletin of September 2013 advising against "all  but  essential
    travel" to that part of Mineanao where Davao City was situated, because
    of "ongoing terrorist activity and clashes  between  the  military  and
    insurgent groups".

6.   The judge found that the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules having entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor,
    because of the effect of paragraph  E-LTRPT3.1  of  Appendix  FM.   The
    judge found that she could not satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE because she had not lived in the United Kingdom for twenty years
    and could not be said to have lost ties to her home country.

7.   The judge considered the appeal  under  Article  8  jurisprudence.   In
    doing so, he asserted that he had applied R  (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  Beoku-Betts  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39 and Chikwamba
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40.

8.   The judge noted that the appellant's child was a  British  citizen  and
    asserted that he had considered and applied Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  together  with  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 2 WLR 148 as well  as
    EA (Article 8 - best interests of the child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  00315
    (IAC).  He concluded that it is in the best interests of the  child  to
    remain with its parents.

9.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thorne  suggested  that  there   was   no
    "adequate" evidence as to why  it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
    appellant's husband to apply for entry to the Philippines to live  with
    the appellant and their child and "no adequate" evidence as to  why  it
    would not be reasonable for the appellant to return to the  Philippines
    with her child to make the appropriate application to enter the  United
    Kingdom once she qualifies.

10.  Permission was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on the  following
    basis:-

         "Notwithstanding the judge's structured Article  8  assessment  and
         citations  of  a  number  of  authorities  including  Chikwamba   v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  40,  it  is
         arguable that the latter authority was not in substance  considered
         together with  those  authorities  cited  in  the  grounds  seeking
         permission with reference to assessing best interests of the child,
         more especially, where the  child  is  a  British  citizen  however
         young."

11.  At the hearing before me on 13th September, Mr Said  told  me  that  he
    relied on various authorities but unfortunately did not have copies for
    me.  He suggested that the decision of the judge was not  proportionate
    because by refusing her appeal the appellant would have  to  return  to
    the  Philippines  and  wait  until  her  husband  had  found   suitable
    employment so that she could meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  That, he suggested, was unfair on the appellant.

12.  Unfortunately, Mr Said was ill-prepared and did not have copies of  the
    authorities he sought to rely on, nor could he direct me to  particular
    paragraphs of the opinions and judgments on which his submissions  were
    based.  In the circumstances, I concluded  that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the appellant that the proceedings be adjourned to  enable
    Mr Said to properly prepare so that he could return on another occasion
    with copies of the authorities on which he relied.

13.  At the hearing before me on 7th February, Ms Faryl told me that it  was
    accepted on behalf of  the  appellant  that  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   As  a  result,  Ms   Faryl
    suggested, the appellant has three alternatives.  She could; leave  the
    United Kingdom without her child and return  to  the  Philippines;  she
    could leave the United Kingdom and return to the Philippines  with  her
    child; or she could leave the United Kingdom with both  her  child  and
    her husband and make application for settlement at a later  date.   She
    referred me to paragraph 46(vii) of the judge's determination where  on
    the one hand, the judge appears to  accept  that  it  is  in  the  best
    interests of the child to remain with its parents but then suggests  in
    paragraph  46(ix)  that  the  appellant's  husband  and  child  can  be
    separated while the appellant and her child return to  the  Philippines
    to make an appropriate application once they qualify.

14.   Ms  Faryl  suggested  that  in  order  to  consider  the  question  of
    proportionality fully, the judge would have  needed  to  make  a  clear
    finding  on  whether  the  appellant's  husband  can  return   to   the
    Philippines with the appellant.  He says in paragraph  46(viii)  "There
    is no adequate evidence as to why it would not be  reasonable  for  the
    husband to apply  for  entry  to  the  Philippines  to  live  with  the
    appellant and their child" but that simply fails to take account of the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice to which the judge  had  earlier
    referred warning against all but essential travel.   The  appellant  is
    from Davao City in Mindanao which  is  specifically  mentioned  in  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice.

15.  Mr Harrison suggested that the determination was well written and  that
    the conclusion reached by the judge at paragraph  46(vii)  demonstrates
    that the judge has considered the  best  interests  of  the  child  but
    concluded  that  the  public  interest  outweighs  the  rights  of  the
    appellant and that the decision is proportionate.

16.  Responding briefly, Counsel suggested that  more  consideration  should
    have been given by the judge to the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
    advice.  She asked what the point was of making the appellant return to
    the Philippines until such time as she could meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

17.  I reserved my decision.

18.  It has been conceded on behalf of the appellant that  she  cannot  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I believe that at the  time
    she entered the  United  Kingdom  she  knew  very  well  that  she  was
    pregnant.

19.  In his determination, the judge  purports  to  apply  the  decision  of
    Their Lordships in Chikwamba.  Where Article 8 is engaged,  a  decision
    maker should not, without some good reason, fail  to  engage  with  the
    merits and dismiss a claim on the basis that an application  should  be
    made from abroad.

20.  In MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 953 an appellant who had  originally  been  granted  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a student, had married and had subsequently
    travelled to Pakistan but returned to the United  Kingdom  following  a
    disagreement with his father.   He  had  given  up  studying  when  his
    funding was withdrawn.  His  leave  to  remain  was  cancelled  by  the
    Secretary of State when it was discovered  that  he  was  no  longer  a
    student.    He   unsuccessfully   appealed   that   decision   and    a
    reconsideration was ordered on the grounds that the  Immigration  Judge
    had failed to consider the appellant's human rights.  At  a  rehearing,
    the Immigration Judge  decided  that  the  appellant  could  return  to
    Pakistan and make a fresh application which, in all  likelihood,  would
    be granted as the spouse of a British national.   The  judge  suggested
    that either the appellant and his wife could go to  Pakistan  together,
    or that they would only be apart long enough for the fresh  application
    to be made and determined.  The judge concluded that any  inconvenience
    did not amount to an insurmountable obstacle such as  to  constitute  a
    disproportionate interference with family life.

21.  Applying Chikwamba, Lord Justice Sullivan said at paragraph 9:-

         "The real question  was  not  whether  there  were  'insurmountable
         obstacles' to the appellant returning to Pakistan in order to  make
         an application for entry clearance from there,  but  whether  there
         was any sensible reason as to why they should  be  required  to  do
         so."

22.  The Court of Appeal allowed the  appeal,  finding  that  there  was  no
    sensible reason.

23.  In this appeal, it has been conceded that  the  appellant  cannot  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   The  evidence  before  the
    judge was that  the  appellant's  husband  was  in  receipt  of  income
    support.

24.  The judge clearly demonstrates that he was aware of the fact  that  the
    appellant's child is a British subject.  He concluded that it  must  be
    in the best  interests  of  the  child  to  remain  with  its  parents.
    However, as the Supreme Court made clear in ZH (Tanzania) the interests
    of  the  children  are  paramount  and  must  be  carefully  and  fully
    considered.  On the one hand, the judge  recognised  that  there  is  a
    legitimate interest in maintaining effective  immigration  control.   I
    believe that he did err by failing to consider the  best  interests  of
    the appellant's child.

25.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thorne  suggests  in  paragraph  49  of  his
    determination that because the child is young he could easily adapt  to
    life with his parents in the Philippines.  However, that means that the
    child is effectively being  denied  the  benefits  of  his  nationality
    referred to in paragraph 30 of ZH (Tanzania) where Baroness Hale refers
    to the decision in Wan v Minister for  Immigration  and  Multi-Cultural
    Affairs.  It may be  some  considerable  time  before  the  appellant's
    husband is earning sufficient funds to enable the appellant to  qualify
    under the Immigration Rules (if ever) and during that time  the  family
    life which  the  appellant's  husband  enjoys  with  his  son  will  be
    interrupted.  That interruption will not be for a matter of  weeks  and
    could be for a considerable period of time.  The alternative is for the
    appellant's husband to go to the Philippines with her and  their  child
    (and to another part of the Philippines, if they  fear  life  in  Davao
    City because of the advice of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office), but
    then the child is denied the opportunity of growing up in the  homeland
    of his father and his own nationality and deprived of  the  benefit  of
    linguistic and cultural development as well as possibly the benefit  of
    a British education.

26.  I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in law  and
    I set aside his decision.  I remake it allowing the appellant's Article
    8 appeal.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
