
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2015                     | On 18 May 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                            sylvia kahee hangero
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Magrath, Counsel instructed by Supreme
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her leave to remain outside the Rules, and
    to make directions for her removal as an  overstayer.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider the
    appellant requires to be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Namibia, whose date of birth is 7  March
    1980.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 May 2003 with  leave  to
    enter as a working holidaymaker.  She had a two  year  visa  which  ran
    until 22 May 2005.

 3. On 24 May 2005 she applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
    a student.  This application was refused with no right to appeal  on  6
    July 2005 because the appellant did not have extant leave at  the  time
    she lodged her application.

 4. On 1 December 2008 the appellant gave birth  to  Moses,  who  took  his
    father's surname.  His father is a Namibian national, who has no lawful
    basis of stay in the United Kingdom and indeed it is not clear that  he
    is still here.

 5. On 4 April 2012 the appellant applied on  behalf  of  herself  and  her
    child for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  a  compassionate
    basis outside the Rules.  The application was refused on 4  June  2013,
    without a right of appeal.  On 7 October 2013 the appellant was  served
    with an immigration notice IS151A, as was her child.

 6. On 21 March 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  deciding
    to remove the appellant as a person subject to  administrative  removal
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  (her  human
    rights claim having been refused).

 7. Her sister Meriam Hangero had said in the  2012  application  that  the
    appellant would experience "severe and extreme hardship" if she were to
    return to Namibia.  No objective evidence had been provided which would
    corroborate  that  the  appellant  would  be  incapable  of   obtaining
    employment or accommodation in her home country, such  as  evidence  of
    physical infirmity or disability and so forth.  In  any  event,  claims
    based  on  poor  living  conditions,  high  unemployment  or  lack   of
    accommodation for an applicant in their home country did not ordinarily
    engage Article 3 ECHR.  In the case of MA (prove  destitution)  Jamaica
    [2005] UKIAT 0013,  the  IAT  concluded  that  for  a  claim  based  on
    destitution to engage Article 3 it would need to  be  proven  by  clear
    evidence from the applicant in question.

 8. The appellant had previously claimed she lived with a  sibling  in  the
    United Kingdom between 2006 and September 2011  before  moving  out  to
    live in a rented apartment.  But in her letter  of  support  Ms  Meriam
    Hangero claimed that the appellant had lived with  her  since  November
    2005.  The appellant had not demonstrated the means of support that she
    seemingly had available to her in the United Kingdom would not continue
    to be available to her upon her return.  Alternatively, it had not been
    demonstrated that any family members in Namibia  could  not  offer  the
    appellant and her child assistance or support should that be  required.
    In the questionnaire form, the appellant stated that  her  parents  and
    five siblings were currently living in Namibia.  In addition  to  this,
    the appellant had also asserted in the same questionnaire that she  had
    a sister and cousin living in the United Kingdom.  Accordingly, it  had
    not been demonstrated that her claimed family  members  in  the  United
    Kingdom could not assist her from abroad following her  return  to  her
    home country.

 9. The appellant had spent the majority of her life in Namibia,  including
    all her formative years.  She was able to speak a  native  language  of
    that  country.   She  would  be  aware  of  the  culture,  customs  and
    traditions of her home country on account of having  lived  in  Namibia
    for her formative and adolescent years.  She was approximately 23  when
    she left Namibia to come to the United Kingdom.   She  did  not  suffer
    from any  medical  ailments,  or  from  any  physical  infirmity  which
    prevented her from being able to relocate or adapt to life abroad.

10. There was no current evidence of contact between the appellant's  child
    and his father, nor was there any evidence of assistance by him towards
    the child's day-to-day care and needs, or  of  any  assistance  or  the
    financial costs of the child's upbringing.  In any event, there was  no
    evidence that the father had any lawful basis of  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and as the child's father was a national of Namibia, he  could
    relocate to that country and could continue to enjoy a family life with
    Moses in Namibia.

11. Prior to considering whether enforcement should  continue  against  the
    appellant and her dependent child, the Home Office had  had  regard  to
    whether there were any extenuating circumstances for the appellant  and
    her child which would in turn demonstrate it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect them to leave the United Kingdom and return/relocate to Namibia.
     With regard to the above, that the Home Office had given consideration
    to the factors identified under  Chapter  53  of  the  Enforcement  and
    Instructions Guidance  Manual.   There  were  insufficient  factors  to
    justify allowing the appellant and her dependent child to stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Colyer sitting  at  Nottingham
    Justice Centre in the First-tier Tribunal  on  28  October  2014.   The
    appellant was  represented  by  Counsel,  and  the  Presenting  Officer
    appeared on behalf of the respondent.  The judge received oral evidence
    from the appellant, her sister Meriam and from  her  brother-in-law  Mr
    Gibrill Cham, a Belgian national.

13. The judge's findings were set  out  in  his  subsequent  decision  from
    paragraph [24] onwards.  At paragraph 33, he  found  that  the  child's
    father did not have any status in the  United  Kingdom.   At  paragraph
    [34], he found that the appellant's departure with  a  dependent  child
    would not significantly affect the relationship between the  child  and
    his father.  At paragraph [38], the judge found that the child  was  of
    an age where he was dependent upon his mother for his care and  support
    and he was young enough to be able to adapt to life abroad.   He  would
    continue to be cared for in Namibia in the same manner as he  has  been
    cared for during his time in the United Kingdom, namely by his  mother.



14. It was in the best interest of the child to be cared for by his  mother
    and his mother had no right to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  was
    required to return to Namibia.  So he found it was in the child's  best
    interest to relocate to Namibia with his mother.  There was no evidence
    to show he could not attend primary school  in  Namibia  following  his
    relocation there, and he would also be able to establish a private life
    with family members and friends that lived in Namibia.

15. The judge addressed the question of whether the appellant  could  bring
    herself within Rule 276ADE at paragraphs [52] to [55].

16. The judge addressed the prospects for the appellant and  her  child  on
    return to Namibia at paragraphs [61]  to  [69]  under  the  heading  of
    "Return to Namibia".

17. The judge addressed the public interest at paragraphs [70] to [72], and
    further Article 8 considerations  in  paragraphs  [73]  to  [83].   His
    conclusions were set out in paragraphs  [84]  to  [87].   At  paragraph
    [85], he found that the appellant's private and family  life  might  be
    resumed in Namibia.  She was mature enough to be able to adapt to  life
    in her home country.  The facts of the appeal revealed  no  substantial
    health or welfare issues.  The situation in Namibia might be materially
    less good for the appellant than the UK and there might be  a  relative
    disadvantage.  But any difference was not in itself a sufficient  basis
    for allowing her human rights appeal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

18. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Some of the grounds did not specify clearly and  coherently,  with  the
    appropriate particulars, the areas  of  law  said  to  contaminate  the
    decision under challenge: see Nixon  (permission  to  appeal:  grounds)
    [2014] UKUT 368 (IAC).  However, it is not necessary  to  explore  this
    issue further, as in the event Ms Magrath only pursued  before  me  two
    grounds of appeal. These two grounds were adequately formulated in  the
    application for permission.

19. Ground 1 was that the judge had erred in law in his application of Rule
    276ADE(vi).  Ground 2 was that the judge had erred in law in failing to
    have regard to the fact the appellant  might  have  an  entitlement  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as the extended family member  of  an  EEA
    national.

The Grant for Permission to Appeal

20. On 26 January 2015 Judge Wellesley-Cole granted permitted to appeal  on
    all grounds raised.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Melvin relied on the  Rule  24
    response settled by his colleague Mr Tarlow on 16th February 2015,  and
    also on an extended Rule 24 response which he had himself settled.

22. I explored with Ms Magrath the question of whether, and if so  to  what
    extent, there had been evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge as
    to prior dependency by the appellant on Mr Gibrill  Cham,  the  Belgian
    husband of the appellant's sister.

Discussion

23. In the refusal letter, the respondent addressed the question of whether
    the appellant came  within  the  requirements  of  Rule  276ADE(vi)  in
    paragraphs [30] and [31].  As the refusal letter was written  in  March
    2014, the respondent referred to the version of the Rules in  existence
    at that date.  Under this version,  the  applicant  had  to  show  that
    he/she had no ties to the country of return, including social, cultural
    or family ties.

24. Although  the  judge  discussed  the  application  of  Rule  276ADE  in
    paragraphs [52] to [55], he only considered sub-paragraphs (iii),  (iv)
    and (v).  He did not consider sub-paragraph (vi).

25. The judge effectively engaged with the old version of  Rule  276ADE(vi)
    at paragraph [61] onwards, where he  repeated  and  enlarged  upon  the
    reasons given by respondent in the refusal letter  for  asserting  that
    the appellant continued to have social, cultural  and  family  ties  to
    Namibia.  But, as correctly pointed out by Ms Magrath,  the  judge  did
    not in terms direct himself to the new version of sub-paragraph (vi) of
    Rule 276ADE.  Under the new version,  which  was  introduced  into  the
    Rules from 28 July 2014, the  test  is  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.  Although the
    application was decided by the Secretary  of  State  before  28th  July
    2014, Mr Melvin agreed that in his decision making the judge needed  to
    apply the new version, not the old one.

26. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge's error was not material, as  he  in
    effect found that there would  not  be  significant  obstacles  to  the
    integration of the appellant and her child on return  to  Namibia.   On
    the other hand, Ms Magrath submitted that, as a result  of  failing  to
    apply the correct test, the judge had not given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding against the appellant on Rule 276ADE(vi).

27. Judge Colyer fully addressed the case that was put to  him  by  Counsel
    for the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, namely that the child had
    no ties to Namibia, and his mother would have no  support  in  Namibia.
    The closing submissions of Counsel are set out  in  the  decision,  and
    they did not include a submission that there would be very  significant
    obstacles to the integration of the appellant or her child on return to
    Namibia.

28. Moreover, it is implicit from the findings of fact made by the judge in
    the section headed "Return to Namibia" that he was finding, among other
    things,  that  there  were  not  very  significant  obstacles  to   the
    integration of the appellant or her child.

29. The reasoning of the  judge  was  that  the  appellant  had  spent  the
    formative years of her life in Namibia, and was able to speak a  native
    language of that country.  She was aware of the  culture,  customs  and
    traditions of her home country on account of having  lived  in  Namibia
    for her formative and adolescent years, and having  left  Namibia  when
    she was aged approximately  23.   She  had  family  members  living  in
    Namibia.  There was no evidence that  she  suffered  from  any  medical
    ailments or from any  physical  infirmity.   She  and  her  child  were
    citizens of Namibia.  No objective evidence  had  been  provided  which
    corroborated the  claim  that  the  appellant  would  be  incapable  of
    obtaining employment or accommodation in Namibia.

30. Ms Magrath criticised two of  the  judge's  findings.   The  first,  in
    paragraph [67], was that the appellant could utilise  any  skills  that
    she might have gained in the United Kingdom, including English language
    skills, to secure employment in Namibia.  Ms Magrath submitted that the
    evidence did not disclose that the appellant had acquired any skills in
    the United Kingdom.  But the appellant is likely to have  improved  her
    English language skills as a result of being here since 2003,  and  she
    came here as a working holiday-maker.  So it was open to the  judge  to
    find the appellant's improved English language skills would enhance her
    employability in Namibia, as would any experience of working in the UK.

31. The second criticism relates  to  the  judge's  finding  in  the  first
    sentence of paragraph [68] that there may be family and friends to whom
    the appellant may have access to  on  her  return  to  her  country  of
    origin.  Ms Magrath submits that this is speculative.   But  the  judge
    goes on to say that it is clear from the evidence that there are  still
    family members of the appellant in Namibia. So it was open to the judge
    to draw the inference that the  appellant  and  her  child  might  have
    access to such family members.  Indeed, the judge can be said  to  have
    rather understated the position.  Arguably, this was much more  than  a
    mere possibility. For the appellant and her child  would  not  need  to
    cross an international border in order to visit family  members  living
    in the same country of return.

32. Although this did not feature as  part  of  the  judge's  reasoning,  a
    further highly material consideration is that Mr Cham did  not  dispute
    the proposition that he could send money to the appellant and her child
    in Namibia.  This was put to him in chief.  He did  not  deny  that  he
    could send money.  The thrust of his response was  that  the  appellant
    and her child would not be deprived of financial support from him as  a
    result of going back to Namibia, but that  her  child  Moses  would  be
    deprived of his emotional support: see paragraph [14] of the decision.

33. In the light of the evidence (or lack of it),  no  reasonable  Tribunal
    properly directed could have reached any other conclusion than that the
    appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  Rule  276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Rules.  Moreover, the judge gave adequate reasons in paragraphs [61] to
    [67] for finding that the appellant's relocation to Namibia  would  not
    be unjustifiably harsh.  The significance of  the  unjustifiably  harsh
    test is that it was the test which found favour with the Upper Tribunal
    at [124] in Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 00060 when addressing  the  equivalent
    provision in the old deportation rules  to  the  old  version  of  Rule
    276ADE(vi).

         We recognise that the text under the  rules  is  an  exacting  one.
         Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
         circumstances. Nevertheless, we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
         has no ties with Nigeria. He is a  stranger  to  the  country,  the
         people, and the way of life. His father may have ties but they  are
         not ties of the appellant or any ties that could result in  support
         to the appellant in the event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly,
         given the length of the appellant's residence here, all of his ties
         are with the United Kingdom.  Consequently  the  appellant  has  so
         little connection with Nigeria so as to mean that the  consequences
         for him in establishing private life there at the age of 28,  after
         22 years residence in the United Kingdom, would  be  'unjustifiably
         harsh'.

34. The new version of Rule 276ADE(vi) reflects the guidance given  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu as to the true scope of the "no ties"  test.
    The applicant did not have to show that literally he or she would  have
    no ties to the country of return.  The question was whether he  or  she
    had effective ties in the country of return such that they  could  lead
    an adequate private life there.  Although the judge has applied the old
    version of the Rules, rather than the new version  of  the  Rules,  his
    approach  is  Ogundimu  compliant.  So  he  has  given,  by   necessary
    implication, adequate reasons for finding that the appellant  does  not
    meet  the  requirements  of  the  new  version  of   Rule   276ADE(vi).
    Accordingly, no material error of law is made out.

35. The other ground of appeal lacks merit for two reasons.   Firstly,  the
    appellant was legally represented at the hearing, and so it was not for
    the judge to take a point which, if it had merit, could  reasonably  be
    expected to be taken by her Counsel.  Secondly, the mere fact that  the
    appellant resided in the same household as her  biological  sister  and
    her Belgian EEA national brother-in-law did not of  itself  disclose  a
    viable claim that the appellant was residing in the UK as the  extended
    family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights here.   There
    is no suggestion  in  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been  a
    dependant of Mr Gibrill Cham when living in Namibia.  As the  essential
    element of prior dependency on an EEA national (or  prior membership of
    the EEA national's household) was wholly missing from the evidence, the
    proposition that the appellant might  qualify  as  an  extended  family
    member under the Regulations 2006 does not get off the ground.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly this decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

