

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16557/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                OMER HAMAYAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by Bassi Solicitors,
Birmingham


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 17 October 2013, the Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to
    appeal against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nixon
    that was promulgated on 14 August 2013.  The Secretary of State  argued
    that Judge Nixon had failed to give adequate reasons for  finding  that
    the immigration decision  was  not  proportionate  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's protected family life.

 2. Mr Hussain relied on the grounds of appeal settled by his colleague, Mr
    David Neale on 20 August 2013.  He did not pursue the arguments in  the
    first paragraph, which related to private  life  rights.   Instead,  he
    focused on Mr Hamayan's family life rights.

 3. Mr Hussain argued that Judge Nixon failed to have regard  to  the  fact
    that when Mr Hamayan applied to vary his leave to  remain  he  did  not
    rely on family life rights.  This was unsurprising because at that time
    he was not in a relationship let alone married.  Mr  Hussain  amplified
    this argument by pointing out that both Mr Hussain and  his  wife  were
    aware that his immigration status was precarious.  The failure of Judge
    Nixon to consider these issues meant that her findings and  conclusions
    lacked adequate reasoning because these were material issues  that  had
    to be considered.

 4. Mr Pipe replied by reminding me of the context in which the application
    and appeal had to be considered.  The application for further leave  to
    remain was made prior to the introduction of appendix FM and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and they should not have been  applied.
    Mr Pipe acknowledged that the application had not  referred  to  family
    life issues but pointed out that  Judge  Nixon  accepted  Mr  Hamayan's
    explanation for not having done so.   Mr  Pipe  reminded  me  that  the
    grounds of appeal did not seek to challenge any of the finding of  fact
    made by Judge  Nixon,  who  identified  the  couple  as  in  a  genuine
    relationship.

 5. In conclusion, Mr Pipe argued that there was no need  for  a  judge  to
    give extensive reasons.  In this case Judge Nixon had in essence  found
    that Mr Hamayan would have met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at the date of decision (which because of transitional provisions
    were those in part 8 of HC395) and that the only reason  for  requiring
    him to leave the UK was to satisfy  immigration  formalities.   It  was
    never proportionate for a State to interfere  with  a  person's  family
    life rights merely for bureaucratic reasons.

 6. As I indicated at the end of the hearing, I find against the  Secretary
    of State.  I reserved my reasons which I now give.

 7. The grounds do not seek to challenge the factual findings made by Judge
    Nixon.  She found that Mr Hamayan would have met  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules as they applied to him.  In so doing, Judge Nixon
    recognised that the immigration rules are an expression of  the  public
    interest.  In refusing the application that generated this  appeal,  it
    would appear that the Secretary of State failed to have regard  to  her
    own  transitional  provisions  which  were  themselves  part   of   the
    expression of public interest and the need to act  fairly.   The  Judge
    rightly corrected this error.

 8. Implicit in Judge Nixon's determination is the fact  that  because  the
    appellant was last granted leave as a  tier  4  (general)  student  and
    because he had applied in time  for  that  leave  to  be  extended,  he
    continued to benefit from that leave as it was statutorily extended  by
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  I say this is implicit because
    these facts are  recorded  early  in  the  determination.   Mr  Hussain
    acknowledged that there was no bar to those with such  leave  switching
    into a category relating to spouse so long as they met the requirements
    of the immigration rules.  In light of this, the fact that Judge  Nixon
    found that the requirements of the immigration rules that applied to Mr
    Hamayan were could only mean there was no public interest in  requiring
    him to leave the UK in order to resolve his immigration status.

 9. In addition, it must be recalled that Judge Nixon had to have regard to
    the facts as they were at the date of  hearing,  a  fact  she  reminded
    herself of in paragraph 5.  Although Judge Nixon recognised that  those
    facts were significantly different to the facts known to the  Secretary
    of State when the refusal decision was made, she  understood  that  the
    law required her to take the approach she did to the evidence; in other
    words she could not ignore the evidence that Mr Hamayan was married and
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

10. It is trite law that interference in family life  merely  in  order  to
    ensure a person complies with the formalities  of  immigration  control
    will be disproportionate.  I stress the fact that it is the requirement
    of ensuring a person to comply  with  the  formalities  of  immigration
    control that is likely to  be  disproportionate  and  not  the  control
    itself.  In many cases where matters need to be investigated there is a
    positive requirement that a person is subjected to  proper  immigration
    control which will necessitate  them  leaving  the  UK.   Judge  Nixon,
    however, found that Mr Hamayan was not in this situation; his  position
    was akin to that established by the House of Lords in Chikwamba  [2008]
    UKHL 40.  It was open to Judge Nixon so to do given  the  findings  she
    had made.

11. I am fully satisfied that the determination contains  adequate  reasons
    that explain how Judge Nixon reached her findings and conclusions.  The
    Secretary of State's grounds seek to find difficulties where there  are
    none.  If anything, the grounds simply reflect the  author's  inability
    to recognise that an experienced and specialist judge will not need  to
    recite every basic legal point.  A judge writes for the parties and can
    assume that they have some knowledge of the issues  and  the  law  that
    applies.  I find nothing whatsoever wrong in law  with  regard  to  the
    approach Judge Nixon has taken or with  her  findings  and  conclusions
    because, as I have shown, her reasoning is more than  adequate  despite
    it being concise.

12. I add one final observation to ensure clarity; the fact that I have had
    to examine the determination forensically should not suggest to  anyone
    that Judge Nixon should have included more in her  determination.   Her
    conciseness is commendable.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

The determination of Judge Nixon does not contain an error  on  a  point  of
law and is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
