
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2015                           |   On 24th March 2015          |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                           MS IRENE GYPAOMAA ADJEI
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr V Makol, of Maalik & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 7th  May  1987.  She  first
    came to the UK on 12th November 2011 as a family  visitor  to  see  her
    sister. She then overstayed. On 30th November 2012 she  applied  for  a
    residence card as the  spouse  (via  a  Ghanaian  proxy  marriage)  and
    durable partner of Mr John Brown Marfo, a citizen of Portugal  born  on
    5th December 1969. This  application  was  refused  and  the  appellant
    appealed. However the respondent then withdrew the refusal decision.  A
    new refusal decision was made by the respondent on 13th March 2014. The
    appellant appealed once again  on  31st  march  2014.  Her  appeal  was
    dismissed in a  determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Russell promulgated on 26th November 2014.

 2. On 22nd January 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes found that
    there was an arguable error of law because Judge Russell had not  taken
    into account documentation provided by the appellant to the  respondent
    in response to the first refusal decision and had found the absence  of
    this material contributed to his finding that she was not in a  durable
    relationship with Mr Marfo. This was arguably  procedurally  unfair  in
    accordance with MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

 4. Mr Makol submitted that  documents  showing  cohabitation,  letters  of
    support from the church attended by the  appellant  and  Mr  Marfo  and
    friends, and photographs of the  couple  were  included  in  the  first
    respondent's bundle which the appellant had  assumed  would  be  before
    Judge Russell. These items had been specifically noted  as  missing  by
    Judge Russell at paragraph 17 of his determination and as matters which
    led  him,  along  with  other  considerations,  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant and Mr Marfo were not in a genuine durable relationship. This
    was unfair on the appellant.

 5. Ms Savage accepted that there had been procedural  fairness  as  argued
    for by the appellant in accordance with MM (unfairness; E&R) Sudan.

 6. I informed the parties that I agreed with  these  submissions  for  the
    reasons set out below, and I would therefore set aside the decision  of
    Judge Russell.

 7. I noted that in  MM  (unfairness;  E&R)  Sudan  it  had  been  seen  as
    appropriate to re-make the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal however Mr
    Makol took instructions from the appellant and Mr Marfo and they  asked
    that I remake the appeal in the Upper Tribunal due to the  long  period
    during which the appeals relating to this refusal had  been  going  on.
    The application had been made in November 2012 and since then two years
    and four months had elapsed, and they understandably wished to have the
    matter resolved. Ms Savage said she was happy for this to be the way in
    which the Tribunal proceeded. I therefore agreed to remake  the  appeal
    in the Upper Tribunal.

 8. There were a large number of documents in the Tribunal  file  submitted
    by the appellant. There were five separate bundles: a 50 page bundle, a
    72 page bundle, a 169 page bundle and two small  bundles  submitted  by
    fax on 10th and 12th December 2014: the first of  which  contained  the
    evidence that had been missing from the hearing  before  Judge  Russell
    and the second of which contained some further evidence. I admitted all
    of this evidence. Ms Savage did not have all of these bundles so I  let
    her mine for the hearing and she was given  time  to  acquaint  herself
    with the bundles before we proceeded with the remaking hearing.

 9. I clarified with Mr Makol before commencing the remaking  hearing  that
    there was  no  evidence  from  the  Portuguese  authorities  that  they
    accepted that the appellant's Ghanaian  proxy  marriage  was  valid  in
    Portuguese law. He confirmed that this was the case and that therefore,
    in accordance with Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  Nigeria  [2014]
    UKUT 24, the appellant only argued that she could succeed in the appeal
    on the basis of having a durable relationship and  thus  that  she  was
    entitled to a residence card in accordance with Regulation 8(5) of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (henceforth  the  EEA  Regulations).
    The appeal under Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations was not pursued.

Conclusions - Error of Law

10. It was a procedural error of  law  for  the  letters  in  support  from
    friends; the letter from the church where the appellant  and  Mr  Marfo
    met; and the  photographs  of  the  appellant  and  Mr  Marfo  together
    submitted by the appellant to the respondent and included in the appeal
    bundle for the first appeal not to have been considered by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in the  ultimate  determination  of  the  appeal  on  the
    application when they were rightly considered pertinent evidence to  be
    expected by Judge Russell. As stated in MM (unfairness; E&R)  Sudan  an
    error of law may be found in circumstances where some material evidence
    through no fault of the First-tier Tribunal was not considered and this
    resulted in unfairness.

Evidence and Submissions - Remaking

11. The appellant attended the Tribunal and gave evidence. She adopted  her
    statement and confirmed that it was true and correct and  her  evidence
    to the Tribunal.

12. In summary in her statement the appellant  says  as  follows.  She  was
    annoyed that the only issue that had initially led to  the  refusal  on
    24th June 2013 was the fact that statutory  declaration  regarding  the
    proxy marriage did not give the  address  where  she  and  her  partner
    lived. She and her partner obtained a new statutory declaration  giving
    this information but were not allowed to proceed with their  appeal  in
    February 2014 as the respondent withdrew their refusal decision. A  new
    decision was then made on a totally different basis. They have provided
    a letter from the Ghanaian embassy stating that the marriage  is  valid
    in Ghanaian law and evidence that shows that Mr Marfo was originally  a
    Ghanaian citizen too.

13. The appellant contended that she is in a genuine relationship  with  Mr
    Marfo. They met at Christ Foundation Church in Canning Town where  they
    were both active members. They followed what was traditional  for  them
    in having a customary marriage between their families  in  Ghana.  This
    took place on 20th July 2012, and they have lived together ever  since.
    They have submitted substantial evidence that they have cohabited since
    this time. Mr  Marfo  supports  the  appellant  financially,  and  they
    provide each other with emotional and mental support.

14. In oral evidence the appellant added that  she  went  to  church  every
    Sunday. She had come to the UK to visit her sister and had not returned
    because she met Mr Marfo and they were in love. She had not intended to
    overstay but she met the man she loved. She had met Mr Marfo in January
    2012; they had decided that they wanted to be together  in  April  2012
    and they had married in August 2012. They had had a proxy  marriage  as
    this is the way it is done  in  her  country.  They  had  had  a  small
    gathering in their house in the UK with her sister, Bernice  and  Kwaku
    after the proxy marriage. She said she had discussed  having  a  church
    wedding in the UK with her partner when she got her passport back. They
    were in the UK as Mr Marfo is working here and he is allowed to do this
    as a Portuguese national. He worked for AJS recruitment. He had started
    this job in August 2014. Before that he had  worked  for  Greggs  as  a
    cleaner. He had done that job for between a year and a year and a half.
    They liked to do shopping and go to church  together.  They  did  other
    things together such as go to parties. There were others who knew about
    their relationship: her friend Bernice;  her  sister  Charlotte;  Kwaku
    Mensah and Philomenia who shared their house. Last night they had eaten
    an African dish called fou-fou which she had made.  Last  weekend  they
    had done shopping in Barking on Saturday and gone to church on  Sunday.
    There were three people living in their house: herself,  Mr  Marfo  and
    Philomenia. Philomenia had two rooms with her partner and  she  and  Mr
    Marfo had one room. She did not know why the tenancy agreement  implied
    they rented the whole house: they only rented one room for  themselves.
    She only had one sister, Charlotte. Charlotte  had  met  Mr  Marfo.  Mr
    Marfo had a brother called Prince who lives in Ghana, whom she had  not
    met. She was very sad the process to obtain a residence card had  taken
    so long.

15. Mr John Brown  Marfo  attended  the  Tribunal  and  gave  evidence.  He
    confirmed his name, date of birth and address, and that  his  statement
    was true and correct and his evidence to  the  Tribunal.  Most  of  his
    statement is worded identically to  that  of  the  appellant.  He  does
    however add that he would be devastated if the appellant had to  return
    to Ghana as they had been through a lot together and he needed his wife
    by his side. The appellant supports him in every way. He also  confirms
    he is a Portuguese national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

16. Mr Marfo gave evidence in identical terms  about  the  history  of  his
    relationship with the appellant; his employment; the things they  liked
    to do together; their friends; the celebration  they  had  after  their
    proxy marriage in the UK; the number of bedrooms at their home and  the
    fact that he and the appellant rented just one of these bedrooms;  what
    they ate last night and who  made  it;  what  they  did  last  weekend;
    regarding his brother and his upset about the delay in  resolving  this
    matter. His evidence appeared to differ regarding who  lived  with  him
    and the appellant as he said this was a man called Addo however when  I
    asked whether Addo had a partner  he  said  this  was  Philomenia.  His
    evidence differed from the appellant in that he said  that  he  had  no
    idea whether he and the appellant would have another marriage in the UK
    and that the appellant had a brother called Samuel in Ghana whom he had
    met last year.

17. Ms Savage relied upon the refusal letter.  In  relation  to  Regulation
    8(5) of the EEA Regulations this document says that it is  expected  by
    the respondent that the appellant show two years cohabitation with  the
    EEA sponsor, and she  had  failed  to  provide  sufficient  documentary
    evidence to show this was the case.

18. Ms Savage further submitted that there were many documents which showed
    that the appellant and Mr Marfo lived at the same address but this  was
    not sufficient to show a durable relationship. There  was  very  little
    evidence that the appellant and Mr Marfo were in a genuine relationship
    as durable  partners.  Their  claimed  living  arrangements  were  also
    inconsistent with their tenancy agreement  which  on  the  face  of  it
    showed that they rented the whole of the property not just one bedroom.
    She submitted that there was an inconsistency over who lived  there  as
    Mr Marfo  had  referred  only  to  Addo  living  at  the  property  not
    Philomenia. It was  notable  that  the  sponsor  had  referred  to  the
    appellant having two siblings when the appellant  herself  had  claimed
    only to have one. It was also notable that Mr Marfo said that there had
    been no decision to have a UK wedding  whereas  the  appellant  claimed
    that this matter had been discussed and that this would take place.

19. Mr Makol relied upon his skeleton argument, however when I pointed  out
    that this document  did  not  seem  to  contained  any  submissions  on
    Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations beyond recounting  the  law  and
    saying that there was documentary evidence placing both  the  appellant
    and Mr Marfo at the  same  address  he  did  not  disagree.  He  argued
    strongly however that more than two years  cohabitation  was  a  strong
    starting point to show that the  appellant  and  Mr  Marfo  were  in  a
    durable relationship as it was the bench mark used by the respondent.

20. In addition the appellant and Mr Marfo had both attended three Tribunal
    hearings and had chosen to go ahead  and  have  their  case  determined
    today rather than just postpone the matter for more months by having it
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  They  were  both  sad  about  the
    appellant's on-going  unresolved  immigration  status.  They  had  made
    dozens of visits to their legal representative  together  and  produced
    letters from the friends they had mentioned in their evidence.

21. Mr Makol said that the issue with the living  arrangements  was  not  a
    genuine inconsistency as both parties were clear that they only got one
    bedroom whatever the tenancy agreement implied and it  was  clear  that
    both Philomenia and Addo (who were partners themselves)  lived  at  the
    address - they had just each focused on  one  of  these  partners  when
    giving their evidence. It was possible that the appellant had  answered
    the question about her siblings only in relation to  those  present  in
    the UK. Whilst she  spoke  reasonable  English  she  had  struggled  to
    understand a number of  questions  and  asked  for  a  question  to  be
    rephrased. It may be that the parties differed on the issue of  the  UK
    wedding as this was a heat of the moment thing.

22. Overall, considering all of the evidence before the Tribunal, Mr  Makol
    submitted  that  I  should  be  satisfied  that  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities  the  appellant  and  Mr  Marfo   were   in   a   durable
    relationship. It was only a 51% degree of certainty that  was  required
    to allow the appeal.



Conclusions - Remaking

23. I find that Mr Marfo is a Portuguese national who is working in the  UK
    and paid via Smart Tax (UK) Limited. He has supplied recent payslips as
    confirmation of this fact and this is not contested by the respondent.

24. I accept that the appellant and Mr Marfo had a Ghanaian proxy  marriage
    on 20th July 2012 in  Accra  and  that  this  marriage  is  binding  in
    Ghanaian law and for other purposes in the UK but that it does not make
    the appellant  a  spouse  in  EU  law  for  Regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations as there is no evidence  that  the  Portuguese  authorities
    accept this marriage as valid. I note that there is evidence  (a  birth
    certificate showing that Mr Marfo was born in Ghana  and  his  Ghanaian
    driving licence) that indicates that Mr Marfo has Ghanaian heritage and
    thus that  a  Ghanaian  proxy  marriage  is  potentially  part  of  his
    tradition as well as that of Ms Adjei. The  formal  marriage  documents
    aside there is also a letter from  the  appellant's  father  Yaw  Adjei
    about the process of the appellant and Mr Marfo  getting  married,  and
    his contact with the parents of Mr Marfo.

25. The appellant and Mr Marfo have a  joint  bank  account  with  Barclays
    (although one which appears to just channel money  from  and  to  other
    accounts) and a joint Aviva life insurance  taken  out  and  maintained
    since 2012. I  find  that  there  is  a  limited  amount  of  financial
    interdependency between the appellant and Mr Marfo on the basis of this
    evidence.

26. In addition the appellant has  provided  a  great  many  utility  bills
    (water, T mobile, Dorothy Perkins,  Argos  Card,  Evan's  Card  Barclay
    Card, Standard Life,) and medical cards,  statements  for  two  further
    bank accounts for Mr Marfo (Halifax and Santander) and statements for a
    further account for the appellant with Barclay's bank placing  them  at
    their joint address for the years 2012, 2013 and 2014. There  are  also
    work documents for the appellant including HMRC documents for her  work
    at City Facilities Management UK Ltd and other documents about her work
    for Asda, and others that indicate that  Mr  Marfo  used  to  work  for
    Greggs bakery, as claimed by both witnesses.  A  document  from  a  man
    called Mr Kennedy Owusu-Nyarko, who says he is the landlord at page  38
    of the 72 page bundle states that the appellant and Mr Marfo rent  only
    one bedroom at their address. The tenancy agreement was not amongst the
    papers in the Tribunal file and I assume was inadvertently retained  by
    Ms Savage. I am satisfied that the appellant and Mr Marfo both live  at
    their claimed address on the basis of this evidence.

27. In support of the appellant's marriage to Mr Marfo being genuine  there
    are letters in support from three of the friends the appellant  and  Mr
    Marfo named in their  evidence,  namely:  Kwaku  Addo-Mensah  who  also
    submits evidence he is a German citizen; Bernice Owusu who also submits
    evidence of her British citizen passport;  and  Philomenia  Mensah  who
    also submits the picture page  of  her  Ghanaian  passport.  Philomenia
    Mensah also describes herself as the co-tenant at the appellant and  Mr
    Marfo's address. There are also two letters from Bishop Emmanuel  Bamfo
    of the Christ Foundation Church: the first dated 25th November 2012 and
    the second dated 12th December 2014 both describing them  as  a  couple
    and active members of the church.  The  appellant's  sister,  Charlotte
    Adjei, has also provided a  letter  in  which  she  confirms  that  the
    appellant and Mr Marfo have been living together as  a  married  couple
    since their proxy marriage and attaches a copy of her  British  citizen
    passport. There are also copies  of  photographs  but  these  were  not
    identified in any way by Mr Makol and  are  so  poor  that  it  is  not
    possible to see who is in them.

28. In addition, as Mr Makol has claimed, the appellant and Mr  Marfo  have
    answered a large number of questions  consistently  in  oral  evidence.
    However  it  is  accepted  by  all  that  there  are  three   potential
    inconsistencies, and these raise legitimate doubts as  to  whether  the
    couple are in the durable partnership they claim. I will  examine  each
    of these in detail.

29. The first is not so clear cut and concerns who lives  at  the  property
    given that the tenancy agreement states that the appellant and Mr Marfo
    are the only tenants, and then that they both named a different  person
    to be the third tenant. However it would appear that  they  have  named
    two people who, according to  the  evidence  of  Mr  Marfo,  are  in  a
    romantic relationship with each other (and thus plausibly both spend  a
    lot of time at their property) and that an additional letter  from  the
    landlord indicates that they  have  correctly  described  their  rental
    arrangement as being for one double room.

30. The second is the inconsistency as to whether the couple have discussed
    and planned a church wedding when the application is resolved  and  the
    appellant's passport is returned to her. The appellant seemed sure that
    this was the case whereas Mr Marfo said he had no idea if they would do
    this. It is possible that they simply hold different views on  what  is
    current agreed on the topic: the protracted nature of  the  application
    may also account for this disparity as potentially  the  idea  to  have
    another wedding may have  been  discuss  a  long  time  previously  and
    recalled by the appellant but not by Mr Marfo.

31. The third inconsistency is regarding the appellant's siblings. Mr Marfo
    has said she has a brother as well as a sister  whereas  the  appellant
    named her sister in the UK as her only sibling. It is the case that the
    appellant indicated that she did not understand the  questions  put  to
    her on a number of occasions throughout her evidence by stating; "I  am
    not getting you" and that questions had to be rephrased. It is possible
    that Samuel is not a full sibling and thus that Mr Marfo's evidence was
    inaccurate or that the appellant mistakenly understood the question  to
    be about siblings in the UK as Mr Makol has argued.

32. Ultimately when considering all of the evidence before me I  find  that
    the appellant  and  Mr  Marfo  should  be  considered  to  be  credible
    witnesses given their significant degree of consistency with each other
    and the documentary evidence; and that their  evidence,  together  with
    the confirmation from their church  leader  and  the  very  substantial
    documentary evidence regarding the proxy marriage and placing  them  at
    the same address over three years suffices to show on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that  the  appellant  and  Mr  Marfo  are  in  a  durable
    relationship. I thus find that the appellant  is  an  "extended  family
    member" as defined in Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations.

33. As the Secretary of State  has  not  yet  exercised  discretion  as  to
    whether to issue a residence permit, the matter must be remitted to the
    Secretary of State to exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the
    EEA Regulations.

Decision

   1. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   3. The appeal is remade allowing it to the extent that I  find  that  the
      decision of the Secretary of State is not in accordance with  the  law
      and must be remitted to her to exercise  discretion  under  Regulation
      17(4) of the EEA Regulations with regards issuing a residence card  to
      the appellant.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23rd March 2015


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as I was not requested to do so and clearly a  very  substantial  amount  of
evidence has been submitted during the  appeal  process  making  the  appeal
necessary to determine this issue.


Signed                              Date 23rd March 2015


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

