
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16486/2013
                                                               IA/16488/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2014                               |On 11th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                   Oladapo Afolabi lawal (first appellant)
                 ayodele oluwatoyin lawal (second appellant)
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Khan of Ikon Law Solicitors and Advocates
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Devittie (the judge) promulgated on 16th April 2014.

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian citizens born 7th August 1973 and 11th June
    1973 respectively.  The first Appellant is the husband  of  the  second
    Appellant.

 3. On 14th March 2013 the first Appellant applied for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the  Points
    Based System (PBS) and the second Appellant applied as his dependant.

 4. The applications were refused on 29th April 2013.  In relation  to  the
    first Appellant the Respondent accepted that  he  was  entitled  to  be
    awarded the 10 points claimed for English language  under  Appendix  B,
    and the 10 points claimed for maintenance under  Appendix  C.   However
    the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was entitled to the 75
    points claimed for Attributes  under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and no points  were  awarded.   The  application  was  therefore
    refused with reference to paragraph 245DD(b) of the Immigration Rules.

 5. In giving reasons for refusal the Respondent contended that  the  first
    Appellant, who was relying upon third party financial support, had  not
    provided the specified evidence to prove that  the  third  party  funds
    were available and therefore that the business was financially viable.

 6. The Respondent contended that the letters from  Ecobank  and  FirstBank
    did not contain the required specified information, and also  contended
    that letters from legal representatives did not confirm the validity of
    signatures on third party declarations, as they had not been signed  by
    the first Appellant.  A third reason for refusal  was  that  the  first
    Appellant had submitted a printout regarding his  company  information,
    but this was not a Current Appointment Report from Companies  House  as
    required by paragraph 110 of the published guidance.

 7. Because the first Appellant's application had been refused, the  second
    Appellant's application, as his dependant, was also refused.   In  both
    cases the Respondent made combined decisions to refuse to vary leave to
    remain, and to remove the Appellants from the United Kingdom.

 8. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and  their  appeals
    were heard by the judge on 18th March 2014.  The appeals were dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and with reference to Article 8 of the 1950
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 9. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had  erred  in  law  by  not
    finding that the Respondent's decision to remove was  unlawful  as  the
    decision had been made at the same time as the decision  to  refuse  to
    vary leave to remain.

10. It was also argued that the judge had made material factual  errors  in
    his determination, and had failed to make findings as to why  the  bank
    letters and third party declarations did not meet the  requirements  of
    the rules.  It was contended that at paragraph 10 of the  determination
    the judge misinterpreted the requirements of paragraph 41-SD.

11. It was further argued  that  the  judge  should  have  found  that  the
    Respondent should have considered the evidential flexibility policy  as
    it was accepted that there was some information missing  from  some  of
    the specified documents submitted by the Appellants.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hemingway in the following terms;


         "1.  The Appellants have applied, in time, for permission to appeal
             against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Devittie)
             promulgated on 16th April 2014, dismissing each appeal against
             decisions of the Respondent, of 29th April  2013  refusing  to
             vary leave to remain as a Tier 1  Migrant  and  dependant  and
             deciding to remove each of them from the UK.
         2.   The grounds of appeal assert the judge  erred  in  failing  to
             consider the lawfulness of the removal aspect bearing in  mind
             the decisions were taken prior to the  coming  into  force  of
             relevant provisions of the Crime and Courts Act 2013, erred in
             failing to apply the doctrine of evidential flexibility, erred
             in misreading certain bank letters and  erred  in  applying  a
             requirement not contained in the rules.
          3.     The  judge  arguably  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
             lawfulness of the removal    parts of each decision.   Since  I
             am granting permission I shall not shut  out  argument  so  the
             other grounds may be argued too.
         4.     Permission is granted."

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In relation to the decision to remove taken pursuant to  section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, the  Respondent
    accepted that this  was  unlawful  and  withdrew  that  aspect  of  the
    decision.

14. In relation to evidential flexibility the Respondent pointed  out  that
    the case was decided post September 2012 by which time  the  applicable
    evidential flexibility policy  had  been  incorporated  into  paragraph
    245AA of the Immigration Rules.  Given the extent of the non-compliance
    with the specified documents in this case, it was  contended  that  the
    provisions of paragraph  245AA  did  not  assist  the  Appellants,  and
    consequently any failure to consider them was not a material  error  of
    law.

15. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to establish whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Appellants' Submissions

16. Mr Khan relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, together with his skeleton  argument  dated  22nd
    May 2014.

17. In brief summary Mr Khan accepted that the Respondent was  entitled  to
    withdraw the removal decision.  He submitted that it  was  not  correct
    that the Respondent's evidential flexibility policy which was published
    on 17th June 2011 had been incorporated into  paragraph  245AA  of  the
    Immigration Rules and pointed out that the Respondent had  published  a
    new evidential flexibility policy valid from 28th March 2014.  Mr  Khan
    believed that the policy published on 17th June 2011  was  valid  until
    6th October 2013.  I was not provided  with  any  evidence  to  confirm
    that.

18. With reference to the Respondent's contention that  the  Appellant  had
    not submitted with his application the Current Appointment Report  from
    Companies House, Mr Khan's first submission was that this document  was
    in fact submitted with the application, but if it was found not to have
    been submitted, he relied upon Shebl (Entrepreneur: proof of contracts)
    [2014] UKUT 00216 (IAC) in support of the contention that the  majority
    of the information contained in the Companies House report was in  fact
    in a printout that was submitted with the application.

19. In relation to the letters from  the  legal  representatives,  Mr  Khan
    submitted that these letters contained at H1 and H5 of the Respondent's
    bundle appeared to comply with  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and  there  was  no  requirement  that  they  be  signed  by  the
    applicant.

20. Mr Khan accepted that the bank letters from Ecobank and  FirstBank  did
    not contain the specified information required.  He accepted that  they
    did not satisfy the requirements in paragraph 41-SD(a)(i)(5), (6), (9),
    (10), and (11).  However Mr Khan's submission was that  the  Respondent
    should  have  applied  either  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  or
    paragraph 245AA, and given the Appellants the opportunity to submit the
    missing information, and the judge had  materially  erred  in  law,  by
    failing to find the Respondent's  decision  unlawful,  because  of  the
    failure to apply either paragraph 245AA or the  evidential  flexibility
    policy.

The Respondent's Submissions

21. Miss Everett  confirmed  that  the  section  47  removal  decision  was
    withdrawn and relied upon the rule 24 response.

22. Miss Everett submitted that Shebl  could  be  distinguished  from  this
    case, as Shebl involved contracts which were not in issue in this case.

23. In relation to the letters from the legal representatives, Miss Everett
    accepted that they appeared to comply with the rules.  The bank letters
    however had numerous omissions.  Miss Everett submitted that the  judge
    had been correct to dismiss the appeal, based on those omissions in the
    bank letters.

24. Miss Everett commented that  the  Respondent's  evidential  flexibility
    only dealt with minor omissions.

The Appellants' Response

25. Mr Khan pointed out that in the evidential flexibility policy  document
    dated 17th June 2011, there was no mention of  this  applying  only  to
    minor omissions.  I was asked to set aside  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

26. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. Dealing firstly with the fact  that  the  Respondent  made  a  combined
    decision to refuse to vary leave, and to remove the Appellants from the
    United Kingdom, and the fact that this decision was made before 8th May
    2013 when section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 made it lawful to
    take two decisions at the same time, I conclude that the judge erred in
    not recording that the removal decision was unlawful.

28. The Respondent has indicated that this decision is  withdrawn,  and  Mr
    Khan consented to that.  If a decision is to be  withdrawn  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, the consent of the Tribunal  is  required  pursuant  to
    rule 17 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  and
    consent  was  granted  to  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellants being withdrawn.  There is therefore no removal decision.

29. I turn next to the refusal based  upon  specified  evidence  not  being
    supplied with bank letters,  those  letters  having  been  supplied  by
    Ecobank and FirstBank.  The judge made his findings in paragraph 10  of
    his determination which I set out below;


         "10. On the evidence presented in this case  I  am  satisfied  that
             even on a liberal interpretation of the  rules  the  Appellant
             has failed to provide the evidence specified and,  separately,
             to establish that the required level of  funds  are  genuinely
             available to him  to  invest  in  a  business  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  These are my reasons:
             (i)  The bank letters in respect of each of the third  parties
                  do not, as required under paragraph  41-SD,  confirm  that
                  the third party has informed the institution of the amount
                  of money it  intends  to  make  available,  and  that  the
                  institution  is  not  aware  of  the  third  party  having
                  promised to make that money available to any other person.
             (ii) The letters from the  bank  raise  serious  doubts  about
                  whether the funds are freely  transferrable  because  they
                  say that transferability of funds is subject  to  approval
                  by the exchange control authority.  There is  no  evidence
                  to show that such authority has been granted."

30. I conclude that the judge should have given more comprehensive  reasons
    for finding that the specified evidence had not been submitted but this
    is not a material error, as it is clear, and accepted on behalf of  the
    appellants, that the specified evidence required in  the  bank  letters
    was not included.

31. The specified evidence required was, at the date of refusal, set out in
    paragraph 41-SD(a)(i) of Appendix A which states that there must  be  a
    letter from each financial institution holding the  funds,  to  confirm
    the amount of money available to the applicant, and there is  then  set
    out eleven specific requirements which the letter must contain.

32. The letters in question are a letter from Ecobank dated 8th March 2013,
    and FirstBank of the same date.  The following specified information is
    missing from both letters, which is set out below using  the  numbering
    in paragraph 41(a)(i);


         (5)  confirm that the institution is regulated by  the  appropriate
             body
         (6)  state the applicant's name, and his team partner's name if the
             applicant is applying under the provisions of paragraph 52  of
             this Appendix,
         (9)  confirm the amount of money provided to the applicant from any
             third party (if applicable) that is held in that institution,
         (10) confirm the  name  of  each  third  party  and  their  contact
             details, including their full address including  postal  code,
             landline phone number and any email address,
         (11) confirm that if the money is not in an  institution  regulated
             by the FSA the money can be transferred into the UK.

33. The judge found that the specified information was not included in  the
    letters,  although  he  did  not  set  out  correctly   the   specified
    information that was missing.  As it is not disputed that the specified
    information was missing, the issue is whether the judge  erred  in  not
    concluding  that  the  Respondent  should  have  applied   either   the
    evidential flexibility policy or paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I do not find that the judge materially erred on this issue.

34. I have had  the  benefit  of  considering  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal
    decisions,   Durrani   (Entrepreneurs:   bank    letters;    evidential
    flexibility) [2014] UKUT 00295 (IAC),  Akhter  and  another  (Paragraph
    245AA:  wrong   format)   [2014]   UKUT   00297   (IAC),   and   Fayyaz
    (Entrepreneurs: paragraph 41-SD(a)(i)  -  "provided  to")  [2014]  UKUT
    00296 (IAC).  I set out below paragraph 245AA which was in force at the
    date of refusal on 29 April 2013;


         245AA Documents not submitted with the applications
         (a)  Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part  6A  state
             that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  UK  Border
             Agency will only consider documents that have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only  consider   documents
             submitted after the application where they  are  submitted  in
             accordance with sub-paragraph (b)
         (b)  If the applicant has submitted:
             (i)  A sequence of documents and some of the documents in  the
                  sequence have been  omitted  (for  example,  if  one  bank
                  statement from a series is missing);
             (ii) A document in the wrong format; or
             (iii)    A document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                  document,
             the  UK  Border  Agency  may  contact  the  applicant  or  his
             representative in writing, and request the  correct  document.
             The requested documents must be  received  by  the  UK  Border
             Agency at the  address  specified  in  the  request  within  7
             working days of the date of the request.
         (c)  The UK Border  Agency  will  not  request  documents  where  a
             specified document has not  been  submitted  (for  example  an
             English language certificate is  missing),  or  where  the  UK
             Border Agency does not anticipate that addressing the omission
             or error referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a grant
             because the application will be refused for other reasons.
         (d)  If the applicant has submitted a specified document:
             (i)  in the wrong format, or
             (ii) that is a copy and not an original document,
             the application may be granted exceptionally, providing the UK
             Border Agency is satisfied that the  specified  documents  are
             genuine and the applicant meets all  the  other  requirements.
             The UK  Border  Agency  reserves  the  right  to  request  the
             specified original documents in  the  correct  format  in  all
             cases where (b) applies, and to refuse applications  if  these
             documents are not provided as set out in (b).

35. In my view paragraph 245AA would not have assisted the Appellant.  This
    was not a case where a document was  missing  from  a  sequence,  or  a
    document was in the wrong format, or a copy had been submitted  instead
    of an original document.

36. The Tribunal in Akhter decided that  a  bank  letter,  which  does  not
    specify the postal address, landline telephone number and email address
    of the account holders is not thereby 'in the  wrong  format'  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules.

37. The Upper Tribunal in both Akhter and Durrani, found that there was  no
    evidence that some policy on evidential  flexibility,  independent  and
    freestanding of paragraph 245AA,  survived  the  introduction  of  that
    paragraph in the Immigration Rules.  The Tribunal recorded in paragraph
    15 of Akhter;

         "15. We consider that the judge erred in law in assuming that  this
             'policy' remained in existence following the  introduction  of
             paragraph  245AA  and,  hence,  applied  to  the   Appellants'
             application.  The question of whether a policy exists, in  any
             given context, is a question of fact.  There was no concession
             to this effect.  Absent a concession, an evidential foundation
             for this finding was necessary.  There was none.  The contrary
             was  not  argued  before  this  Tribunal.   Furthermore,   the
             additional evidence brought to the attention of the  Court  of
             Appeal in the Rodriguez case suggests that  the  documents  in
             question had no enduring force or effect when paragraph  245AA
             of the Rules was introduced:  see Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department v Rodriguez and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 2, [47]
             and [65].  The information contained in these passages, though
             not formally admitted in evidence by the Court of Appeal,  was
             not  challenged  by  the  Appellants  before  this   Tribunal.
             Finally, and in any event, the Court of  Appeal  reversed  the
             Upper Tribunal's finding that  the  documents  under  scrutiny
             constituted a new policy: see [87]."

38.  I  therefore  reject  Mr  Khan's  submission  that  the   Respondent's
    evidential flexibility  policy  published  on  17th  June  2011  exists
    independently from paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules.  There was
    therefore no obligation on the Respondent to consider this policy,  and
    no error made by  the  judge  in  not  finding  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was unlawful because the policy had not been considered.   The
    Respondent does in fact have Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Policy guidance, and
    version 08/2012 was in effect when the Appellants applied for leave  to
    remain.  This has a  section  dealing  with  documentary  evidence  and
    paragraph  26  sets  out  the  policy  in  relation  to  submission  of
    documents, which is set out below;


         26.  If you do not provide the specified documents, we will contact
             you to ask for them only when you have submitted:
                . A sequence of documents, and some of the documents in  the
                  sequence have been  omitted  (for  example,  if  one  bank
                  statement from a series is missing);
                . A document in the wrong format;
                . A document that is a copy and not an original document.
             In  these  circumstances  we  will   contact   you   or   your
             representative in writing, and the evidence must  be  received
             by the UK Border Agency processing centres  within  7  working
             days.  If not, we may refuse your application.   We  will  not
             ask for further information when none of the  information  has
             been submitted (for example an English language certificate is
             missing); or where a correction of minor errors  or  omissions
             will not lead to an approval because the application will fail
             for other reasons.

39. It can be seen that the above mirrors the provisions of paragraph 245AA
    which was in force at the relevant time.  Therefore this  policy  would
    not have assisted the Appellants.

40. The judge did not make findings upon the aspects of the  refusal  which
    referred to letters from legal representatives nor the alleged  absence
    of the Current Appointment Report from Companies House, and findings on
    these points should have  been  made.   However  the  omission  is  not
    material, as the judge found that the appeals could not succeed because
    of the absence of the specified information  required  in  the  letters
    from Ecobank and FirstBank.

41. The judge considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human
    Rights, and the appeal was rejected on that basis, and there  has  been
    no challenge to those findings.

42. I therefore conclude  that  although  there  are  some  errors  in  the
    determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  those  errors  are   not
    material.  Therefore the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands,
    although as previously stated, if the Appellants are to be removed from
    the United Kingdom there must be a  further  removal  decision  as  the
    removal decision dated 29th  April  2013  was  unlawful  and  has  been
    withdrawn by the Respondent.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.


Signed                              Date 30th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
Fee Award

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.

Signed                              Date 30th June 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
