
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/16222/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2016                 |On 12 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                              ms victoria amoo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded  as
    10th January 1968.  On 25th April 2013  application  was  made  on  her
    behalf for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. On 4th June 2013 a decision was made to refuse the application and  the
    Appellant appealed.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andonian, sitting at Taylor  House  on  24th  June  2016.   He
    dismissed the appeal.  What he appears not to have known  was  that  on
    the very day of the hearing the Appellant was attending an  appointment
    with her general practitioner at Cricket Green Medical  Practice.   She
    had been courteous enough to send an email to the Tribunal the previous
    day, 23rd June 2016. It is clear from the evidence  she  supplied  with
    her Notice of Appeal that the email was acknowledged by  auto  response
    from the Tribunal.

 3. The original documents are not on file but suggests  to  me  only  that
    there has been an administrative error  and  the  documents  have  been
    misfiled; there is clearly evidence that the documents were received.

 4. It is unfortunate that from time to time documents do get misfiled. The
    result is that the Appellant, who wished to attend at her  own  hearing
    did not have the opportunity to do so and did not have the  opportunity
    to be heard.

 5. For the Respondent, Ms Isherwood submits that the error,  if  any,  was
    not material because the outcome would have been  the  same.  She  also
    points to the fact that the  Appellant  was  in  breach  of  Directions
    because no sufficient evidence had been placed by the Appellant  before
    the Tribunal. That may be so but  she  lost  the  opportunity  to  make
    application before the judge to be allowed to be heard  notwithstanding
    any breach. Thee evidence she may  have  given  before  the  judge  was
    capable of making a material difference.  That must be so because we do
    not know what she was going to say.  Justice must not only be done  but
    be seen to be done and in my judgment it would be manifestly unfair  to
    leave matters as they are.

 6. In granting permission to this Tribunal in response to the  Appellant's
    application for permission  dated  9th  July  2016  Judge  Hollingworth
    observed that the judge was plainly unaware of the  circumstances.   It
    is disappointing that it did not occur to him simply to set  aside  the
    decision having regard to Rule 32  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2014 which is something that he might have done.

 7. I find that there was a material error of law.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be re-heard afresh before any judge
    other than Judge Andonian.  There is no reason why  Judge  Hollingworth
    should be barred from hearing this case because he  did  not  hear  any
    evidence from the Appellant.  It is unlikely that the matter would come
    before him but it seems to me there is no reason to say  that  he  will
    not hear it.

Decision

 8. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside to be reheard as indicated within  the  body
    of this decision at Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

