
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16880/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th March 2014                            |On 27th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              chetankumar patel

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol (Legal Representative), o Maalik & Co
Solictors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 31st July 1988.

2.   The appellant sought leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.

3.   That application was refused by the respondent on 25th April  2013  and
    directions for removal were also made.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters.

5.   The appeal was dismissed both  on  immigration  grounds  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

6.   Grounds of appeal were submitted on the basis that the  Judge  had  had
    regard to the incorrect version of the Immigration Rules.

7.   Leave to appeal was granted  on  that  basis.   Thus  the  matter  came
    before me in pursuance of that grant.

8.   It was a requirement of the  Rules  that  the  appellant  had  to  show
    proficiency in the English language at a minimum CEFR B2.

9.   The appellant had submitted TOEIC certificates dated 19th June 2012  to
    show that he passed the requisite scores in listening, reading, writing
    but not speaking.  No points were awarded for his CAS.

10.  At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge it had been  argued
    on behalf of the appellant that in fact he had passed all four areas as
    required and had submitted the requisite certificates before  the  date
    of decision, as such he met the minimum English requirement.

11.  The Judge found at paragraph 35 that  the  Immigration  Rules  required
    the appellant to show that he had achieved the required scores and  all
    the relevant components of the English language test  during  a  single
    sitting and could not combine scores from different parts of  the  same
    examination set at different times.  Thus the Judge did not  find  that
    the appellant met the requirements of the Rules.

12.  It was argued  that such was to misunderstand the  requirement  of  the
    Rules.  Such a requirement of the Rules only came in after October 2013
    and not before.  That was the argument that had  been  advanced  before
    the Judge whch had not been accepted.

13.  Mr Makol, who represents the appellant,  submitted  that  all  relevant
    documents had been submitted prior to the decision.

14.  At E1 was the TOEIC dated 24th May 2012  which  showed  that  listening
    and reading tests had been taken on that occasion  and  both  had  been
    passed.  At Annex E2 of the respondent's bundle showed the TOEIC  dated
    15th May 2012 which had the speaking and writing tests.  It  was  clear
    that the speaking one was below the 150 points that was required but on
    19th June 2012 a further TOEIC was submitted showing that  in  relation
    to speaking he scored 180.

15.  It was a matter of concern that the  decision letter made no  reference
    to that second speaking score.  There was no requirement at that  stage
    to have the test all on one occasion.   Further  a  new  CAS  had  been
    obtained from a different college on 15th April 2013 and that had  also
    been submitted to the respondent.

16.  Mr Saunders, who represents the respondent, most fairly  conceded  that
    the requirement to pass all four language tests on  the  same  occasion
    was brought into the Rules in  October  2013  postdating  the  date  of
    decision.  He conceded therefore that  the  Judge  was  wrong  in  that
    regard.

17.  In those circumstances ,I find that there was a material error  of  law
    such that the decision should be set aside and remade.

18.  Turning to the refusal letter it makes no reference to the  certificate
    showing that the speaking score had been achieved.  It seems to reflect
    that reading and listening should be on one  certificate  at  the  same
    date and speaking and writing on another of the same date.

19.  The extracts from the Rules said to be in  operation  at  the  material
    time are set out in the grounds of appeal at paragraph  9.   It  was  a
    requirement

         "that the appellant has  achieved  or  exceeded  Level  B1  of  the
         Council of Europe's Common European Framework for Language Learning
         in all four components (reading, writing, speaking and  listening),
         unless exempted from sitting  a  component  on  the  basis  of  the
         appellant's disability."

20.  It was submitted there was  no  requirement,  therefore,  to  have  two
    pairs of examination as set out in the decision letter.  Whether or not
    that was a requirement set out in the guidance is irrelevant.   It  was
    not set out in the Rules.

21.  Mr Saunders did not seek to  argue  to  the  contrary  but  rather  was
    content for me to determine the matter upon the merits.

22.  I find that the appellant had been  proficient  in  all  four  subjects
    prior to the decision and had notified the respondent of that fact.   I
    find, therefore, that at the date of the  decision  the  appellant  did
    meet the Immigration Rules and the relevant requirements.

23.  In the alternative given the failure to acknowledge the passing of  all
    components I find that there  has  been  a  lack  of  fairness  in  the
    decision with regard to Naveed [2013] UKUT 00114.

24.  So far as Article 8 is  concerned,  although  the  appellant  does  not
    satisfy the requirements of private and family life so  as  to  entitle
    him  to  a  freestanding  consideration  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
    nevertheless given my findings that he meets the Immigration  Rules  it
    would be disproportionate  to remove him.

25.  In all the  circumstances  therefore  the  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules is allowed.  The appeal in respect of Article 8  ECHR
    is also allowed in line with the above.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
