
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2016                |On 2nd September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MUHAMMAD JAVED AKRAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kumar (Capitol Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State,
    with permission, against a judgment of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Nicholson) promulgated on 12th November 2015 in  which  he  allowed  Mr
    Akram's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  him
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and to remove him
    to Pakistan. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I will continue
    to refer, in this judgment, to the Secretary of State as the Respondent
    and to Mr Akram as the Appellant.

 2. The background to this case is that the Appellant arrived in the United
    Kingdom in July 2011 with leave, valid until 9th September  2012  as  a
    Tier 4  student  to  study  a  course  at  the  Manchester  College  of
    Accountancy and Management.

 3. That college's sponsorship licence was cancelled and so  the  Appellant
    approached the London College of IT and Management Studies with a  view
    to studying there  instead.  Having  explained  the  position  to  that
    college, he was accepted to do a Diploma in Business Finance, which  he
    completed in August 2012.

 4. On 8th September 2012 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain
    and he produced a CAS from the London  College  of  IT  and  Management
    Services intending to  continue  his  education  there.  However,  that
    college's sponsorship  licence  was  cancelled  while  the  Appellant's
    application was pending. Accordingly, his CAS  was  cancelled  on  24th
    November 2012. By a letter of 29th November 2012  the  Respondent  gave
    the Appellant a further 60  days  to  find  another  college.  On  31st
    January 2013 the Respondent refused the Appellant's application on  the
    grounds that he had not provided a further CAS. In fact, the  Appellant
    had done so on 28th January 2013. He had submitted a CAS for  a  course
    at the Birmingham Institute of Education and  Training  and  Technology
    issued to him on 22nd January 2013.

 5. His appeal against the refusal was successful on  the  basis  that  the
    matter was remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  further
    decision.

 6. The Secretary of State's further decision  was  not  taken  until  15th
    March 2015. However, on that occasion the application was refused under
    paragraph 322(3) of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had studied at college without a CAS, namely  at  the  London
    College  of  IT  and  Management  Studies,  prior  to  submitting   his
    application on 8th September 2012 and he had therefore failed to comply
    with the conditions attached to his grant of leave.

 7. That was the decision that came before Judge Nicholson  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Judge  Nicholson  heard  evidence  and  found  that  the
    Secretary of State should have exercised her discretion differently and
    he allowed the appeal.

 8. The grounds upon which permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted are that there is no dispute that the Appellant had  failed  to
    comply with the conditions attached  to  the  grant  of  leave  and  in
    allowing the appeal  "because  the  Appellant  acted  in  ignorance  in
    studying without a CAS and not through  dishonesty  or  any  intent  to
    circumvent the Rules" the judge misdirected himself  in  the  law.  The
    Secretary of State referred to the case of Cave v Robinson, Jarvis  and
    Rolf [2002] UKHL 18 which makes clear that ignorance of the law  is  no
    defence.

 9. I would say first of all that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly
    well aware of that principle because he  actually  referred  to  it  at
    paragraph 28 (iii) of his Decision and Reasons.

10. The Judge was considering whether or not the  Secretary  of  State,  in
    exercising her discretion, should have exercised it differently. In  so
    doing he took account of all the circumstances of the  case.  He  noted
    the Appellant's argument that he met the  substantive  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules  for the grant of further leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant; he had  always  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom legally; it was not his fault that the  Manchester  College  of
    Accountancy and Management lost its licence; he acted in good faith  in
    studying at college without a CAS; there is support to be had  for  his
    actions in the Respondent's own policy and he had alleged that he had a
    legitimate expectation or at least some expectation that the Respondent
    would not raise this issue in March 2015 when it had not been raised in
    2012 when the Secretary of State invited him to submit a further CAS.

11. The Judge's consideration is contained in paragraph 28 of the  Decision
    and Reasons where he considered that the Appellant had a number of good
    points in his argument. The Judge noted that there was no dispute  that
    the Appellant had always been in the UK with leave. He noted that there
    was no dispute that the  Appellant  had  switched  colleges  after  the
    Manchester College of Accountancy and Management lost its licence which
    meant that the Appellant was obliged to find another college. He  noted
    that this was not a case of somebody who thought that he  would  simply
    try a different course or move to  another  part  of  the  country  and
    another college for his convenience.

12. The Judge noted that there had been no evidence put before him  by  the
    Secretary of State to show that the Appellant was actually notified  at
    the time of his grant of entry  clearance  that  he  could  not  switch
    without a CAS, albeit ignorance of the Rules and the law was no defence
    to the matter.

13. The Judge found that no legitimate expectation arose from the fact that
    the Respondent failed to raise the issue in 2012.

14. The Judge noted that  it  would  have  been  quite  apparent  from  the
    documents submitted when the Appellant first applied that he  had  been
    studying at the London College of  IT  Management  Studies  until  2012
    without a CAS. The Respondent's Policy Guidance was less than clear.

15. The Judge then found, taking all the matters into account, that because
    the Appellant had simply acted in ignorance rather than ill will or any
    intent to circumvent the Rules, that this was an appropriate case  were
    discretion ought to have been exercised in his favour.

16. I cannot discern any error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  He  was
    considering the exercise of discretion, took all relevant factors  into
    account, did not misdirect  himself  in  law  and  reached  a  reasoned
    conclusion which he was entitled to reach upon the evidence.

17. The reality is that the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the Judge's conclusions and do not identify an  error
    of law, material or otherwise.



Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.

    The First-tier Tribunal having declined to make a  fee  award,  I  also
    decline for the same reasons.


Signed                              Date 2nd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
