
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                             |Determination issued on       |
|on 26th November 2014                        |On 28th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 Ozlem Ergun
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clough, promulgated on 9th July 2014, dismissing her appeal under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The appellant's first Ground of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  that
    the appellant provided sufficient evidence  to  show  that  she  was  a
    victim of domestic violence and that as such she met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The second Ground of Appeal  is  directed  at  the  finding  that  "the
    appellant has a private life, if not a  family  life,  in  the  UK  and
    removing her would interfere with her private life".  The appellant has
    a minor son living in the UK with his  father.   The  grounds  complain
    that the observation that the appellant could keep in touch with him by
    electronic means is an error of law; that the judge failed to find that
    the appellant has family life in the UK with her son; and the judge has
    erred in failing to find that removal would be disproportionate.

 4. Mr McGinley  did  not  pursue  the  argument  that  the  appellant  had
    established her case of domestic violence under the Immigration  Rules.
    He was plainly correct not to do so.

 5. In relation to the second ground, Mrs O'Brien, also correctly, conceded
    that the judge erred in not making a finding that  family  life  exists
    between the appellant and her son.  There is a very strong  presumption
    that such family life exists for Article  8  purposes,  and  there  was
    nothing in the case to suggest otherwise.

 6. The appellant on her uncontradicted evidence has an unfortunate marital
    history.  She and her son lived together in Turkey until 2011.  Her son
    is now living with his father in the UK.  His father has  become  a  UK
    citizen.  So far as is known, the boy is  a  citizen  only  of  Turkey.
    There was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  only  sketchy  information
    regarding the present circumstances and the  child's  attitude  towards
    living with his mother or father.  A letter from him, running  to  only
    four lines, says that he lives with his father in Carlisle, at weekends
    travels to Dumfries to see his mother, is in daily contact with her  on
    the phone and by Facebook, and that if she had her own place  he  would
    like to stay with her.  He does not comment  on  whether  he  sees  his
    future as lying in the UK or in Turkey, or where he would prefer to be,
    if his mother were to return to Turkey.  There is  nothing  to  suggest
    that  it  would  be  disadvantageous  to  the  child  or  in  any   way
    unreasonable for him to return to Turkey.  He has reached an age  when,
    although he is still a child, it is probably up to him where  he  lives
    and with which parent.

 7. It is now accepted that the appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The child is not, as far as  known,  a  British
    citizen.  He has not lived in the UK for seven years or more,  and  has
    spent most of his life with his mother in Turkey.

 8. All that is known about the appellant's private life is  that  she  has
    friends  in  Dumfries  who  are  apparently  prepared  to  assist   and
    accommodate her at least for the  time  being.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that she has any  private  life  interests  which  would  weigh
    heavily against removal to Turkey.  The only relevant  family  life  is
    her relationship with her child.  As I have already observe, there  are
    no known circumstances which suggest that  it  would  be  significantly
    adverse to the child's interests if she were to return  to  Turkey,  or
    that it would be unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

 9. In short, the evidence discloses no case that the appellant has a right
    to remain in the UK outside the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  on  any
    approach.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, for  failure
    to determine a material matter, the existence of  family  life  between
    the appellant and her son, both presently in the UK.  However, as there
    is no evidence to show that her removal from the UK would  involve  any
    significant interference with that  family  life,  or  any  significant
    disadvantage to her son's best interests, the appeal is dismissed.

11. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           27 November 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
