
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/16674/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 July 2016                       |On 19 July 2016                 |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ROMEISH OAVONNI O'SHANE FACEY
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr K Mak, solicitor, of MKM Solicitors

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ievins,  promulgated  on  30  November
2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 22 August 1992 and is a national of Jamaica.

4. The appellant arrived in the UK as an 8-year-old child  with  his  mother
and siblings. The respondent granted the appellant leave to remain a  number
of times. On 14 November 2009 he was granted discretionary leave  to  remain
until 3 June 2011.


5. On 3 June 2011 the appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain.  The
respondent refused that application.  The  appellant  successfully  appealed
that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  As a result  of  that  First-tier
decision, on 21 March 2014 the appellant was granted leave to  remain  until
21 September 2016.

6. On the same day (21 March 2014) the  Secretary  of  State  curtailed  the
grant of leave to  remain  in  the  UK  made  to  the  appellant,  and  gave
directions for his removal to Jamaica.

The Judge's Decision

7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ievins ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 11 May  2016  Judge  Cruthers
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "I consider it arguable that the Judge erred in law in his approach to
      relevant paragraphs of the immigration rules, particularly  S-LTR  1.5
      and S-LTR 1.6. And arguable that the judge erred in law  when  finding
      in the appellant's favour in respect of  the  relevant  tests  arising
      under paragraph 276ADE of the rules.  And  arguable  that  matters  of
      public  interest  (as  reflected  in  part  5A  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, for instance) mean that the judge was
      not entitled in law to decide the issue of article  8  proportionality
      in favour of the appellant."

The Hearing

8. (a) Mr Norton, for the respondent, moved the  grounds  of  appeal.  There
are three grounds of appeal, but he  told  me  that  the  second  and  third
grounds of appeal are dependent on the first ground  of  appeal.  The  first
ground of appeal is that the Judge's interpretation of S LTR 1.5  &  1.6  is
wrong. If that is  established,  the  second  ground  is  that  the  Judge's
assessment of paragraph 276ADE of the rules is fundamentally flawed  because
it does not take proper account of the appellant's offending behaviour;  for
the same reason he advanced the third ground  of  appeal,  saying  that  the
Judge made a material misdirection of law when considering section  117B  of
the 2002 act. Mr Norton accepted that, because this case does not involve  a
deportation order, section 117C of the 2002 Act is not relevant.

(b) Mr Norton told me the Judge correctly recorded the appellant's  criminal
offending, and having done so should not have found that S LTR  1.5  of  1.6
do not operate against the appellant. He told me that  the  Judge's  failure
to properly apply S-LTR 1.5 and S-LTR 1.6 infect  the  entire  decision.  He
told me that the decision is  undermined  by  material  errors  of  law  and
should be set aside. He asked me to remit the case  to  the  First-tier  for
rehearing de novo.

9. Mr Mak, solicitor for the appellant, opposed the appeal. He set  out  the
background to this case reminding me that, following a successful appeal  to
the  First-tier  in  2013,  the  respondent  granted  leave  to  remain  but
curtailed that leave on the same day relying  on  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
immigration rules. He reminded me that the respondent chose  not  to  appeal
the decision of the First-tier from 2013. He also reminded me that  this  is
not a deportation appeal. He told me that  the  Judge's  decision  does  not
contain any errors of law,  material  or  otherwise,  and  argued  that  the
grounds of appeal amount to little more than an attempt to  relitigate  this
case. He urged me to dismiss this appeal and allow the Judge's  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

10. SLTR 1.5 says


    'S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to
    the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law. '

11. SLTR1.6 says


    'S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to
    the public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not  fall   within   paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3.   to   1.5.),   character,
    associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them  to
    remain in the UK.'

12. paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration rules says
      'Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
      remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused...
      (5) the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
      the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including convictions
      which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character or associations
      or the fact that he represents a threat to national security;'

13. Between [19] & [33] of the decision the Judge  records  the  appellant's
evidence. It is clear from those paragraphs of the decision that the  is  no
dispute about the appellant's  history  of  offending  and  the  number  and
nature of his previous convictions. It is  accepted  that  at  the  time  of
hearing the appellant had an outstanding  criminal  prosecution.  It  is  at
[57] that the Judge commences his findings and reasons.

14. At [58] the Judge correctly takes as a starting point the  determination
of First-tier Judge Jones, and then commences [60] of the  determination  by
asking himself the question "What has changed since then?"

15. At [62]  the  Judge  reminds  himself  that  the  respondent  relies  on
paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration rules, and astutely  distinguishes  that
paragraph of the rules from paragraph 322(5A) of the  rules.  In  doing  so,
the Judge reminds himself that an exercise of  discretion  is  required  and
that the  focus  is  on  the  appellant's  conduct  (including  convictions)
character and associations to determine whether it is undesirable to  permit
the appellant to remain in the UK.

16. Between [66] and [71]  the  Judge  analyses  the  appellant's  offending
behaviour. He then takes guidance  from  Farquharson  (removal  -  proof  of
conduct) [2013] UKUT 146(IAC) in which the Tribunal held that (i) Where  the
Respondent relies on allegations of conduct in proceedings for removal,  the
same principles apply as to proof of conduct and the assessment of  risk  to
the public,  as  in  deportation  cases:  Bah  [2012]  UKUT  196  (IAC)  etc
applicable; (ii) A criminal charge that has not resulted in a conviction  is
not a criminal  record;  but  the  acts  that  led  to  the  charge  may  be
established as conduct; (iii) If  the  Respondent  seeks  to  establish  the
conduct by reference to the contents of police CRIS  reports,  the  relevant
documents  should  be  produced,  rather  than  a  bare  witness   statement
referring to them; (iv) The material relied  on  must  be  supplied  to  the
appellant in good time to prepare for the appeal; (v) The judge has  a  duty
to ensure a fair hearing is obtained by affording the  appellant  sufficient
time to study the documents and respond; (vi)  Where  the  appellant  is  in
detention and faces a serious allegation of conduct, it is in the  interests
of justice that legal aid is made available

17.  It is between [72] & [75] that the Judge draws  all  these  matters  to
the conclusion that finds that the respondent does not discharge the  burden
of proving that it is undesirable to permit the appellant to remain  in  the
UK in light of his  conduct  convictions,  character  or  associations.  The
Judge gives adequate reasons for reaching that conclusion. It  is,  perhaps,
a generous decision but it is nonetheless a decision  which  is  within  the
range of conclusions open to the Judge on the facts as he found them to be.

18. It is not argued by the respondent that the  Judge  misdirected  himself
in law. A fair reading  of  the  decision  discloses  that  the  Judge  took
correct guidance in law after carrying out a careful fact  finding  exercise
and after analysing those facts in order to reach his conclusions.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20. I am grateful to Mr Norton for conceding that if  the  first  ground  of
appeal does not succeed, then the remaining two grounds cannot succeed.  For
the avoidance of doubt, on the facts as  the  Judge  found  them  to  be  he
correctly  reached  the  conclusion   that   the   appellant   fulfils   the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(v) because the appellant has  lived  in
the UK for more than half of life and is between  the  ages  of  18  and  25
years.

21. The determination  of  the  First-tier  in  June  2013  found  that  the
appellant is in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  British
citizen child. The undisputed facts are that the appellant  has  contact  to
his child. His child lives with her mother,  who  has  a  new  partner.  The
third ground of appeal is advanced on the basis that

      "... It is plausible that circumstances may  have  changed  since  his
      appeal was allowed in 2013."

No actual change is  plead,  and,  perhaps  unsurprisingly,  the  respondent
leads no evidence to support that ground of appeal.

22.  There is nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the grounds of appeal amount to  little  more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.
There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise.  The  correct
test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

23.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

25.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 18
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
