
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16917/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                   |On 1 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          OLUFEMI SAMSON OGUNYANKIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Kaihiva, Counsel instructed by Corban
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell, promulgated on 1  August  2016,  in
    which he allowed Mr.  Ogunyankin's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse leave to remain on the basis of  family  and
    private life.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to Mr. Ogunyankin as the Appellant, reflecting their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds argue that the judge has given inadequate reasons  for
         allowing the appeal under paragraph 276ADE and  therefore  for  the
         same reasons  the  findings  in  respect  of  article  8  are  also
         infected.

         Having carefully considered the judge's decision, I  do  find  that
         the judge may have given inadequate reasons as to why  there  would
         be significant obstacles if the appellant were to  be  returned  to
         his home country."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  that  my
    full reasons would follow.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Nath relied on the grounds of appeal.  Paragraph [37]  was  a  very
    short paragraph summing up the judge's findings.  He  did  not  explain
    what he meant by the Appellant having to "establish his lifestyle in an
    appropriate manner".  There was no reference to any  remittances  which
    the Appellant might obtain from  his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was no reference to any contact with his father.  The judge  went
    no further than the findings and reasons set  out  in  paragraph  [37].
    There was no detail  of  any  "very  significant  obstacles",  and  the
    decision lacked an assessment of what these obstacles were.

 6. Mr. Kaihiva relied on the skeleton argument.  The  Respondent  had  not
    attended the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge set out the
    law from paragraphs [28] to [31].   In  paragraphs  [32]  and  [34]  he
    stated that he was taking into account all of  the  evidence  provided,
    and "those matters which  I  find  to  be  factually  applicable".   He
    accepted that the judge could have phrased  it  better,  but  submitted
    that the judge had looked at the totality of  the  evidence.   Had  the
    Respondent been represented, the judge may have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.  The judge had summarised the evidence, and the  Respondent
    had not attended to challenge this evidence.  Taken  as  a  whole,  the
    decision was proper and adequate.  It was not appropriate  to  look  at
    one sentence and take it apart as the Respondent had done.

 7. In response Mr. Nath submitted that there was no reference to the  fact
    that the Appellant was a healthy male, in his  30s,  who  had  acquired
    skills in the United Kingdom.  The judge had found  in  paragraph  [37]
    that the Appellant would need support on return, but he had not  stated
    why.  This was a situation which anyone would face on moving to another
    country.  Although the Respondent had not been  present,  there  was  a
    duty on the judge to consider the reasons for refusal letter where  the
    Respondent had set out in some detail why  she  considered  that  there
    were no "very significant obstacles".  The judge  had  not  taken  this
    into account.

 8. There was a discussion regarding an earlier reasons for refusal  letter
    dated December 2014, as this decision had also looked at the  issue  of
    "very significant obstacles".  However the decision under appeal  dated
    April 2015 also considered the issue of "very  significant  obstacles",
    so the relevance of the earlier decision was limited.

Error of law Decision

 9.  The  findings  and  reasons  in  relation  to  the  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules  are  contained  in  paragraphs  [32]  to  [38].   In
    paragraph [32] the judge states:

         "I confirm  that  I  take  into  account  all  evidence  presented,
         including  documentary  evidence,  whether  or   not   specifically
         referred to hereafter.  I refer also to my record of proceedings."

10. In paragraph [34] he states:

         "In considering the term 'very significant obstacles' I  take  into
         account those matters which I find to be  factually  applicable  on
         the basis of my assessment of the evidence in the round."

11. In paragraph [38] the judge states that his  views  "are  based  on  my
    assessment of the evidence in the round and having found the  Appellant
    and the supporting  witnesses  to  have  given  truthful  and  credible
    evidence".

12. In paragraphs [33] and [34] the judge states that he needs to  consider
    whether there are "very significant obstacles" to the  Appellant's  re-
    integration into Nigeria.  However, there is no reference  to  this  in
    the later paragraphs where the evidence is considered.

13. Paragraphs [35] and [36] do not address what  obstacles  the  Appellant
    would face on return to Nigeria.  In paragraph  [35]  the  judge  finds
    that the Appellant spent fifteen years in Nigeria, his formative years.
     This points in favour of him being able to re-integrate  successfully.
    The judge refers to the fact that the Appellant has supported others in
    the United Kingdom.  This suggests that, if he has been able to support
    others, he will be able to support himself in Nigeria, but this finding
    in and of itself does not have any bearing on  the  obstacles  that  he
    will face on return.

14. At [36] the judge finds that the Appellant has gained qualifications in
    the United Kingdom.  He also finds that the evidence shows that he  did
    so at his own expense.  In addition  to  finding  that  he  has  gained
    skills which he could use on his return, if he had been  able  to  gain
    qualifications at his own expense, this  would  indicate  that  he  has
    resources  available.   However,  there  are  no  findings  as  to  the
    resources which would be available to the Appellant in Nigeria.

15. Without making any further  findings  as  to  the  situation  that  the
    Appellant would face in Nigeria, in paragraphs [37] or [38]  the  judge
    finds that paragraph 276ADE  has  been  met.   There  are  no  specific
    findings or reasons given why a healthy male, in his 30s, who has spent
    the formative years  of  his  life  in  Nigeria,  and  who  has  gained
    qualifications in the United  Kingdom,  would  face  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his re-integration.

16. Paragraph [37] states:

         "I am satisfied from the evidence presented that the Appellant does
         not have individuals upon whom or facilities upon which he can draw
         in Nigeria in order to establish his lifestyle  in  an  appropriate
         manner in that country."

17. There is no explanation of what the judge means by this paragraph,  but
    the implication is that the Appellant will need support on his  return.
    However, there are no reasons given for  why  this  is.   There  is  no
    reference to any family that the Appellant may have in Nigeria.   There
    is no requirement that the facilities on which he can draw have  to  be
    in Nigeria, but there is no reference  to  any  support  which  he  may
    obtain from family in the United Kingdom.  Not having  "individuals  or
    facilities on which he can  draw  to  establish  his  lifestyle  in  an
    appropriate manner" is not equivalent to him facing  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his re-integration.

18. Having found that the Appellant had spent 15 years in Nigeria, that  he
    had supported others while living in the United Kingdom,  and  educated
    himself at his own  expense,  it  was  necessary  to  explain  why  the
    Appellant, a healthy male in his  30s,  would  face  "very  significant
    obstacles" on return to Nigeria.  Given that the evidence when taken at
    face value does  not  show  any  very  significant  obstacles,  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to give adequate reasons for why he  found  that
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) had been met.  The ties that the Appellant  has
    in the United Kingdom are relevant to this to the extent that such ties
    will offer him support on return to Nigeria, but the fact that  he  has
    ties in the United Kingdom cannot form "very significant obstacles"  to
    his re-integration into Nigeria.  Just because the support that he  has
    in the United Kingdom would not be replicated in  Nigeria  such  as  to
    assist him to "establish his lifestyle in an appropriate  manner"  does
    not amount to "very significant obstacles".

19. I find that the judge has made a material error of law in  his  failure
    to give full reasons for why the Appellant would face "very significant
    obstacles" to his re-integration into Nigeria.  I find that the finding
    that the immigration rules were  satisfied  has  infected  the  judge's
    decision under Article 8 outside the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules.

20. Given that  the  Respondent  was  not  represented  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and following discussion between the representatives, it  was
    agreed that it would be appropriate to remit the  appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be remade.  I have taken account of the Practice
    Statement dated 10 February 2010,  paragraph  7.2.   This  contemplates
    that an appeal may be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for the party's case to
    be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the  nature
    and extent of the fact-finding necessary to enable this  appeal  to  be
    remade, and having regard to the overriding objective, I find  that  it
    is appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.





Notice of Decision

21. The appeal of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of a material
    error of law and I set it aside.

22. No findings are preserved.

23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 31 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

