
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/16571/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2016                           |On 5 April 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    [O Y]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: party
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bird promulgated on  25  August  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1974 and is a national of Nigeria.

4. On  19  March  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Bird ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 5th January 2016 Judge  Hollingworth
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "1. At paragraph 28 of the decision the Judge refers to  there  having
      been no compelling circumstances put forward, apart from the fertility
      treatment, to show why this matter should now  be  considered  outside
      the immigration rules. Further in the decision the Judge has  referred
      to the extent of the  available  evidence  in  relation  to  fertility
      treatment.


      "2. Given the reference by the judge at paragraph 28  to  finding,  in
      effect, that fertility treatment constitutes compelling  circumstances
      in the circumstances of the case before him, an arguable error of  law
      has arisen in that the judge has not in fact gone on to  consider  the
      relationship between the content of  the  immigration  rules  and  the
      facts so far  as  they  were  established  in  relation  to  fertility
      treatment.


      "3. Although the judge has applied the criteria in section 117 and has
      taken into account factors relevant in  the  proportionality  exercise
      the judge embarked upon this prior to paragraph 28  of  the  decision.
      Given that the reference in paragraph 28 of the  decision  is  to  the
      gateway constituted by compelling circumstances through  which  it  is
      possible to pass in order for a breach of article 8 to be  considered,
      it is arguable that the application of section 117  criteria  and  the
      conducting of the proportionality exercise has  been  carried  out  in
      such a way that doubt has arisen as to whether  the  judge  considered
      the case should have embarked on that exercise or not.


      "4. In these circumstances an arguable error  of  law  has  arisen  in
      relation to the approach taken to the question of whether there  would
      be a breach of article 8 in the light of the  fact  that  the  wording
      employed at  paragraph  28  of  the  decision  merely  indicates  that
      compelling  circumstances  were  found  on  the  basis  of   fertility
      treatment. The judge has also employed the phraseology at paragraph 28
      as to why this matter should now be considered outside the immigration
      rules.


      "5. At paragraph 26 of the decision the judge has referred to  finding
      that there is little evidence to show that  there  are  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria. It is unclear  whether
      the judge was continuing to apply the immigration rules  or  embarking
      upon a consideration of a breach of article 8."

The Hearing

7. (a) Because the appellant was unrepresented I discussed the  appeal  with
her rather than asking her  for  detailed  submissions.  The  appellant  was
accompanied by her partner, [BB], who assisted the appellant. The  appellant
agreed that the focus in  her  case  is  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.  The
appellant argues that there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  reintegration
into Nigeria and that there are compelling  compassionate  circumstances  in
her case which merit consideration of article 8 ECHR out-with the rules.

(b) The appellant told me that the fulcrum of her case relates to  fertility
treatment which she and her husband are pursuing.  She  told  me  that  both
she and her partner are now in their  early  40s  so  that  her  chances  of
conceiving are diminishing. A cycle of fertility treatment in February  2016
was unsuccessful. The next cycle of treatment is due in February  2017.  She
told me that the uncertainty surrounding this appeal together with a  desire
to start a family are causing psychological  torment.  She  agreed  with  me
that the focus in her appeal is on [28] of the judge's decision,  where  the
judge  appears  to  find  that  compelling  circumstances  exist,  but  then
declines to consider article 8 outside the rules.

(c) The appellant urged me to set the decision aside  and  to  substitute  a
decision allowing the appeal. She reminded  me  to  consider  not  only  her
rights but the rights of her partner.

8. Mr Tarlow,  for  the  respondent,  adopted  the  terms  of  the  rule  24
response. He agreed that the focus in this case is at [28] of the  decision,
but told me that that paragraph cannot be  read  without  reference  to  the
notice of decision - which quite clearly dismisses the appellants  case.  He
argued that that amounts to a clear finding that  there  are  no  compelling
circumstances meriting consideration of this case  out-with  the  rules.  He
told me that at [25] the Judge clearly records  the  appellant's  arguments,
which she goes on to reject. He asked me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow
the decision to stand.

Analysis

9. It is between [19] & [28] that the Judge  analyses  the  appellants  case
and reaches  conclusions.  In  essence,  there  are  three  aspects  to  the
appellants case. The first is consideration of appendix FM;  the  second  is
consideration of paragraph 276  ADE;  and  the  third  is  consideration  of
article 8 ECHR out-with the immigration rules. All three of  those  elements
are contained in the decision between [18] and [28].

10. Although each of those elements can be found between [18] and [28],  the
decision does not make easy reading because those elements are not  set  out
in a logical order.
11. At [20] the Judge finds that the appellant and partner enjoy  a  genuine
and subsisting relationship & that they  have  lived  together  since  2009.
Immediately thereafter at [21] the Judge  launches  into  a  proportionality
assessment, reminding herself of the impact of  section  117B  of  the  2002
Act. Between [23] and [26] the Judge returns to consideration of  the  facts
and circumstances pertaining  to  the  appellant  and  her  partner,  before
reaching the conclusion (in the final sentence of [26]) that  there  are  no
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria (that  is  not
exactly the language the Judge uses, but it  is  the  conclusion  the  Judge
reaches)

12. Whilst the path followed by the Judge is not perfect, the Judge  applies
the correct legal test and quite clearly comes to the  conclusion  that  the
appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph EX. 1 of appendix  FM
because the evidence is insufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of  proving
that there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  outside
the UK.


13. It might have been helpful if the Judge had clearly indicated  that  the
Judge had moved on to consider paragraph EX.1(b) of the rules,  but  a  fair
and holistic reading of the  Judge's  decision  leaves  no  doubt  that  the
Judge's findings of fact drive at appendix FM, and that  the  correct  legal
test has been applied.


14. At [27] the Judge considers paragraph 276 ADE of the  immigration  rules
and correctly concludes that, because of a combination  of  the  appellant's
age and the length of time that she  has  been  in  the  UK,  the  appellant
cannot fulfil the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.


15. A  fair  reading  of  [18]  to  [27]  shows  that  the  Judge  correctly
considered each of the necessary parts of appendix FM and paragraph 276  ADE
before reaching the conclusion contained in the final sentence of [27]  "the
appellant therefore fails to meet the requirements of the immigration  rules
with regard to article 8"


16. [18] to [27] of the decision therefore adequately  support  the  Judge's
decision to dismiss the appeal under the immigration  rules.  The  appellant
urged me to consider not  only  her  article  8  rights  but  those  of  her
partner. Her partner is now a British citizen. His home and his job  are  in
the UK. He would leave  the  UK  if  the  appellant  were  removed,  so  the
decision could  be  interpreted  as  depriving  him  of  his  home  and  his
employment.
17. R (on the application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA  Civ  440  considered  the
phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in paragraph EX.1  of  the  Rules.
"...The phrase as used in the Rules is intended to have the same meaning  as
in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear  that  the  European  Court  of
Human Rights regards it as  a  formulation  imposing  a  stringent  test  in
respect of that factor, as is illustrated by  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see
para. [117]: there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  family  settling
in Suriname, even though the  applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
hardship if forced to do so). "
18.  At paragraph 26 of that decision "The mere facts that Mr Benette  is  a
British citizen, has lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job
here - and hence might find it difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to  re-
locate to Ghana to continue their family life there - could  not  constitute
insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

19. In reality appellant's partner finds himself in no different a  position
to that of Mr Benette in the case of Agyarko. The  case-law  indicates  that
the Judge's approach is beyond criticism. The  Judge  took  account  of  the
difficulties that would be faced by  the  appellant  and  her  partner,  but
correctly concluded that those difficulties do not amount to  insurmountable
obstacles. No challenge is taken to the legal  test  applied  by  the  Judge
(which was correct). The challenge is to her conclusion. As  her  conclusion
is entirely in line with the case of Agyarko, the conclusion is well  within
the range of reasonable conclusions available to  the  Judge,  and  is  also
well founded in law.


20.  Even  though  the  decision  does  not  make  entirely  straightforward
reading, there is no error of  law  in  relation  to  consideration  of  the
appellant's appeal under either appendix FM or  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
immigration rules. There is nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding
exercise. The Judge correctly directs herself in law.

21.  In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  Lord  Justice  Richards
said at paragraph 33 "In our judgment, even though a test of  exceptionality
does not apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of  special
contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to
be identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new  Rules  in
Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as strict as  a
test of exceptionality or a requirement of  "very  compelling  reasons"  (as
referred to in MF (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to
foreign criminals), but  which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
consideration  of  public  interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  It  also
reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which has been  tested  and
has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g.,  Haleemudeen  at  [44],  per
Beatson LJ".

22. In a carefully  drafted  notice  of  appeal  the  appellant  argues  for
consideration of this case on compassionate grounds outside the  immigration
rules. The appellants case was plead before the  first-tier  and  before  me
entirely on the basis of fertility treatment which she and her  partner  are
now having. It is here that this appeal is clearly focused on  [28]  of  the
decision, which says


   "There have been no compelling circumstances put forward, apart from  the
   fertility treatment, to show why this matter  should  now  be  considered
   outside of the immigration"

23. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  at  [28]  the  Judge
found that fertility treatment constituted  compelling  circumstances.  That
is not what [28] of the decision  says.  A  fair  reading  of  [28]  of  the
decision is that the appellant's case relies  entirely  on  the  pursuit  of
fertility treatment in the UK, and that the Judge does not  find  that  that
is a sufficiently compelling set of circumstances to merit consideration  of
article 8 outside the immigration rules.

24. In R (on the application  of  Erimako)  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWHC  Civ  312,
Burnton J said that it was not  disproportionate  to  remove  the  appellant
(whose wife was in her 40s & has leave to remain) when they were  undergoing
fertility treatment here  that  would  not  be  as  effective  in  his  home
country,  particularly  in  the  case  with  the  prospects  were  at   best
uncertain.


25. Although the Judge's findings at [28] is brief, it  is  correct  in  law
and supports the Judge's finding that compelling circumstances  which  would
require consideration of  the  appellant's  case  out-with  the  immigration
rules do not exist, so that the appeal is dismissed under the  human  rights
convention.

26. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

27. In this case, there is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact  finding
exercise is adequate.  The decision is not tainted by a  material  error  of
law.

28.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

29. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

30. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 17
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

