
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA/16844/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard             at             Field             House,             London
  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              19th              August               2015
         On the 4th September 2015


                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:

                       MISS OLUWASEUN OLASUMBO JABITTA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: No attendance
For the Respondent: Miss Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Carroll promulgated on  the  19th  November  2014,  who
      dismissed her appeal on the grounds  that  she  did  not  satisfy  the
      requirements of paragraph 245ZX (ha) of the Immigration Rules.

Background

   2. On the 30th January 2014, the Appellant applied for Leave as a Tier  4
      (General) Student  Migrant  and  for  a  Biometric  Residence  Permit.
      However her application was refused by  the  Respondent  on  the  28th
      March 2014, on the basis that she had previously been granted leave to
      study courses at degree level or above for a total of 4  years  and  6
      months and that her current application was to study for a Global  MBA
      until the 24th March 2015. However, it was found that a grant of leave
      to study this course would result in her  having  spent  more  than  5
      years in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student  studying  courses  that
      consist of degree level study or above and therefore it was held  that
      she failed to meet the requirements of paragraph  245ZX  (ha)  of  the
      Immigration Rules.




   3. The Appellant appealed against that refusal decision to the First-Tier
      Tribunal, and her  appeal  was  heard  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Carroll on the 10th November 2014. In  his  decision,  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant's  case  was   that   her
      application for a Tier 4 visa was made under the impression that  "the
      one year I spent studying the LPC would be exempt regardless of when I
      studied it." It was found at [6] that the Appellant  relied  upon  the
      Tier 4 policy guidance version 09/12 but the First-Tier Tribunal Judge
      found that the exception in the policy guidance stated:

'Law, where the Applicant has completed a course at degree level in  the  UK
and is progressing to:

    . the Common Professional Examination;

    . The graduate Diploma in Law and Legal Practice Course.'

   He found that both that previous guidance and what was said to be current
   guidance precluded Applicants spending  more  than  5  years  in  the  UK
   studying courses at  degree  level  or  above  subject  to  a  number  of
   exceptions including in respect of Law, an exception where the  Applicant
   had completed a course at degree level in the UK and  is  is  progressing
   the Legal Practice Course and that  the  guidance  envisaged  current  or
   future applications to study the Legal Practice Course ("the LPC") rather
   than someone who has already completed the Legal Practice Course and that
   therefore the Appellant was not in the position of an  Applicant  who  is
   progressing to that course and  that  therefore  she  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 245 ZX (ha). The Appellant  has  appealed  that
   decision to the Upper Tribunal.




   4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  when
      she found that:

"1. The issue in the grounds  relates  to  paragraph  245  ZX  (ha)  of  the
Immigration Rules and it is arguable that the Judge misapplied the  relevant
Tier 4 guidance as to whether the time spent completing the  Legal  Practice
Course should have been exempt from the calculation of  5  years  and,  thus
the issue relates to the correct interpretation  as  to  whether  the  legal
practice course can be exempt regardless when it was  completed  or  whether
the  guidance  envisages  that  it  only  applies  to  current   or   future
applications to study the Legal Practice Course.

2. When the appeal comes before the Tribunal, the Respondent must make  sure
that the Tier 4 guidance that was current at the time is made  available  to
the Tribunal."



   5. In the grounds of appeal it is argued  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge failed to consider the intention behind  the  relevant  law  and
      that the intention of the law was to always give exception to  certain
      courses, including the Legal Practice Course.  It  is  further  argued
      that a Home Office representative had stated  to  the  UK  Council  of
      International Student Affairs at any time spent studying on an  exempt
      course is exempt, regardless of when it was studied and that to ignore
      this is to penalise the Appellant for choosing to  study  the  LPC  in
      2012, as opposed to another time and  the  law  should  not  be  taken
      literally as it would have an unfair outcome.




   6. On the 12th August 2015, the Tribunal received an unsigned and undated
      letter purporting to be from the appellant which stated:




      "Notification of Withdrawal,

      Miss  Oluwaseun  Olasumbo  Jabitta  (26th  Feb  1990)  residing  at  [
                     ]  would  like  notify  the  Tribunal  my  decision  to
      withdraw my appeal number IA/16844/2014.

            Sincerely

            Oluwaseun Olasumbo Jabitta."



   7. However, that application  was  considered  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Perkins on the 14th August 2015, who found that the Appellant  is  not
      allowed to withdraw an appeal from  the  Upper  Tribunal  without  the
      Upper Tribunal's consent pursuant to  Rule  17  (4)  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  that  as  the   letter
      attributed to her was  not  signed  and  offered  no  explanation  for
      withdrawing the appeal, he was not prepared to consent to  the  appeal
      being withdrawn and therefore it remained  in  the  list  for  hearing
      today. The appellant was notified of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins'
      decision on the 14th August 2015 by first class post.




   8. However, despite the Appellant having been given notification  of  the
      time, date and exact address of the Tribunal where the appeal  was  to
      be heard, namely at Field House, 15  Breams  Buildings,  London,  EC4A
      1DZ, and having been given notice that the appeal was to be  heard  on
      Wednesday 19th August 2015 at 2 p.m., by 3 p.m.  on  the  day  of  her
      appeal no one had arrived on behalf of  the  Appellant,  nor  had  the
      Appellant herself arrived,  and  there  was  no  explanation  for  her
      failure to attend and no request made  for  an  adjournment.  In  such
      circumstances, the Appellant's previous request to withdraw her appeal
      having been refused, and there being no attendance by the Appellant or
      anyone on her behalf, and no  further  explanation  given  as  to  any
      reason for wanting to withdraw the appeal  or  confirmation  that  the
      Appellant indeed had written  the  letter  sent  to  the  Tribunal,  I
      considered that it was in the interest of justice to continue with the
      appeal in the absence of the Appellant and that it would  be  contrary
      to the overriding objective to consider the appeal as being  withdrawn
      in such circumstances, as I again could not consent to any withdrawal,
      that having previously been determined against the Appellant,  without
      any further explanation as to any reason for her wanting  to  withdraw
      her appeal, or confirmation that she indeed had actually  written  and
      signed the letter sent to the Upper Tribunal. Nor did I consider it to
      be in the interest of justice considering the overriding objective  to
      deal with cases fairly and  justly  that  any  adjournment  should  be
      granted, when no such adjournment was sought.

   9. I therefore proceeded to hear submissions from Miss Everett on  behalf
      of the Respondent. She handed up what she said was the applicable Home
      Office Guidance that was valid between January 2014 to date  and  that
      in respect of Law, it was stated that the exceptions to the maximum of
      five-year study at degree level or above for the purposes of paragraph
      245 ZX (ha) that the




       "applicant must have completed a course at degree level in the UK and
      be progressing to:

    . A Law conversion course validated by the Joint  Academic  Stage  Board
      (England and Wales), a Masters in legal science (Northern Ireland)  or
      an accelerated graduate LLB (Scotland);

    . The Legal Practice Course (England and Wales) or the solicitors course
      (Northern  Ireland)  or  a  diploma  in  Professional  Legal  Practice
      (Scotland)

    . The Bar professional training course (England and Wales)  or  the  Bar
      course (Northern Ireland)."

   Miss Everett argued that under the policy applicable at the time, it  was
   only if the Appellant was progressing to the LPC course,  that  it  would
   not be taken into account in calculating the five-year period of study at
   degree level or above. As the Appellant has already completed  her  legal
   practice course and was wishing to progress onto a  different  course  of
   study, she argued it did count towards the Appellant's maximum  of  five-
   year study at degree level or above and argued that  on  this  basis  the
   decision of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge was correct  and  disclosed  no
   material error of law and she asked me to dismiss the appeal.

My Findings on Error of Law

  10. Although within her Grounds of Appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal,  the
      Appellant sought to rely upon an email by the UKVI to the  UK  Council
      of International Student Affairs which was said to be dated  the  12th
      July 2013 that had stated "There is no change in the policy  intention
      here. Any time spent studying  these  courses  still  does  not  count
      towards the five-year, be that current or previous study" and that the
      UK Council of International Student Affairs had published this excerpt
      in a publication on the 14th November 2013, in her Grounds  of  Appeal
      she conceded that all attempts to have the actual  email  released  as
      evidence had been refused by the UK Council of  International  Student
      Affairs, to protect the identity of the UKVI representative  who  made
      the statement. I have to bear in mind that it is for the Appellant  to
      prove that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge involved  the
      making of a material error of Law. She has not produced the email said
      to have been sent to the UK Council of International Student  Affairs,
      and irrespective of the reason, without any such email, I  am  not  in
      position to conclude that an email was sent, that in any material  way
      changed or was different to the published guidance.




  11. Although in the UK Council of International  Student  Affairs  special
      briefing publication on the 14th November 2013 entitled "A summary  of
      recent immigration changes summer-autumn 2013" it was stated that  the
      provision of any time spent  studying  one  of  the  accepted  courses
      listed in paragraphs 245 ZX (ha) (iii) of the  Rules  does  not  count
      towards the five-year cap, had been omitted from  the  Tier  4  policy
      guidance and sponsor guidance since the 1st July 2013,  but  that  the
      Home Office had confirmed in an email that there was no change in  the
      policy intention here  and  any  time  spent  towards  studying  these
      courses still does not count towards a five-year cap be  that  current
      or previous study, I do not consider that this in  itself  amounts  to
      sufficient evidence that the Respondent had  by  virtue  of  an  email
      changed the policy guidance so that it was in fact different  to  what
      was stated in the published guidance document. Without having seen the
      email itself, I am not in a position to be able to determine who  sent
      the email, or as to whether or not the actual contents of  such  email
      are as described in the UK Council of  International  Student  Affairs
      publication, or as to whether or not the person who is  said  to  have
      sent the email had authority to send it and  bind  the  Respondent  in
      terms of any change or clarification  of  the  Respondent's  published
      policy guidance. The  UK  Council  of  International  Student  Affairs
      special briefing publication simply amounts to their interpretation of
      the email and the policy, rather than sufficient proof  of  the  email
      contents itself.




  12. In such circumstances, having considered the policy guidance which was
      submitted to me as being the policy guidance current at  the  time  by
      Miss Everett on behalf of the Respondent, it is clear that in  respect
      of Law, "the Applicant must have completed a course at degree level in
      the UK and be progressing to:... The legal  practice  course  (England
      Wales)." In such circumstances it was perfectly open to the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge to find that the policy guidance envisaged  current  or
      future applications to study the legal practice course, as opposed  to
      someone in the position of the Appellant who had already completed two
      courses at degree level amounting to a total of 4 years  and  who  had
      undertaken the Legal Practice Course in 2011/2012 and was then wanting
      to study for an MBA. I agree with  the  interpretation  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Carroll  that  the  Appellant   was   therefore   not
      progressing to the Legal Practice Course, she  had  already  completed
      it. The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Carroll thereby does not
      disclose any error of law.




  13. I do not accept the contention of the  Appellant  that  the  intention
      behind  the  guidance  was  to  give  exemption  to  certain  courses,
      including the LPC, irrespective of when  they  were  studied,  as  the
      wording of the guidance itself in respect of Law  specifically  refers
      to applicants  "progressing to" the LPC.  In  respect  of  courses  in
      architecture, medicine, dentistry, veterinary  medicine  and  science,
      there was said to be no maximum period for those students,  save  that
      if a student applied for leave or an extension of  leave  for  one  of
      those courses, it should be refused if the grant  of  leave  for  that
      course would lead to the  student  having  spent  more  than  8  years
      studying in the UK at degree level or  above  and  they  have  already
      completed a PhD, and therefore in respect of those courses it appeared
      to make no difference as to when any previous  course  was  completed.
      However, in respect of the Law section of the policy, the  wording  is
      different in that  the  word  specifically  refers  to  the  Applicant
      "progressing to: ... the Legal Practice Course". I therefore  do  find
      that it was open to the Judge to find that  the  guidance  on  Tier  4
      (General) Students required  them  to  be  progressing  to  the  Legal
      Practice Course in order for her  attendance  on  the  Legal  Practice
      Course not be considered for the five-year cap and that  therefore  it
      did matter as to when the Legal Practice Course  was  completed.  This
      further makes  sense  from  a  policy  point  of  view,  in  that  the
      Respondent may well not wish to prevent people from  becoming  lawyers
      as a result of the five-year cap, if they are then as a result  unable
      to complete their final parts of their professional qualifications  in
      terms of the Law Conversion Course, the Legal Practice Course  or  the
      Bar Professional Training Course, but that if those courses are simply
      part and parcel of a portfolio of courses studied by the Appellant and
      she had already completed the course and was wishing to then go on  to
      a completely different course of study for her  MBA,  the  time  spent
      studying on that Legal Practice Course should be taken into account in
      respect of the five-year cap. I therefore do  not  consider  that  the
      guidance does mean anything other  than  what  it  says  or  that  the
      application of the guidance to the  Appellant  results  in  an  unfair
      outcome. The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Carroll  does  not
      disclose any material error of law and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Carroll  does  not  disclose  any
material error of law and shall stand.

The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order  was  not  made  before
me. No such order is made.



Signed


[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McGinty
           Dated 19th August 2015

