
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2015                    |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              ARSHAD JAVED DAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nazim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page ("the Immigration Judge")  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against the decision made by the respondent to refuse the  appellant  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations. The hearing took place  on  8
    January 2015 and was promulgated on 20th January 2015. Both sides  were
    represented at that hearing.

 2. As was observed by Judge Rintoul, when he granted permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, the grounds are very lengthy. It has been  quite
    hard to ascertain the basis for the appeal from  those  grounds  but  I
    have been given much assistance by Mr  Nazim,  who  made  lengthy  oral
    submissions to expand on the grounds. I also  had  the  benefit  of  Mr
    Avery's submissions, which  were  helpful.   As  well  as  hearing  the
    submissions before me I have had an opportunity to read  the  notes  of
    the hearing before the Immigration Judge.

Discussion

 3. The issue before the Upper Tribunal is: whether  it  was  open  to  the
    Immigration Judge in the FTT to dismiss the appeal on  the  basis  that
    the appellant did not comply with Regulation 10 of the EEA  Regulations
    2006 or whether the Immigration Judge ought to have gone on to consider
    whether the appellant had acquired a right  to  reside  in  the  UK  by
    virtue of Regulation 15 of those Regulations. In particular:  could  it
    be said that the appellant, who is not himself an EEA national,  was  a
    family member of an EEA national on the basis that he  had  resided  in
    that capacity for a continuous  period  of  five  years  prior  to  his
    application?

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul decided that it was at least arguable that
    the appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK  by
    virtue of residing with and marriage to an Irish national,  Mrs  Byrne,
    who had been present in the UK exercising Treaty rights for a period of
    five years. The appellant and the sponsor had been married in 2003  and
    until they were finally divorced in 2013, having separated in 2007.

 5. Mr Avery has drawn my attention to the fact that case  was  effectively
    presented before the Immigration Judge on the basis that the  appellant
    satisfied Regulation 10, which gives a family member of an EEA national
    a retained right  of residence  in the UK in the circumstances set  out
    in that regulation, not regulation 15. That  would  have  been  on  the
    basis that he retained a right of residence in the UK by virtue of  his
    former marriage to Ms Byrne and he ceased to be a  family  member  with
    her on the termination of the marriage. This, combined with an  earlier
    continuous period of residence with her of at least one year  during  a
    marriage that lasted at least three years, meant he was a family member
    with a right of residence for the purposes of regulation 10.

 6. Regulation 10(5) provides that a person  satisfies  the  conditions  of
    that Regulation (i.e. has a retained right  of  residence)  if  he  can
    satisfy one of the conditions  set  out  in  sub-paragraph  (5).  These
    include the requirement that  for  at  least  three  years  before  the
    marriage ended the parties lived together   and at least  one  year  of
    those three years was present in the UK.

 7. I have considered the cases of PM [2011] UKUT 89 and  OA  [2010]  UKAIT
    00003 to which my attention was drawn.  These help  to  illuminate  the
    relationship between the regulations 10 and 15.

          1) To rely on regulation 10 the  applicant  must  show  that  the
             marriage lasted at least three years, of which  at  least  one
             has  been  in  the  member  state  where  he  seeks  permanent
             residence.

          2) If the couple separate,  but  do  not  divorce,  no  right  of
             residence is retained but the separated spouse can apply under
             regulation 15 (1)  (b)  on  the  basis  that  he  has  resided
             continuously in the UK for a period of at least five years "in
             accordance with the regulations".

          3) Before  the  applicant  can  succeed  in  an  application  for
             permanent residence he must be the member of a family unit who
             satisfies certain requirements,  e.g.  that  he  is  a  worker
             within the meaning of the regulations, but PM makes  it  clear
             that they do not need to live together in the  same  household
             to qualify.

          4) The applicant must show that he has  resided  in  the  UK  "in
             accordance with the regulations" in  order  to  qualify  under
             regulation 15 (1) (b) or (f).

 8. The respondent says in her rule 24 response dated 20th July 2015,  that
    even if the appeal is considered  under  regulation  15  the  appellant
    still fails because his  residence  card  was  cancelled  in  2006  and
    subsequent applications and appeals against this refusal to grant him a
    residence card were dismissed. This means that the  appellant  did  not
    reside in the UK in accordance with the regulations for a period of  at
    least five years.

 9. Accordingly, if the respondent  is  correct,  the  appellant  qualifies
    under neither regulation.

Conclusions

10. I can find no evidence in the notes of the hearing or in  the  decision
    itself which suggests that Regulation 15 was referred to in the  course
    of submissions. It   may  have  been  referred  to  in  the  course  of
    correspondence before the hearing and it appears to be intended to make
    a reference to it in the grounds. Both parties were represented at that
    hearing and it was  open  to  the  appellant's  representative  to  put
    forward any argument that he considered appropriate.

11. The burden rested  on  the  appellant  to  show  that  he  fell  within
    whichever   Regulation he relied on and to show why there  is  said  to
    have been an error of law on the part of the Immigration Judge.

12. When regulation 15 is considered it appears not to have been  satisfied
    because the appellant cannot be shown to be in the UK for a  continuous
    period  of  five  years  "in  accordance  with  the  regulations",  his
    residence card having been cancelled in 2006. In addition  the  sponsor
    cannot be shown to have been a worker within the meaning of  regulation
    6 of the regulation as to be a "qualified person".

13. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the FTT.

14. Article 8 of the ECHR was considered by the Immigration Judge, but this
    has not been pursued before the Upper Tribunal and having regard to the
    extent of the grant of permission, argument has effectively limited  to
    the appeal against the decision in relation to the residence  card.  In
    any event the Immigration Judge's reasons for  refusing  to  allow  the
    appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human  rights  grounds   appear
    comprehensive.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of  law
and this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



Fee award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

