
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16282/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2015                           |On 24th March 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                               MR UMID KABULOV
                        (anonymity direction not made)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr E Cole, Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkmenistan born on 23rd  May  1988.  On
    6th February 2014 the  appellant  made  an  application  as  a  Tier  4
    student. On 18th March 2014 the appellant was refused  because  he  was
    not awarded any points under Appendix A. The  respondent  contended  he
    had no right of appeal due to his having made his application  when  he
    did not have leave to remain.  The appellant appealed  however  on  2nd
    April 2014. His appeal was allowed in a determination of Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Gibb promulgated on 4th December 2014.

 3. On 23rd January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer found that
    there was an arguable error of law because it was arguable  that  there
    was no jurisdiction for the Tribunal to hear the appeal.

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 5. Mr Cole arrived late and explained that he had only been instructed  at
    2.30pm via text message. The solicitors had thought they had instructed
    counsel but in fact had forgotten to do so. He did not have papers  and
    needed some more time. I provided him with an appeal  bundle  and  gave
    him to time to read it. I explained to the appellant and  Mr  Cole  the
    issue before the Tribunal. Ms Savage also supplied Mr Cole with a  copy
    of s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as it stood
    at the time of decision and appeal.

 6. I asked Ms Savage to explain her grounds of  appeal  in  full  for  the
    benefit of Mr Cole, although I  indicated  that  I  thought  they  were
    correct. She relied upon the written grounds. The history of the matter
    was that the appellant had made a previous application which  had  been
    refused and had  been  appealed.  This  appeal  was  withdrawn  on  5th
    February 2014.

 7. The new application, which led  to  this  appeal,  was  made  when  the
    appellant had no leave on 6th February 2014.  There  was  therefore  no
    immigration  decision,  as  defined  in  s.82(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  contained  in  the  refusal  of  that
    application as there  was  no  removal  decision  in  relation  to  the
    appellant and there was no refusal to vary his leave to  remain  as  he
    had no leave to remain at the time of application to vary.

 8.  Judge Gibb had erred in law at paragraph 15 of  his  determination  by
    thinking that the 28 day provision under the Tier 4 migrant Immigration
    Rules created an appeal right.

 9. Mr Cole asked for 3 days to make written submissions but I refused this
    application as the law is clear. He then contended that he had made  an
    application for an adjournment at the start of the proceedings but this
    was not correct. He had merely asked for more time and had  been  given
    time to read the papers relevant to the case, and  had  not  asked  for
    more time after this.

10. I explained to the parties that I found Judge Gibb had erred in law and
    that the decision would be set aside and  a  new  decision  substituted
    dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction  would  be  substituted,
    but that I would set out my reasons in writing.

Conclusions - Error of Law

11.  Judge  Gibb  does  not  give  any  reasons  at  paragraph  15  of  his
    determination as to why an application  made  within  28  days  of  the
    expiry of the appellant's leave attracts a right of appeal if  refused.
    I accept the submission of the respondent that he had  probably  become
    confused by the fact  that  such  an  application  may  be  granted  as
    complying with the Immigration Rules.

12. The appellant had no leave at the time of application and so there  was
    therefore  no immigration decision refusing to vary his leave to remain
    and giving him a right of appeal  under  s.82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in accordance with  s.82(2)(d)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The  Tribunal  confirms
    that  this  approach  is  correct  in  SA  (work  permit  refusal   not
    appealable) Ghana 2007 UKAIT 00006.

Decision

   1. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   3. The appeal is remade dismissing it for want of jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20th March 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 20th March 2015


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

