

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16298/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 10th November 2014                         |On 11th November 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                JUNLIN LIANG
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                    NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL BY THE APPELLANT


    1. At a hearing on the 22nd February 2013 the Upper Tribunal  considered
       and then adjourned the Appellants challenge to the  determination  of
       the First-tier Tribunal that dismissed  his  appeal  under  both  the
       Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds. A  direction  for  the
       Appellants removal made pursuant to section  47  Asylum,  Immigration
       and Nationality Act 2006 was dismissed as having  been  found  to  be
       unlawful by the First-tier Tribunal which is not  challenged  by  the
       Respondent.


    2. The grounds of appeal assert procedural impropriety  in  refusing  to
       adjourn the appeal pending the  outcome  of  proceedings  before  the
       Employment Appeal Tribunal  brought  by  the  Appellant  against  the
       termination of his employment, which were said to be determinative of
       the merits of the appeal.  The Upper Tribunal considered this  matter
       and agreed to adjourn the error of law hearing pending the outcome of
       the employment related proceedings.


    3. There have been a number of interim case management hearings since to
       establish the progress  of  the  Employment  Tribunal  hearing  which
       resulted in the Upper Tribunal being advised that the  Appellant  had
       lost his case but had sought leave to appeal to the Employment Appeal
       Tribunal.


    4. In fairness to the Appellant, he was told the  Upper  Tribunal  would
       await the outcome of the Employment Appeal Tribunal  decision  before
       considering the error of law issue.  On the  6th  November  2014  the
       Employment Appeal Tribunal sent the Upper  Tribunal  a  copy  of  the
       order of The Honourable Mrs Justice Simler dated  5th  November  2014
       made following  the  appeal  being  listed  for  consideration  at  a
       preliminary hearing at which the appeal was dismissed.


    5. On the 10th November 2014 the Upper Tribunal received a  letter  from
       Mr Liang seeking leave to withdraw his appeal. It is  appropriate  in
       all the circumstances for permission to be granted for the appeal  to
       be withdrawn. Consequently  there  is  no  extant  challenge  to  the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal which shall stand.


    6. The hearing listed for 14th November 2014 shall be vacated.






  Signed.......................................................
  Judge of the Upper Tribunal


  Dated the 10th November 2014


















