
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16177/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th September 2015                        |On 5th November 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              miss farjana boby
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss T Kabir, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 30th August 1985.   On
    31st December 2013 the Appellant made a combined application for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system and for a biometric residence permit.  On
    20th March 2014 the Appellant's application was refused  on  the  basis
    that she had overstayed in the United Kingdom for a period of more than
    28 days.  The Secretary of State's contention was that the  Appellant's
    leave to remain was curtailed to expire on 19th May 2012 but  that  the
    Appellant had not submitted a valid application  for  leave  to  remain
    until 31st December 2013 and that this was more than 28 days  therefore
    after the Appellant's previous leave to remain had expired.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Aujla sitting at Richmond on 10th November  2014.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 21st November 2014 the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had no right to appeal against the Respondent's decision  and
    therefore there was no valid appeal extant before him.

 3. On 29th December 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  That application was refused by Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zucker on 3rd February  2015.   On  18th  February  2015
    renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. On 13th May 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He considered that he was satisfied  that  it  was  reasonably
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  no  evidence  before  it  to
    support  a  decision  that  the  Respondent  had  served  a  notice  of
    curtailment on the Appellant rather than evidence that  the  Respondent
    believed that  she  had.   He  pointed  out  that  the  Tribunal  would
    appreciate  submissions  from  the  parties  on  the  following  points
    confirming (if this be their position) that a decision  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  and  is  appealable  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Further he invited the Respondent (but did  not  direct)  to
    disclose in any reply precisely the evidence relied upon to prove  that
    the Appellant was given notice of curtailment  of  leave  and  how  the
    evidence supports that conclusion.

 5. On 29th May 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response points  out  that  the  Judge  had
    noted that the Appellant did  not  attend  the  hearing  and  that  the
    Appellant had asserted  that  she  did  not  receive  the  curtailment.
    However it was contended  that  it  was  clear  from  the  Respondent's
    records that two letters  had  been  despatched  to  the  Appellant  by
    recorded delivery.  Given the failure of the Appellant  to  attend  the
    hearing and to provide any cogent evidence  to  support  her  assertion
    that she did not receive the curtailment notice it was  contended  that
    it was open to the  Judge  to  accept  thereafter  the  assertions  and
    evidence relied upon by the Respondent.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears by her  instructed  Counsel
    Miss Kabir.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Miss Kabir indicates that this is a  procedural  appeal.   Her  initial
    starting point is that there is a basis for an appeal to be  heard  and
    she relies on the authority of Abiyat and  Others  (rights  of  appeal)
    Iran [2011] UKUT 00314 (IAC) which is authority for the contention that
    there is a right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal declining jurisdiction when that  decision  has
    been made after full consideration and is embodied in a  determination.
    Mr Bramble on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not  seek  to
    challenge that authority.

 8. Miss Kabir consequently turned to address the issue as  to  whether  or
    not the notice of curtailment has or has not been properly served.   He
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  by  endorsing  the
    decision of the Respondent relying on the mere assertion of the fact by
    the Respondent that the decision to curtail the Appellant's  leave  was
    duly communicated  to  the  Appellant  at  her  address  and  that  the
    Respondent had failed to prove that it was actually communicated to the
    Appellant.  She relies on the authority of Syed (curtailment of leave -
    notice) [2013] UKUT 00144.  She submits that though there is mention of
    the case in the determination the judge has failed to  mention  whether
    the case was considered and how.  She points out that Syed is authority
    for outlining the duty of a Respondent in curtailing a migrant's  leave
    and that the Secretary of State has to be able to prove that notice  of
    such a decision was communicated to the person concerned in  order  for
    it to be effective and that the Secretary of  State  cannot  rely  upon
    deemed postal service.

 9. She submits the fact that the Appellant did not attend the  hearing  to
    give evidence that she had not received the notice of curtailment would
    not have made much difference in the outcome of the appeal since it was
    the Respondent's burden to discharge their duty  of  proving  that  the
    notice was communicated properly.  She points out  that  the  Appellant
    was not in a position to prove that she  did  not  receive  the  notice
    except answering "no" to a question if put to her whether she  received
    the notice of curtailment.  She submits that the Secretary of State had
    failed to discharge their burden in line with Syed.

10. In response Mr Bramble starts by reciting Ved  and  Others  (appealable
    decisions; permission application; Basnet) [2014] UKUT 150  and  whilst
    acknowledging that this case is not  on  all  fours  with  the  current
    scenario refers me to paragraphs 21 onwards  pointing  out  that  these
    paragraphs addressed the powers of the Upper Tribunal to deal  with  an
    appeal in this scenario.  He does accept that such powers do exist.  It
    seems to me therefore that there is an acknowledgement  by  both  legal
    representatives that there is a power for me to hear this appeal.

11. Mr Bramble therefore submits that the  question  to  be  considered  is
    whether or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge had properly  adopted  and
    applied Syed.  He points out that it is not  known  what  documentation
    was served but does refer to paragraph 13 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's determination as far as it relates to documents produced by the
    Respondent.  He points out that the question therefore  remains  as  to
    whether or not those documents have been communicated to the Appellant.
     He acknowledges that he is uncertain as to whether  any  of  the  Home
    Office documents produced were the ones referred to by the Home  Office
    Presenting Officer but he is uncertain as  to  what  further  documents
    could have been provided.  In such circumstances he asked  me  to  find
    that there is no material error of law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  in  granting  permission  invited  the
    Secretary of State to disclose in  any  reply  precisely  the  evidence
    relied upon to prove that the Appellant was given notice of curtailment
    of leave and how the evidence supports that conclusion.   The  Rule  24
    response does no more than to submit that two letters  were  despatched
    to the Appellant by recorded delivery.  Syed is authority stating  that
    the Secretary of State cannot rely upon deemed postal service.  I  find
    the arguments put forward by Miss Kabir to be persuasive.

15. Mr Bramble has argued whilst he is uncertain as to what documents  were
    produced by the Home Office Presenting Officer it is  uncertain  as  to
    what further documents could have been provided by the Home Office  and
    accepts that the Home Office do not have the means to  track  documents
    in order  to  prove  service.   In  such  circumstances  however  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge was wrong in law to find that  the  notice  of
    curtailment was communicated to the Appellant and  therefore  valid  in
    that there is an absence of documents provided  by  the  Respondent  to
    show that that was the case.   In  such  circumstances  the  Judge  has
    failed to apply Syed or to give any analysis of that authority on  this
    particular case.  It is clear that following  Syed  that  the  Tribunal
    would have been most likely to come to a different  conclusion  and  in
    such circumstances there is a material error of law.

16. The correct approach therefore is to find  that  there  is  a  material
    error of law and then to remake the decision allowing the appeal to the
    extent the matter is remitted  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    further and fresh consideration.  I note from  comments  made  by  Miss
    Kabir that if that approach is adopted that the Appellant is  confident
    that she can meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   That  is
    not a matter for this Tribunal to determine and further it is  not  the
    scope of this Tribunal to enforce what could very well be construed  as
    a procedural unfairness to  the  Appellant  and  this  finding  will  I
    acknowledge give the Appellant one final opportunity  to  show  to  the
    Secretary of State that her application is in order and should succeed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is remade allowing the appeal to the  extent
that the matter is remitted back to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  further
consideration.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

