
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th October 2016                       |On 26th October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                            MRS AMMARA CHOUDHARY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patyma, Counsel for Pavandeep Bassi, Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23rd August  1985.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 20th  April  2015
    refusing her application for further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit.  The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly
    and dismissed under the Immigration Rules in a decision promulgated  on
    4th April 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was  made  and  permission  was
    granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  2nd
    September 2016.  The permission states that it  is  arguable  that  the
    findings made by the judge should have led to the conclusion  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  given  the
    extent of the available evidence.  The judge heard  the  argument  that
    the matter should be referred  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    reconsideration with a view to having the Secretary of State  give  the
    Appellant 60 days' notice.  The judge found that that was  an  entirely
    discretionary matter and he could not direct the Secretary of State  to
    make such a decision.  The permission states that given the arguability
    of whether or not the decision was taken in accordance  with  the  law,
    the question of the exercise of discretion would flow from a review  of
    the totality of the facts made on the basis of the available  evidence.
    The permission states that the judge's findings, set out  at  paragraph
    13 could have led to the exercise of discretion in the issuing of a  60
    day notice despite the fact that this may well not be the corollary  of
    the conclusion that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

 3. There is a Rule 24  Response  which  states  that  the  judge  properly
    considered  the  issues,  finding  that  the  Appellant  submitted   an
    application which contained a COS which was not genuine.  The Appellant
    claimed that she was duped by an agent but  the  judge  noted  that  in
    circumstances such as these  there  was  no  remedy  available  to  the
    Appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  was  under  no  obligation  to
    consider granting the Appellant 60  days  to  find  another  COS.   The
    response states that these events are completely outside the  Secretary
    of State's remit.

The Hearing

 4.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the original decision by  the
    Respondent  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   She   submitted
    therefore, that this claim  should  have  been  remitted  back  to  the
    Secretary of State.

 5. I was referred to paragraph 13 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    accepts that the Appellant was duped and  acted  in  good  faith.   The
    judge then states that the difficulty for the Appellant  is  that  that
    does not take her very  far  in  these  proceedings  as  she  does  not
    seriously question or put in issue the authenticity of the  Certificate
    of Sponsorship.  It was not authentic.

 6. Counsel submitted that the refusal letter refuses the application under
    Section 322(1)(A) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  states  that
    false  documents  were  submitted  so  the  Appellant  used  deception.
    Counsel submitted that the Appellant contacted the Home Office as  soon
    as  she  found  out  that  the  Sponsor  was  duping  her  and  so  the
    Respondent's decision cannot be in accordance with the law.

 7. I was referred to the Rule  24  Response  and  Counsel  submitted  that
    because of the Appellant's quick action in this case,  when  she  found
    out about the fraud, the decision issued by the  Respondent  cannot  be
    lawful.  Because of this I was asked to remit this  case  back  to  the
    Respondent.  I was asked to take into account  the  serious  effect  if
    this Appellant has a Section 322(1)(A) finding against her.   She  will
    be unable to make a new application.  I was referred  to  the  skeleton
    argument and the case of AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773.

         "In any event it would be most unfortunate if, merely because of an
         entirely innocent misrepresentation, an applicant had to leave  the
         United Kingdom under a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  which
         stated, as the decision in the case of Mr A has stated,  that  'You
         have used deception in this application.'"

 8. She submitted that if this claim is remitted back to the Home Office it
    is not known what the Home Office decision will be but the decision  in
    place is unsustainable and incorrect.  I was referred to paragraphs  14
    and 15 of the decision in which the judge states that it would  not  be
    competent for him to refer the matter back to the  Secretary  of  State
    for reconsideration with a view to issuing the  Appellant  a  60  days'
    notice.   The  judge  goes  on  to  state  that  that  is  an  entirely
    discretionary matter and he cannot direct the  Secretary  of  State  to
    make such a decision and in any case there is some doubt  that  such  a
    decision would be made.

 9. Counsel submitted that the purpose of  Section  322(1)(A)  which  is  a
    mandatory section, is to ensure that no applications are granted  based
    on false documents but in this case the Appellant is no longer  relying
    on the false document and  the  judge  accepted  that.   She  submitted
    therefore that paragraph 322(1) (A) does not bite and that no deception
    decision should have been made against the Appellant.

10. Counsel submitted that  when  a  decision  is  made  which  is  not  in
    accordance with the law it should be remitted back to the Secretary  of
    State.

11. I was referred to the case of A [2010] EWCA Civ 773  which  deals  with
    the meaning of false representations and the words "whether or  not  to
    the holder's knowledge" in the Rules. This case refers to  applications
    which suffer from an  innocent  misrepresentation  and  this  case  was
    remitted back to the Secretary of State.

12. I was referred to the case of UKUS [2012] UKUT 00307 which  deals  with
    discretion and decisions which are not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
    Counsel submitted that the Respondent reached an unlawful  decision  in
    this case and because  of  that  the  Appellant's  application  remains
    outstanding awaiting a lawful decision.   It is  for  the  Tribunal  to
    determine whether the Respondent is required to make a fresh and lawful
    decision.  Counsel submitted  that  there  was  no  dishonesty  by  the
    appellant in this case.  She submitted  that  the  Respondent's  policy
    relating to false documents should not be held against the Appellant as
    this is an Appellant who was duped and this is accepted by the judge.

13.  The  Presenting  Officer  made  his  submissions  submitting  that  at
    paragraph 13 of the decision the judge states "The Appellant  does  not
    seriously question or put in issue the authenticity of the  Certificate
    of Sponsorship.  It was not authentic.  The Respondent was thus correct
    to refuse the application.  The decision was  a  lawful  one."   I  was
    asked to consider the refusal letter at page 2 which  states  that  the
    COS has been found not to be genuine.

14. I was referred to the cases referred  to  by  Counsel.  The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that these deal with unlawful decisions but the judge
    in this case does not find that the Respondent's decision is  unlawful.
    At paragraph 15 the judge states that it would not be competent for him
    to refer the matter back to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.
     He states that the Secretary of State has no obligation to consider  a
    further 60 day period.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has set out  everything
    properly in his decision and there are no other issues which require to
    be taken into account.  The judge accepts that the decision  is  lawful
    and he submitted that there has been no competent  basis  suggested  by
    the Counsel which would enable a judge to deal  with  this  appeal  and
    remit the application back to the Secretary of State.

16. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that for the judge  to  state  that
    the decision is lawful is a contradiction of his previous finding  that
    the Appellant was duped by the agent.  I was asked to find  that  there
    is a material error of law in the judge's decision.

Decision and Reasons

17. Paragraph  322(1)(A)  states  that  an  appellant's  leave  has  to  be
    cancelled  where  "false  representations  have  been  made  or   false
    documents or information have been submitted (whether or  not  material
    to the application, and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge)".

    In this case a false  document  was  supplied  apparently  without  the
    appellant's  knowledge.   This  is  properly   covered   in   paragraph
    322(1)(A).  The judge is aware of this and it is based on this that  he
    has found the respondent's decision to  be  lawful  and  has  made  his
    decision.

18. The  judge  is  aware  of  the  letters  the  Appellant  wrote  to  the
    Respondent.  Although her letters were not sent  by  recorded  delivery
    her solicitor's letters were.  At paragraph 5 of  the  decision  it  is
    noted that the Appellant's solicitor  stated  that  the  Appellant  had
    faced threatening behaviour towards her  from  her  employers,  Montana
    Bakery, but the Appellant's  evidence  is  that  she  never  worked  at
    Montana Bakery.  This may be a credibility issue or just  an  error  by
    the solicitor as the Appellant stated that  the  threatening  behaviour
    was by the agent and not Montana Bakery.  The appellant did not declare
    that she was using an agent at the time she submitted the application.

19. The judge refers to the submissions of the respondent at paragraph 8 of
    the decision. He states that the authenticity  of  the  Certificate  of
    Sponsorship was not put in issue by the appellant.   She  has  admitted
    that it was not  genuine.   Credibility  issues  were  raised  and  the
    respondent referred to the appellant's lack of  consistency,  the  late
    production of bank statements and  her  solicitor  saying  she  was  in
    employment.

20. This is a points-based  application.   The  Appellant  did  not  attain
    sufficient points as the Certificate of Sponsorship  was  not  genuine.
    At  the  First-tier  hearing  the  representative  accepted  that   the
    Certificate of Sponsorship was not valid.  At paragraph  13  the  judge
    accepts that the Appellant was duped and acted in good faith but in the
    same paragraph the judge states the Respondent was  correct  to  refuse
    the application and that the decision was a lawful one.  This is not  a
    contradiction when the wording of Rule  322(1)(A)  is  considered.   At
    paragraph 16 the judge states that the Secretary of State exercised her
    discretion appropriately.  There has been no competent basis  suggested
    by the Appellant which would have enabled the judge to allow the appeal
    or refer the matter back to the Secretary of State for consideration.

21. The judge's decision is clear.  He finds that the Respondent's decision
    is lawful; he finds that discretion has been  exercised  appropriately;
    he finds that the Respondent was correct to refuse the  application  so
    he has dismissed the appeal.  He was entitled to these findings.

22. With regard to the serious effect on the appellant if she has a section
    322(1) (A) finding against her, the refusal letter makes it clear  that
    any future applications by the appellant for entry clearance  or  leave
    to enter the UK can be submitted one year after the day  on  which  the
    Appellant leaves voluntarily provided she does leave voluntarily at her
    own expense.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the judge's decision and  the  decision
by First-tier Judge Kelly promulgated on 4th April 2016 must stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray         26th October 2016




