
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16373/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On May 13, 2015                               |On May 19, 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR ZEESHAN HUSSAIN SYED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Barnfield, Counsel, instructed by Cartwright King
                        Solicitors
    For the Respondent:     Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan.  The  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post study) migrant on  December  27,  2012
    with entry clearance until March 6, 2014. On March 4, 2014  he  applied
    for a variation of his leave to remain but the respondent refused  this
    application on March 19, 2014 and at the same time a decision was taken
    to  remove  him  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 4, 2014.

 3. On June 19, 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Heynes  (hereinafter
    referred to as the  "FtTJ")  heard  the  appeal  and  in  determination
    promulgated on June 24, 2014 he refused the appeal.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 1, 2014 and on  November
    6, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes refused  permission  to
    appeal finding there was no arguable error in law.  Grounds  of  appeal
    were renewed to the Upper Tribunal and expanded upon and  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Mandalia found there was an arguable  error  in  law  in
    respect of two of the new grounds of appeal. Permission to  appeal  was
    restricted to these two grounds.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date and the  appellant  was  in
    attendance and the parties were represented as set out above.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.

SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Barnfield submitted the FtTJ failed to  have  regard  to  the  Skype
    conversations that had been placed before him. The FtTJ identified  the
    evidence he had taken into account and the Skype conversations did  not
    form part of that evidence.  The  Skype  conversations  confirmed  that
    although they were not together the marriage was subsisting and if  the
    FtTJ had considered the evidence it may have altered his  view  on  the
    evidence. He agreed that the article 8 argument  would  have  no  merit
    unless his first ground succeeded.

 8. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule  24  letter  dated  April  1,  2015.  He
    submitted the FtTJ made numerous adverse findings  at  paragraphs  [18]
    and [19] and the fact the FtTJ  did  not  make  any  reference  to  the
    conversations was not material because the evidence did not address the
    FtTJ's other findings and the conversations and calls  only  covered  a
    ten day period.

 9. Mr Barnfield invited me to have regard to the fact  the  appellant  had
    been unrepresented at the First-tier hearing and ample evidence had now
    been prepared for any future hearing.

FINDINGS

10. This was an application to vary the appellant's leave based on the fact
    that he was now married. The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing
    but the FtTJ had documents that had been submitted  by  the  appellants
    and oral evidence to consider.

11. At paragraph [11] of his determination the FtTJ detailed  some  of  the
    documentary evidence but he did not specifically  refer  to  the  Skype
    conversations. He also made no reference to these anywhere else in  his
    determination. It is this failure that forms  the  cornerstone  of  the
    appeal before me.

12. The background to this marriage was that the appellant joined a  dating
    agency in October 2013 and he  met  the  appellant  in  the  middle  of
    November 2013. According to the application form the relationship began
    when they underwent a religious ceremony on January 12, 2014.

13. The FtTJ rejected the appellant's claim. He accepted people could marry
    quickly and that a newly married couple may choose to live apart but he
    concluded that it was unreasonable, five months after  their  marriage,
    for the parties to still be living apart. The  appellant  continued  to
    work in London and his wife lived and worked in  Manchester.  The  FtTJ
    was unimpressed with the  evidence  and  concluded  the  appellant  had
    chosen to live in shared accommodation and work  in  London.  The  FtTJ
    further noted there was a  lack  of  supporting  evidence  from  family
    members attaching little weight to the bills and bank statements.

14. The evidence of the Skype calls and communication  covered  the  period
    November 16 to November 25, 2013. In other words it covered  the  first
    ten  days  of  them  speaking  and  texting.  Most  of  the  "chat"  is
    untranslated.   Nothing  within  the  translated  part  of   the   chat
    demonstrated any relationship and of course the parties did  not  start
    an actual relationship until January 12, 2014.

15. There was no evidence that the FtTJ had any regard to this evidence but
    in truth there is nothing within this  short  period  that  would  have
    altered the adverse findings made. The document demonstrated there  was
    contact but little else. The  document  did  not  address  any  of  the
    concerns raised by the FtTJ.

16. I therefore find the failure by the FtTJ to demonstrate he  had  regard
    to the Skype evidence is not material. As the first ground failed there
    is no merit to the second ground.

DECISION

17. There was no material error. I uphold the original decision.


Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The substantive appeal under the Immigration Rules failed  and  I  therefore
make no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
