


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
      IA/16659/2015
      IA/17441/2015
      IA/17443/2015
      IA/17446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 16th August 2017                   |On: 18th August 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     OH
                                     EO
                                  Master O
                                   Miss H
                          (anonymity direction made)

                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Mensah, Counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all nationals of Nigeria. They are  respectively  a
    father, mother and two minor children. On the 16th  December  2016  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Buster Cox) allowed their linked appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds. At the centre of his reasoning was the  position  of
    Master O (the Third Respondent), a child who has lived continuously  in
    the United Kingdom for over 7 years, and who has  been  diagnosed  with
    autism. Judge Cox did not consider it to be reasonable to  expect  that
    child to leave the UK and go  to  live  in  Nigeria  and  so,  applying
    s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  allowed
    the linked appeals.


 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department now  has  permission  to
    appeal against that decision,  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pedro on the 25th May 2017. The grounds of appeal can be  distilled  as
    follows:

              i) That nowhere in the determination does the  Judge  consider
                 whether there  is  treatment  for  autism  in  Nigeria,  in
                 particular "the wealth of information relating  to  medical
                 treatment/support in Nigeria that is in the public domain";


             ii) That the Judge "does not deal" with the evidence  that  the
                 child was "quite low on the spectrum";

            iii) That the Judge misdirected himself as to MA (Pakistan)  and
                 the "unduly harsh" criterion  and  in  particular  that  he
                 failed to consider the expense to the public purse in  this
                 family being allowed to remain. In that respect reliance is
                 placed on EV (Phillippines);

             iv) The Judge failed to make findings on what the circumstances
                 of the family might be if they were returned to Nigeria.



 3. The appeal was opposed on all grounds by Ms Mensah.




    Discussion and Findings


    Ground (i): Treatment for Autism


 4. As Ms Mensah made clear in her excellent submissions, this case had not
    been put on the basis of Article 3 ECHR. Nor was it argued that it  was
    an absence of  care  for  autism  itself  which  rendered  the  child's
    relocation to Nigeria unreasonable. Rather,  the  case  rested  on  the
    uncontested evidence in the large bundle of country background material
    which indicated that a child with  this  condition  would  likely  face
    significant  social  prejudice  up  to  and  including  accusations  of
    witchcraft being levelled against  the  family.  Expert  evidence  from
    specialist NGO  'Stepping  Stones'  was  produced  detailing  how  such
    accusations can lead to significant harm for the child involved.   That
    evidence was rightly given significant weight by  the  Tribunal.     It
    was the evidence of social stigma that was considered of relevance. The
    evidence about 'treatment' was not particularly pertinent, particularly
    since there is in fact no 'treatment' available for autism.


 5. Accordingly, I find that this ground has no merit at all.  I would  add
    this. The grounds of appeal complain that the Tribunal failed  to  take
    into  account  "the  wealth  of   information   relating   to   medical
    treatment/support in Nigeria that is  in  the  public  domain".   Leave
    should never have been granted on this ground. It is unarguable. First,
    as I note above, there is no 'treatment' available to this child and as
    such the point is irrelevant. Secondly it is no part of a Judge's  duty
    to go and find evidence that the parties themselves have not  produced.
    The Secretary of State chose not to provide any background material  on
    autism in Nigeria. She cannot expect the Judge to go and  find  it  for
    himself, much less criticise him for a failure  to  do  so.    Had  the
    Judge done so, it would plainly have been an error of  law.   I  assume
    that the drafter of the grounds  did  not  mean  to  suggest  that  the
    'treatment' of children with autism in Nigeria was a  matter  of  which
    judicial notice could have been taken.





    Ground (ii):  Evidence of Autism


 6. I am unclear what the point being made is here.  The  grounds  complain
    that the Tribunal failed to take  into  account  evidence  (before  the
    Secretary of State)  that this child  was  at  the  lower  end  of  the
    spectrum and that his condition was improving.   There was a very large
    bundle of  material  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerning  the
    current condition of Master O and the support that he receives  in  the
    UK.  It came inter alia from a social worker attached  to  the  family,
    from a senior nurse with long-standing involvement in Master O's  care,
    a consultant community  paediatrician,  the  SEN  co-ordinator  at  his
    school, the manager of a specialist autism youth centre he attends, and
    from the  family  health  visitor.   The  Tribunal  also  heard  direct
    evidence from the child's parents about his current behaviour  and  how
    he was likely to be perceived by  others.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Tribunal had regard to the totality of that evidence. The determination
    acknowledges, for instance, the evidence from the SEN  co-ordinator  at
    school that Master O is able to take  part  in  educational  activities
    such as maths and literacy, (albeit with a specialist support  worker).
    It  also  notes  the  evidence  that  notwithstanding  his  ability  to
    integrate to that extent he requires intensive support (ibid) and  that
    he "struggles with social situations" (the manager  of  the  specialist
    youth centre).   Wherever the child was on the spectrum the  point  was
    that he would behave in a perceptibly different way to others and  that
    it would be this that would expose him to the risk  of  discrimination,
    stigma and potential harm in Nigeria.




    Ground (iii): 'Unduly harsh?'


 7. I need not address this ground in any detail save  to  record  that  Mr
    Diwnycz conceded it  to  be  entirely  misconceived.  This  was  not  a
    deportation and as such the test of undue harshness played no  part  in
    the Tribunal's deliberations.   I would add that EV Philippines  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 was similarly of little relevance, relating as it did to a
    child with only four years' residence.  The  child  in  this  case  was
    'qualifying' and that was  why  the  considerations  in  s117B(6)  were
    engaged.  Insofar as the grounds make specific reference to the  burden
    that this family might place on the public  purse,  that  is  a  matter
    expressly weighed in the  balance  at  paragraphs  68  and  73  of  the
    determination.



    Ground (iv): Life in Nigeria


 8. As is perhaps evident from the reasoning above, this was not  going  to
    be an issue that was of any particular weight in the  determination  of
    this appeal. The autism of Master O was the  defining  feature  of  the
    evidence, and the reasoning. I am not satisfied  that  any  finding  on
    whether his parents might be able to, for instance, find  accommodation
    in Nigeria could have made any possible difference to the outcome.




    Conclusions


 9. The Judge's starting point was that none of these individual appellants
    could meet the requirements of the immigration rules.    Neither  adult
    could hope to qualify under Appendix FM or 276ADE,  and  neither  child
    had reached the 'seven year' mark at the date that the applications had
    been made: this meant that notwithstanding the position at the date  of
    hearing, they had not met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),
    which specifically requires the applicant to be a 'qualifying child' at
    the date of application [38]. What follows is that the  Judge  properly
    directs himself to relevant statute and caselaw [40-42]; he has  regard
    to the findings of an earlier Tribunal and justifiably directs  himself
    that the earlier, negative, findings in respect of the adult  witnesses
    was a matter to be taken  into  account  in  assessing  their  evidence
    before him [45]; the determination then embarks on a  careful  analysis
    of the evidence relating to Master O before reaching findings on  'best
    interests' [46-60], before finally weighing on the other  side  of  the
    scales the countervailing factors such as the parents' poor credibility
    [69] their "blatant disregard for UK immigration laws" [71]  and  their
    failure  to  demonstrate  financial  independence  [68].    I  am   not
    satisfied that the Secretary of State has even arguably established any
    error in approach.




    Anonymity Order

10. This appeal concerns a  claim  for  protection  involving  two  minors.
    Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to  make  an  order  in  the
    following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Respondents are granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify any of them,  nor any  member
        of their family.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  both
        the Appellant and the Respondents.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




      Decisions


11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.


12. The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.

13. There is an order for anonymity.


      [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     15th
                                 August 2017










