
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16899/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 11th December 2014                         |On 20th January 2015           |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                             GURPREET SINGH GILL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the hearing  there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  I observed that notice of the hearing had been sent to both
    the appellant and  representatives,  Kumari-Banga  Solicitors,  on  3rd
    November 2014 and had not been returned in the post.  Having regard  to
    the provisions  of  paragraph  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 I was satisfied that it was in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed in the absence of the appellant.

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I continue to  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. On 9th October 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chohan  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal S J Pacey in which he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    immigration and human  rights  grounds  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse leave to remain in accordance with the  provisions
    of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4.  In  granting  permission  Judge  Chohan  noted  that  the  grounds  of
    application submitted that the judge erred  by  making  a  freestanding
    Article  8  assessment  without  considering  whether  there  were  any
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules to
    take that step. Judge Chohan also noted that the judge had  found  that
    the appellant had done nothing wrong and appeared to have much sympathy
    for his circumstances, but that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    given insufficient reasons  for  finding  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances for allowing the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Johnstone contended  that  the  appellant's
    claimed loss of his passport through alleged negligence by  his  agent,
    Brighter Vision Company, did not  amount  to  compelling  circumstances
    which could lead to a grant of leave to remain outside the  Immigration
    Rules even if only to extend his leave until he could obtain a  further
    travel document.

 6. There were no submissions before me for the appellant  although  I  had
    regard to the original grounds of  appeal,  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's application and the findings of the First-tier Judge.

 7. The decision does not show that the judge gave consideration to whether
    or not the appellant's circumstances in requiring an extension  to  his
    visa to obtain a passport or travel document actually gave  rise  to  a
    breach  of  his  Article  8  rights.   Although  the  judge  reaches  a
    conclusion in paragraph  13  of  the  decision  that  the  respondent's
    refusal was disproportionate in Article 8 terms, he has  not  explained
    how the circumstances gave rise to a breach of private life  or  family
    life.

 8. It appears  that  the  judge  also  applied  the  test  of  "compelling
    circumstances" set out in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) wrongly,  not
    only because such a test has been said to be unnecessary by  the  Court
    of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985, but because the judge  appears  to
    have considered that the appellant's loss of his passport  through  the
    negligence of his agent as  amounting  to  such  circumstances  without
    considering whether the loss could lead to a breach of Article  8.   On
    this basis the decision shows a material error on a point of  law  such
    that it should be re-made.

Re-making the decision

 9. The appellant did not appear at the hearing to  give  evidence  of  any
    additional circumstances, other than the loss of  his  passport,  which
    might have given rise to a breach of Article 8 rights  which,  applying
    the Razgar five stage tests, might lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    respondent's decision  was  disproportionate.   On  the  basis  of  the
    circumstances as set out in the decision of the first judge (which have
    not been criticised by the respondent) it is not possible to reach  the
    conclusion that the appellant's Article 8 rights are engaged.  On  this
    basis the first of the Razgar  tests  cannot  be  passed.   The  appeal
    therefore has to be dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a  point  of
law such that it should be re-made.  I re-make the  decision  by  dismissing
the appeal on immigration and human rights grounds.

Anonymity

Anonymity was  not  requested  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  do  I
consider it appropriate.



Signed        Date 20th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEES AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 20th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
