
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16764/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 November 2013                           |On 2 December 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS QIANQIAN XU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance or representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appeal is that of the Secretary of  State  who  appeals  against  a
    decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sangha  who  in   a
    determination promulgated on 30 August 2013 allowed the  appeal  of  Ms
    Qianqian Xu against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  her
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).  Although the Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before me,  I  will  for  ease  of
    reference refer to her as the respondent  as  she  was  the  respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, I will refer to Ms Qianqian
    Xu as the appellant as she was  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.    There was no appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   The
    appellant had stated in her original appeal form that her  address  was
    2/2, 3 Halmiltonhill Gardens G22 5PR. I consider that it is likely that
    she meant to write the address as Hamiltonhill Gardens. The  notice  of
    hearing was sent to 2/2, 3 Halmilton Gardens G22 5PR.  Given  that  the
    postcode was correct and given that the address is virtually correct  I
    considered that it would not be appropriate or necessary to  re-reserve
    the notice and that it was appropriate to  determine the appeal in  the
    absence of the appellant.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of China, born on  1  August  1986.   Having
    studied at Glasgow University she made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under the points-based system.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary  of  State.   There  were  two
    reasons for the refusal.  The first was that although the appellant had
    provided a job title  that  was  listed  in  Appendix  J  she  had  not
    submitted appropriate evidence to show  that  she  was  active  in  the
    occupation of her business, Xu's  Chinese  Translation  &  Interpreting
    Limited and that the advertising material which she had  submitted  did
    not fulfil the requirements of the Rules.  Secondly, it was stated that
    she had not given appropriate evidence that she had the funds necessary
    for the application.

4.   The appellant appealed.  In her grounds of appeal she  referred  to  an
    advertisement  which  she  had  submitted  and  stated  that  she   was
    submitting an updated advertisement which contained her full  name  and
    therefore met the requirements of the Rules.  She also stated that  she
    had submitted a bank statement letter and  balance  statement  to  show
    that she had access to funds held in the Bank of Scotland.

5.   The appellant did not request an oral hearing of the  appeal.   It  was
    therefore dealt with on the papers before the judge at Birmingham on 19
    August.  The judge set out his findings  of  fact  and  conclusions  in
    paragraphs 12 onwards.   He  considered  the  advertisement  which  the
    appellant had submitted after the refusal and considered  that  it  met
    the requirements of the Rules.  He stated that therefore "assuming that
    all the other requirements  are  met  and,  there  is  nothing  in  the
    respondent's refusal letter to show that they have not been met,  I  am
    satisfied that the advertisement that the appellant has annexed to  the
    grounds of appeal does show his (sic)  full  name  and  therefore  that
    would meet  the  requirements  listed  at  paragraph  41-SD(c)(iii)  of
    Appendix A of the Rules."  He therefore allowed the appeal.

6.    The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  pointing  out  firstly  that  the
    advertisement which had been submitted and which the  judge  found  met
    the requirements of  the  Rules  had  not  been  submitted  before  the
    decision and therefore under the provisions of Section 85A that was not
    admissible.  Moreover, the grounds argued that the judge had been wrong
    to find that the appellant had access to funds.

7.   I have considered the grounds of appeal.  It is correct that the  judge
    relied on the advertisement which  was  submitted  after  the  date  of
    decision and clearly he was wrong to do that.  More importantly perhaps
    however there is no evidence whatsoever that the appellant  had  access
    to the relevant funds.  It is unclear why the judge considered that she
    would meet that requirement of the Rules.  I  therefore  consider  that
    there are material errors of law in the determination of the judge  and
    I set aside his decision.

8.    In re-making the decision, for the reasons which I  set  out  above  I
    find that the appellant has not met the requirements of the Rules.  Not
    only had she not provided the requisite financial evidence but also she
    had not provided an advertisement which met  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

9.   For those reasons, having set aside the  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Judge I re-make the decision and dismiss this immigration  appeal.   It
    was not argued that the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR were infringed by the decision and I can see  no  basis  on  which
    that conclusion could be reached.


Decision.
This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
