
[pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 August 2014                            |On 7 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             NWABUEZE PETER OGU
                        (NO anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble
For the Respondent:    Mr Onipede


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Ogu is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1966.  On 25 January 2010 he was
    granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK under Article 8 ECHR on
    the basis of family life.  On 22 February  2013  he  sought  a  further
    grant of discretionary leave which was refused in a decision made on 22
    April 2013, the Secretary of State indicating that Mr Ogu had failed to
    provide sufficient evidence to show that he was still enjoying a family
    life with Helen Ogu and their children.  Indeed, he had stated that  he
    was no longer living as a family unit.

 2. He appealed, claiming that he is the father of two minor  children  who
    were both born in the UK and are lawfully residing in this country.  He
    is still exercising his family life.  He and his wife had gone  through
    a crisis which led to their separation.   They  had  undergone  serious
    financial problems which led to them losing their  family  home  though
    eviction and the financial  stress  had  affected  their  relationship.
    They have now reconciled and the local council from whom his  wife  had
    sought help have supported them.  There is a  rental/tenancy  agreement
    in the name of his wife and payments in respect of rent are  made  from
    Mr Ogu's bank account.

 3. Mr Ogu's appeal was heard at Hatton Cross on 3 January 2014 by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese who, in a determination promulgated on
    25 January 2014, allowed the appeal.

 4. His findings are at paragraphs [23] to [28].  He found that Mr Ogu  had
    established family life in the UK with his partner  and  two  children,
    that 'they are now living as a family unit and his  wife  and  children
    were in attendance at the hearing'.  The judge noted that Mr Ogu's wife
    gave oral evidence and was 'in full support of the  Appellant  and  his
    appeal.  More fundamentally she gave evidence that despite difficulties
    that they might have had the relationship is  genuine  and  subsisting'
    [23].

 5. The judge went on at [24]) to find that 'the removal of Mr Ogu from the
    UK would bring about  severe  and  grave  consequences  for  the  other
    members of the family bearing in mind the fact that they have  reunited
    and that even during the period between November 2011 and December 2012
    (he) continued to visit his partner and children in the  family  home'.
    While there had been inconsistencies about the number of times  he  had
    visited them the judge, however, 'overall found it to be credible  that
    he did continue to play an important part in the children's life'.

 6. He went on to find that Mr Ogu's 'partner  and  children  would  suffer
    adversely if he were to be removed'.  He also found that 'it would  not
    be in their interest for them to be asked to continue their family life
    in Nigeria,  certainly  for  the  children  they  are  unfamiliar  with
    Nigeria' [25].

 7.  Returning,  in  considering   proportionality,   to   the   issue   of
    inconsistencies in relation to when he had moved back into  the  family
    home the judge noted a letter from  Mr  Ogu's  representatives  stating
    that he had not moved back into the family home.   However,  the  judge
    found Mr Ogu and his partner 'to be credible  overall  because  of  the
    fact that they both say that at that particular time (he) was  residing
    at the property on an ad hoc basis but that he most certainly was there
    during the weekends when she was at work and when  he  would  take  the
    children to church'.  The judge concluded that  Mr  Ogu  'continued  to
    play an important part in the family and that his wife and himself were
    at that particular time going through a  difficult  period  which  they
    have managed to overcome and which took some time for them to do so but
    the role of the Appellant within the family did not cease' [26].

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was refused by
    a judge on  1  May  2014.   On  reapplication  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    permission was granted on 25 June 2014.

 9. At the error of law hearing at  which  Mr  Ogu,  his  partner  and  two
    children were present, Mr Bramble did not seek  to  argue  one  of  the
    grounds, namely, that the judge failed adequately to give  reasons  for
    accepting the inconsistencies in the account.   He  accepted  that  the
    fact  that discretionary leave had previously been granted on the basis
    of family life did not assist the Secretary of State. His sole,  brief,
    point was to question whether the judge's reasoning was adequate on the
    issue of family life in Nigeria.

10. Mr Bramble acknowledged that if error of law was found and the decision
    had to be remade the family's position would be strong as the  children
    would be 'qualifying children' under paragraph 117B(6)(a)  and  (b)  of
    the Immigration Rules having lived here for seven years continuously.

11. Mr Onipede's  position  was  simply  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    adequate.

12. I can deal with this in brief.  It is not disputed that the  judge  was
    entitled on the evidence before him to find that Mr Ogu had,  following
    a period of separation, re-established family life with his partner and
    two children  and  that  he  was  playing  an  important  part  in  the
    children's lives.  As was noted discretionary leave had been granted in
    2010 on the basis of family life in the same family unit.  They are all
    Nigerian citizens and have been lawfully in the UK.  His  two  children
    were born here in 2004 and 2007.

13. The judge clearly did consider family life  in  Nigeria.  He  correctly
    considered the impact of Mr Ogu's removal on third parties, namely  his
    family members, finding as indicated at [24]  that  his  removal  would
    bring about 'severe and grave consequences' for the rest of the  family
    and that particularly for  the  children  it  would  not  be  in  their
    interests for them to continue their family life in Nigeria as they are
    'unfamiliar with Nigeria'.

14. As both children were born in the UK and have lived  their  lives  here
    and his partner has lived here for over ten years such  conclusion  was
    one which on the evidence was properly open to him.  His  reasoning  is
    adequate. He properly identified compelling circumstances that outweigh
    public interest considerations.

15. I see no material error in the judge's findings and conclusions.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision allowing the appeal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                  13 August 2014

