
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16640/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4th May 2017                       |On 17th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                    [N B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on [ ] 1978.  The  Appellant
    has an extensive immigration history which is set out within the Notice
    of Refusal.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 27th September  1988.
    She made a previous application back in March 2003 for leave to  remain
    as a spouse and that application was refused  on  25th  November  2005.
    The Appellant's appeal was appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed and a further application for leave to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules issued on 7th  February  2006  was
    subsequently decided on 13th September 2008 when  the  application  was
    refused with no right of  appeal.   Nothing  further  appears  to  have
    happened until a Statement of Additional Grounds  was  lodged  on  15th
    October 2014 supporting an application made on 30th September 2014  for
    a human rights claim for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
    basis of the Appellant's family life with [DT] and on  the  grounds  of
    private life.  That application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    in a decision and a Notice of Refusal dated 8th April 2015.

 2. Against that extensive  background  the  Appellant  lodged  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal was heard before Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on 4th  August
    2016.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15th  August  2015  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 26th August 2016 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  That application for permission to  appeal  was  refused  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 1st February 2017.  Renewed  Grounds
    of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal  on  28th  February  2017.
    Those renewed grounds appeared to mirror the original grounds.

 4. On 17th March 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington granted permission to
    appeal.  Judge Rimington noted that the grounds asserted that the judge
    had overlooked evidence and was in breach of the  Appellant's  and  her
    mother's human rights for whom she cared.  Judge Rimington  noted  that
    there was only limited written evidence in the appeal and minimal up-to-
    date evidence and bearing  in  mind  the  Appellant  was  unrepresented
    before the First-tier Tribunal and there were documented mental  health
    issues it was arguable, just, that the judge had failed to give  weight
    to the oral evidence of the Appellant and the passage of time since the
    previous decision over ten years' previously and had  given  inadequate
    reasoning when assessing family life with the Appellant's mother.

 5. On 31st March 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Layne.  The Secretary of State appears by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Clarke.

Preliminary Issue

 7. It is pointed out to me  that  the  decision  on  the  application  for
    permission to appeal granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  makes
    reference to the fact that the grounds assert inter alia that the judge
    did not take into account that the Appellant was in fear of  return  to
    Jamaica.  It is the agreement of both Mr Layne and Mr Clarke that  that
    aspect was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge nor is it raised as
    an  issue.   In  such  circumstances  by  consent  that  allegation  is
    withdrawn.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Layne points out that the  Appellant  was  not  legally  represented
    before Judge Sweet and that there was no  Appellant's  bundle,  witness
    statement or up-to-date medical evidence.  He submits that this  is  of
    some relevance.  He acknowledges that it is the  responsibility  of  an
    Appellant to provide their documentation but contends that the issue in
    question which relates to the family life  that  the  Appellant  enjoys
    with her mother had not properly been addressed at paragraph 24 of  the
    decision and that this is the only paragraph in the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge's decision that gives any consideration to this aspect.

 9. Mr Layne further submits that the judge was  unaware  as  to  what  the
    Appellant's mother's health issues were or of the  assistance  provided
    by the Appellant as none of these issues were before the judge when  he
    gave due consideration to  the  contentions  made  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf.  He points out that the only evidence  was  from  the  previous
    hearing some ten years' previously and submits  that  this  is  a  case
    where the issues go beyond normal emotional ties and that there was  an
    exceptional  dependency  which  was  not  addressed   and   that   this
    represented the essence of the Appellant's case and that  this  is  set
    out in the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits that the failure of the judge
    to address these issues constitute a material error of law and he asked
    me to set aside the decision and for the matter to be remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In response Mr Clarke points out that the contention for family life is
    based on a dependency and that there were  some  documents  before  the
    Tribunal as to be found within the Secretary of State's bundle and that
    the  medical  documents  provided  relating  to  the  health   of   the
    Appellant's mother were not that old being from 2015.  He submits  that
    what is being argued  is  that  the  level  of  care  provided  to  the
    Appellant's mother cannot be provided by the Appellant's  brothers  and
    is  such  that  it  forms  family  life.   He  asks  me  to  give   due
    consideration to the evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He takes me through those documents in the  Appellant's  bundle
    starting with a letter from the South London  and  Maudsley  NHS  Trust
    written by the clinical psychologist and  also  going  on  to  consider
    witness statement evidence and further  correspondence  produced  going
    back to June 2006 from Dr Babbs.  He takes me  in  detail  through  the
    correspondence   within   that   file   including   GP   evidence   and
    correspondence dating from 9th February 2015.  His submission is  clear
    that once those documents  are  looked  at  together  the  most  recent
    evidence, which is only some twelve months prior to the  hearing,  does
    not indicate the level of intimate care relied upon by the Appellant.







11. He submits that the judge's approach was correct  and  that  the  judge
    followed the principles  set  out  in  Devaseelan  noting  the  adverse
    credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge back in 2006
    and pointing out that there was no corroborative  evidence  before  the
    judge relating to the contentions made by the Appellant and that it was
    open to the Judge to make the findings that he did at paragraph 24.  He
    asked me to dismiss the appeal.

12. For the sake of completeness Mr Clarke takes me back  to  the  original
    grounds and to points which are not specifically  argued  by  Mr  Layne
    namely the account made by the Appellant's mother and brothers and  the
    precariousness of status and that of the Appellant and that taking  all
    issues into account the judge's findings had been fair.

13. Mr Layne indicates he has no further submissions to make to me.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

16. The thrust of Mr Layne's submissions are that the judge has  failed  to
    take into account contentions that are made of the level  of  care  and
    dependency that the Appellant states she provides to her  mother.   The
    reference to family life with [DT] which was the basis upon  which  the
    human rights claim was made in September 2014  is  effectively  not  an
    issue that is raised before me.  Mr Layne's  argument  is  that  family
    life has not been addressed properly and that the judge  did  not  know
    the extent of the health issues of the Appellant's mother and  that  he
    should have adjourned the case to enable further evidence  to  be  made
    available if he thought that was appropriate.  I reject that  approach.
    I acknowledge that the Appellant is, or certainly was, at that  time  a
    litigant in person.  However the Appellant has been in this country for
    a number of years, she speaks fluent English and she has  adult  family
    members.  It is not for either the Tribunal nor the Secretary of  State
    to make the Appellant's case.  It is quite clear that if the  Appellant
    wished to make the contentions that she  did  regarding  the  level  of
    dependency that was  open  to  her  at  the  time  that  she  made  her
    application and gave evidence and it is equally clear that the evidence
    that is available, some of which is only twelve  months  prior  to  the
    date of hearing, does not support in any manner  the  contentions  that
    are made as to the level of dependency that the Appellant contends that
    she provides.

17. That however is only incidental to  the  contentions  that  are  extant
    before me.  The  issues  are  effectively  whether  or  not  the  judge
    addressed the issue of family life properly.  I am  satisfied  that  on
    the very limited evidence that was available the judge has  undoubtedly
    carried out such an exercise.  I acknowledge that the  judge  has  only
    provided two paragraphs on the issue relating to the care  provided  by
    the Appellant to her mother.  The main aspect relates to that  provided
    at paragraph  24.   It  is  seemingly  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    brothers who live with the mother  provide  support  albeit  that  they
    work.  There is absolutely nothing wrong with what the judge  has  said
    in his assessment at paragraph 24.  He has started with a quite correct
    analysis that this is a claim based on family life with  an  adult  and
    has noted that the two brothers live with their mother and are able  to
    provide similar care.  Based on all the facts that were before him  the
    judge has come to conclusions that he was perfectly  entitled  to.   In
    addition the judge has analysed the law quite properly and carefully at
    paragraph 23.

18. The issues are in effect very properly addressed by Ms Everett  in  her
    Rule 24 response.  Paragraphs 3 to 5 set out the Secretary  of  State's
    position and I am satisfied that they succinctly  reflect  the  correct
    analysis in this matter.  The judge was entitled to take  the  previous
    determination  as  his  starting  point  and  acknowledging  that   the
    Appellant's private life had strengthened since then.   The  judge  was
    entitled to make the uncontroversial finding that the Appellant  cannot
    meet the Rules and proceeded to determine the Article 8 claim.   As  Ms
    Everett submits the judge directed himself appropriately and has  given
    cogent reasons for the findings made.  As to the principle issue as  to
    whether the matter should have been adjourned for medical evidence I am
    perfectly satisfied that the judge was entitled to  make  the  findings
    that he did on the evidence that was before him and that it  was  open,
    had the Appellant sought to do so, to produce further evidence but that
    she failed to do so.  The Appellant was perfectly capable of  producing
    such evidence had she wanted to or if it was available.





19. In all the circumstances this is  a  well  reasoned  judgment  set  out
    clearly and distinctly and analyses the relevant factors.  It discloses
    for all the above reasons  no  material  errors  of  law  and  in  such
    circumstances the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 9th May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 9th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

