
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16399/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      mr RICHARD OLUWAFOLAHANMI AWOYEMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Beach, Counsel, instructed by Estate and
Corporate Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins (the judge), promulgated  on  19  May
    2016, in which she allowed the  appeal  of  Mr  Awoyemi  on  Article  8
    grounds.  That appeal was against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 22 April 2015, refusing his human rights claim.

 2. In essence the basis of that claim was that Mr Awoyemi had  arrived  in
    this country on 9 December 2004 aged 12 and had resided in this country
    ever since.  His mother and younger sister R  had  also  resided  here.
    They had been granted limited leave to remain.  The Appellant, although
    an adult, had lived with his mother and sister throughout.  He had been
    educated in this country and it was said that he  had  a  special  bond
    with R in light of the particular family circumstances.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge found that all of the evidence put forward by  the  Appellant
    was credible (see paragraph 54).   On  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    representative's position taken at the hearing the  judge  went  on  to
    consider Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules  (see  paragraph  66).   In
    paragraph 67 the judge found that there was family life as between  the
    Appellant and his mother and sister.  At paragraph 68 she  goes  on  to
    find that the Appellant's removal would constitute an interference with
    that family life and then  concludes  that  in  all  the  circumstances
    removal would be disproportionate.  In paragraph 69 the judge turns  to
    consider the Appellant's private life  and  again  finds  that  removal
    would be disproportionate in that respect.




The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal

 4. The grounds are fairly brief.  It is of note that they relate solely to
    the issue of the Appellant's private life.  It is said that  the  judge
    did not have regard to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 in respect of the private life.  It is said  that  some
    weight had been given to the Appellant's private  life  but  that  "lip
    service" had been paid to  the  statutory  factors  in  the  2002  Act.
    Finally, it is said that the judge failed  to  make  relevant  findings
    relating to the private life, and that whilst the  Appellant's  conduct
    in this country may have been  exemplary,  "it  should  not  allow  the
    Appellant to benefit in contravention of immigration law".




The grant of permission

 5. In granting permission Judge Simpson refers to  the  challenge  to  the
    private life conclusions set out in the Secretary of  State's  grounds.
    She goes on at the end of  paragraph  3  to  observe  that  whilst  the
    Respondent had not challenged the judge's findings as to  family  life,
    it was in her view arguable that the judge had failed to  give  any  or
    any  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that   family   life   would   be
    disproportionately interfered with.

 6. Subsequent to the grant of permission made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Simpson on 26 September  2016  no  written  application  to  amend  the
    grounds was forthcoming from the Secretary of State.

 7. No such application was made prior to the grant of permission once  the
    original application for permission to appeal had been lodged.




The hearing before me

 8. At the outset of the hearing I was provided with a copy of  a  Rule  24
    response by Ms Beach.  Having considered that I pointed out to Mr Singh
    the  limited  scope  of  the  grounds  as  set  out  in  the   original
    application.  He acknowledged that no application had ever been made to
    amend the grounds either before the grant of permission or  thereafter.
    He himself made no such application before me.

 9. I make it clear that even if such an  application  had  been  made,  or
    indeed was implicitly made  by  Mr  Singh,  I would  refuse  it.   The
    Secretary of State has  had  every  opportunity  to  draft  appropriate
    grounds  following  receipt  of  the  judge's  decision  in  the  first
    instance, and thereafter once the application was lodged, and yet again
    after permission to appeal was granted.  There has been no  explanation
    whatsoever as to why no such application to amend has been made.  There
    is no excuse whatsoever for the inertia on the part of the Secretary of
    State and it is not what I would regard as  a  Robinson  obvious  point
    given that the judge has provided findings, reasons and conclusions  on
    the family life issue, including reference to section 117B of the  2002
    Act.

10. In light of the  above  Mr  Singh  quite  fairly  recognised  that  his
    challenge to the judge's decision was  confined  to  the  private  life
    issue.  He also recognised that in light of the lack  of  challenge  to
    the family  life  issue  his  position  in  this  appeal  was  somewhat
    undermined, to say the least.

11. Ms Beach relied on her Rule 24 response.




Decision on error of law

12. I conclude that there are no material errors of law by the judge.

13. She made findings on the existence of family life in  paragraph  67  of
    her decision and those findings were to be seen of course in  light  of
    the fact that she had found all  of  the  evidence  before  her  to  be
    credible.   She  has  sustainably  found  that  there   would   be   an
    interference with the family life if the Appellant were to  be  removed
    and concluded, albeit in somewhat brief terms, that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate in all the circumstances.

14. As none of this has been challenged by the Secretary of State on appeal
    I conclude that all the matters were open to the judge.

15. Any possible shortcomings in respect of  the  private  life  issue  are
    therefore beside the point.

16. I would just add that in my view the judge did in any  event  have  the
    requirements  of  section  117B  in  mind,  having  referred  to   them
    previously in paragraph 53 and again in paragraph 69.

17. In light of the above the decision of the judge stands.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 10 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


