





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal NumberS: IA/16701/2015
                                                               IA/16702/2015
                                                               IA/16703/2015
                                                               IA/16704/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 19 December 2016                 |On: 23 January 2017                  |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                  Saida [M]
                                  Fredy [M]
                                   [A H B]
                                   [W H B]
                        no anonymity directions made
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Naqvi, Irvine Thanvi Nata Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Bolivia, born on 1  November  1978,  10
    July 1969, 11 August 2007 and 11 March 2013 respectively. Their appeals
    against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  their  applications  for
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules were allowed to the limited
    extent that the matter was returned to the respondent to  consider  the
    children's best interests "and her interpretation of Exception EX.1."

 2. On  16  November  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman  granted  the
    appellants permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge reached his decision without  giving  the  appellants  a
    fair opportunity to deal with issues not previously  put  to  them  and
    moreover made findings of  fact  about  their  international  movements
    which  may  be  shown  by  the  letter  from   the   Bolivian   embassy
    constructively to amount to an error of law, and which may require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 3. He  also  noted  that  although  there  was  no  cross  appeal  by  the
    respondent, and that the matter was not raised by the  appellants,  the
    terms of the Judge's disposal may also require consideration.

 4.  Mr  Naqvi,  who  represented  the  appellants  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, contended that during the course of the hearing on  22  April
    2016, the Judge did not at any stage mention the  serious  point  about
    the appellants' apparent "illegal cross border movement" at  [32].  Nor
    did he ask the appellants  any  "logical  questions"  to  decipher  the
    facts. Nor was the representative afforded the opportunity to  ask  the
    appellants any questions to address  the  Judge's  concerns  about  the
    appellants' apparent illegal cross border movement or make  submissions
    in relation to that point.

 5. This was a case where the Home Office was unrepresented.

 6. It was also contended that it was "wholly illogical" for the  Judge  to
    find that the parents who are without status and who are accompanied by
    young children, would be allowed to depart  to  visit  Spain  and  then
    Bolivia and then return to the UK on two separate occasions.

 7. He submitted that the appellants have managed to obtain a  letter  from
    the Bolivian Embassy  dated  6  June  2016  which  confirmed  that  the
    appellants applied for a new document, namely a new Bolivian  passport,
    at their consular offices in London, and  that  some  of  the  Bolivian
    passports had been printed by their immigration office at  La  Paz  and
    the other Bolivian passport in their branch in Madrid.

 8. Had this issue been raised by the respondent in the refusal letter, the
    appellants would have been able to approach  the  Bolivian  embassy  in
    support of their appeal. In the event that the Judge  had  raised  this
    point at the hearing, the appellants would have made an application  to
    adjourn so as to enable them to obtain this letter.

 9. In the circumstances, the finding by the Judge at [40] that  there  was
    illegal cross border movement is grave and affects the  other  findings
    and credibility.

10. Mr Naqvi produced  a  letter  dated  6  June  2016  from  the  Consular
    Selection of the Embassy of  Bolivia  in  London  certifying  that  the
    appellants applied for a new  document  in  their  consular  office  in
    London, some of them had been printed by the immigration office  in  La
    Paz and the other in their branch in Madrid.

11. In the circumstances, Mr Singh very fairly accepted that there has been
    a material error of law affecting the subsequent findings by the Judge.



12. In the circumstances the parties agreed that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside and thereafter remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a fresh decision to be made.

    Assessment

13. I have had regard to the documentation presented and am satisfied  that
    there has been a procedural irregularity in that the Judge reached  his
    decision without giving the appellants a fair opportunity to deal  with
    issues not put to them and  made  findings  about  their  international
    movements which they would have been able to show were incorrect on the
    basis of the letter from the embassy.

14. In the circumstances, I set aside the whole of the determination.

15. The parties agreed that there would have to be a complete re hearing.

16. I have considered  the  Senior  President's  Directions  regarding  the
    remittal of cases to the First-tier Tribunal. I am satisfied  that  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive the appellants before the First-
    tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for their case  to
    be properly presented to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside.

    I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a  fresh
    decision to be made. Instructions to the  administration  for  remitted
    cases have been prepared.

    An agreed hearing date is yet to be fixed.

    A Spanish (Latin American) interpreter is required. There will be three
    witnesses with a time estimate of two and a half hours. The appeal  can
    be heard by any Judge apart from the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  whose
    decision was appealed against.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 20 January 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer
