
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16127/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2015                           |On 18 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                         miss kristine sabordo ante
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Wilson, Counsel instructed by Blakewells
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.    The  Appellant,  Miss  Kristine  Sabordo  Ante,  a  citizen   of   the
    Philippines,  applied  for  a  derivative  residence  card  under   the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the
    Regulations") in respect of her daughter,  who  had  been  born  on  19
    August 2013 and is a British citizen.  Her application was  refused  on
    18 March 2014 because the Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant
    was the primary carer of her child and that if she  were  removed  from
    the United Kingdom this would force her child to leave as well.

2.   The Appellant's ensuing appeal  was  heard  on  17  September  2014  in
    Birmingham by Judge Andrew.   Both  parties  were  represented.   In  a
    determination of 19,  promulgated  on  22,  September  2014  the  judge
    allowed the appeal under the Regulations,  stating  that  she  had  not
    therefore gone on to consider Article 8.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent by Judge  Saffer  on
    12 November 2014.  Following a hearing on 16 December 2014 I stated  on
    23 December 2014 my reasons for  setting  the  determination  of  Judge
    Andrew aside without preserving any of his findings of fact and  citing
    that the appeal should be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal.

4.   This I did on 10  February  2015.   The  Appellant  gave  evidence,  in
    chief, in which she adopted her statement of  11  September  2014,  and
    cross-examination.  Submissions followed, to which I have  had  regard.
    I reserved my determination.

The Legal Issues

5.    The  decision  was  made  by  reference  to  paragraph  15A   of   the
    Regulations.  Paragraph 15A(1) states that  "P"  -  in  this  case  the
    Appellant - is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the  UK  for
    as long as he  satisfies  the  relevant  criteria  of,  in  this  case,
    paragraph 15A(4A), which are that:

         "(a) P is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ('the  relevant
             British citizen');


         (b)  the  relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and


         (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the
             UK or in another EEA state if P were required to leave.


6.   Paragraph 15(7) of the Regulations provides that:

         "(7) P is to be regarded as a 'primary carer' of another person  if
             -


             (a)  P is a direct  relative  or  a  legal  guardian  of  that
                  person; and


             (b)  P -


                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                      person's care; or


                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                      care with one other  person  who  is  not  an  exempt
                      person."


7.   Guidance on these provisions is contained in MA and  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC), as follows:

         "41.  Hickinbottom  J  recently  had  occasion  to   consider   the
             abovementioned authorities in his decision in Jamil  Sanneh  v
             (1) Secretary of State for  Work  and  Pensions  and  (2)  The
             Commissioners for Her Majesty's  Revenue  and  Customs  [2013]
             EWHC 793 (Admin); summarising the learning to be derived  from
             them, which we respectfully  agree  with  and  adopt,  in  the
             following terms:


         ...


             (iii)    It is for the national  courts  to  determine,  as  a
                  question of fact on the evidence before it, whether an  EU
                  citizen would be compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-
                  EU national upon whom he is dependent.


             (iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20
                  and 21 of the TFEU.  In particular, EU  law  will  not  be
                  engaged where the EU citizen is not compelled to leave the
                  EU, even if the quality or standard  of  life  of  the  EU
                  citizen is diminished as a result of the  non-EU  national
                  upon whom he is dependent  is  (for  example)  removed  or
                  prevented from working; although  (a)  diminution  in  the
                  quality of life might engage EU law if (and only if) it is
                  sufficient in practice to compel  the  relevant  ascendant
                  relative, and hence the EU dependant  citizen,  to  leave,
                  and (b) such actions as removal or prevention of work  may
                  result in an interference with some other rights, such  as
                  the right to respect for family life under  article  8  of
                  the European Convention on Human Rights.


         56.  ...The mere fact that the Sponsor cannot  be  as  economically
             active as he would wish, because of his care  responsibilities
             to JM and FM, is not sufficient to support a  conclusion  that
             JM and FM would be denied the genuine enjoyment  of  their  EU
             citizenship rights, nor would this be the  case  even  if  the
             Sponsor were required to stop working altogether.   The  right
             of residence is a right to reside in the territory of the  EU.
             It is not a right to any particular quality of life or to  any
             particular standard of living (see Dereci at paragraph 68, and
             Harrison at paragraph 67)."


8.   The onus of proof lies upon the Appellant.  The standard  of  proof  is
    that of the balance of probabilities.

The Scope of the Appeal

9.   The evidence of the Appellant and of her then partner,  Mr  Sergio  Jr.
    Sierda Perez at the hearing of the appeal by Judge Andrew was  that  at
    the date of the decision on 18 March 2014 they were living together  as
    a couple, albeit that Mr Perez' work obliged him to be  away  for  long
    periods.  This was the factual background to the determination of Judge
    Andrew.

10.  At the error of law hearing the Appellant  submitted  evidence  to  the
    effect that she and Mr Perez had separated in  November  2014.   In  my
    determination  I  stated  at  paragraph  10  that  it  would   be   for
    consideration  when  the  appeal  came  to  be  re-heard  whether  this
    postdecision evidence should be admitted.  In preparation for  the  re-
    hearing the Appellant submitted further evidence to the effect that she
    was now in a new relationship with a partner who cared with her for her
    child.

11.  At the outset of  the  hearing  Ms  Wilson  sought  to  introduce  both
    tranches  of  subsequent  evidence,  which  Mr  Kandola   opposed.    I
    determined that in an appeal under the Regulations the position had  to
    be determined at the date of the decision on 18 March 2014.  Regulation
    15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  lent
    support to that view by envisaging the need  for  explanation  for  the
    submission of  evidence  which  had  not  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

12.  Related to this was the issue of Article  8  of  the  1950  Convention,
    being the qualified right of the parties to respect for  their  private
    and family life.  Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the  decision  and  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter had not addressed Article 8 and had  invited
    a separate application on that  basis.   I  observed  that  whilst  the
    grounds of appeal referred to Article 8, Judge Andrew had at  paragraph
    15 of the determination specifically not considered it.  Ms Wilson said
    that she was content for Article 8 not to be considered in the  present
    appeal, leaving the opportunity for an application on that basis.

13.  The two tranches  of  subsequent  evidence  are  capable  of  going  to
    Article 8.  Since that is not in issue,  I  declined  to  receive  this
    evidence.

The Evidence

14.  At the  hearing  the  Appellant  gave  evidence  in  chief  and  cross-
    examination.  She adopted her statement which  had  been  before  Judge
    Andrew of 11 September 2014, and was questioned about it and about  the
    statement of Mr Perez of the same date,  which  had  also  been  before
    Judge Andrew.  Her evidence is essentially this.

15.  The Appellant and Mr Perez lived together  in  London  from  the  early
    part of 2011.  Mr Perez did engineering work as  a  lineman  with  High
    Voltage Electricity.  He worked on assignments which  generally  lasted
    six months in places which included Halifax, Darlington  and  Scotland.
    Generally he came home every other weekend for two or three days.  When
    the Home Office made its  decision,  in  March  2014,  their  daughter,
    Haven, was aged 7 months.  At  that  stage  Mr  Perez  was  working  in
    Scotland.  He had indefinite leave to remain in the UK.   As  a  result
    Haven was a British citizen.  He wrote in his statement that  "Together
    we are all well-settled in the United Kingdom".

16.  The Appellant was Haven's primary carer  on  a  day-by-day  basis.   Mr
    Perez worked to support them all and was the breadwinner.  When he  was
    at home he spent time with Haven, took her to the park and put  her  to
    bed.

17.  Mr Perez' evidence in his statement was that in  the  current  economic
    climate it would have been very difficult for him to secure alternative
    employment.  Even were he able to work locally he would not be able  to
    care for Haven during his working hours so  that  the  Appellant  would
    still be her primary carer.  For him to leave his job would  mean  that
    he and the Appellant would become dependent on the state.

18.  The evidence of the Appellant was consistent, internally and with  that
    of Mr Perez.  Their evidence was not challenged.  The Appellant  seemed
    to me to be a witness of truth.  I accept her evidence.

The primary carer for Haven

19.  I refer to the provisions summarised at paragraphs 5 and 6  above.   An
    "exempt person" is defined in paragraph 15A(6) of the  Regulations  as,
    amongst other people, one who has indefinite  leave  to  remain  there.
    This Mr Perez did.  So, since he was an exempt  person,  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy  paragraph  15A(7)  of  the  Regulations  by  sharing
    equally with him the  responsibility  for  Haven's  care.   As  Haven's
    mother, she must therefore show that at the date of  the  decision  she
    had primary responsibility for Haven's care.

20.  From the evidence I find that she did.  Mr Perez earned  the  money  to
    maintain them and spent what time he could with  Haven.   But,  as  the
    mother  of  a  7  month  old  infant,   the   Appellant   had   primary
    responsibility for her care.

Would Haven be unable to reside in the UK if the Appellant were required  to
    leave?

21.  Devoid of authority, the answer to this question  might  be  yes.   Her
    father was working far from home, and able to  care  for  her  only  on
    alternate weekends.

22.  However the law has set a higher  test,  which  I  have  summarised  at
    paragraph 7 above.  Nothing less than compulsion  suffices.   The  fact
    that Mr Perez would not have been able to be as economically active  as
    he wished because of his care responsibilities was not sufficient.  The
    right of residence is a right to reside within the territory of the EU,
    not a right to any particular quality of life or  standard  of  living,
    even if one dependent upon public funds.  So I have to find that,  even
    if the implication would  have  been  for  Mr  Perez  to  give  up  his
    employment and become dependent upon public funds, Haven would not have
    been unable to reside in the UK if the Appellant had been  required  to
    leave.  Her father was involved in her care and would  have  cared  for
    her.  As he wrote at paragraph 8 of his statement, "I  have  a  partner
    whom I love dearly and whom I cannot live without.  She is  the  mother
    of my child and she is the primary carer for her.  Together we are  all
    well-settled in the United Kingdom".

23.  In the light of legal  authority  I  find  that  at  the  date  of  the
    decision the provisions of  the  Regulations  were  not  satisfied.   I
    accordingly dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

24.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

25.  Article 8 of the 1950 Convention does not arise for consideration.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis


