
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16397/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th June 2016                             |On 15th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              ms noelyne mensah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Aidoo (Litigation Friend)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 13th  November  1988.   The
    Appellant first landed in the United Kingdom  on  24th  April  2013  in
    possession of a visa conferring leave to enter until 30th  August  2014
    subject to a condition prohibiting employment and  recourse  to  public
    funds.  On 12th August 2014 the Appellant made a  combined  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
    points-based  system  and  for  a  biometric  residence  permit.   That
    application was considered by the Secretary of State and was refused by
    Notice of Refusal dated 21st April 2015 on the basis that the Secretary
    of State was not satisfied that  the  documents  provided  demonstrated
    that the Appellant was in possession of the required level of funds.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Clarke sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  3rd  November  2015.
    That appeal was dealt with on the papers and in a decision and  reasons
    promulgated on 9th December 2015 the  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 15th December 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  were  straightforward.   They
    contended that the Immigration Judge had materially  erred  in  law  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal when the  Appellant  had  left  the  UK
    voluntarily on 21st September 2015.  Therefore following Section 104(4)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  the  Appellant's
    appeal should the grounds  argue  be  treated  as  abandoned.   As  the
    Appellant had departed the UK prior to  the  appeal  being  heard,  the
    Appellant abandoned her appeal and therefore there was no  jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal and the Secretary of State's request  was  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal be set aside or struck out for lack
    of jurisdiction.

 4. On 13th May 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P  J  M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  No Rule 24 response has  been  filed  or
    served by the Appellant.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  For the purpose of continuity throughout the appeal process  Ms
    Mensah is referred to herein as the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.   The  Appellant  appears  by  her  litigation
    friend Ms Aidoo.  I explained fully the process that was  taking  place
    before the Upper Tribunal to Ms Aidoo and indicated to her that I would
    listen to any  submissions  that  she  had  to  make.   She  noted  and
    understood what was taking place and indicated that she  would  briefly
    address me accordingly.  The Secretary of State appeared  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Norton.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Ms Aidoo indicates that she appreciates what is being said in that  the
    issue before me is one of law and indicates  that  the  Appellant  went
    back to Ghana having been  told  of  the  death  of  her  brother  last
    September.  She believes that Ms Mensah would like to return to the  UK
    and she had received the notice that her appeal  had  been  successful.
    She indicates that she is very much in the hands of the court.

 7. Mr Norton relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He indicates this is purely
    a matter of law and that the Secretary of State does not challenge  the
    favourable findings by the judge.   He  further  indicates  in  a  most
    helpful concession that he does not object to the decision herein being
    attached to any subsequent application that the Appellant may make.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. Whilst the issue in this matter is straightforward, tracing the law  is
    not.  The issue is very simply one that because the Appellant had  left
    the UK there was no jurisdiction for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  hear
    her appeal.  The Secretary of State relies on  Section  104(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  That Section states:

         "An appeal under Section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is  in
         the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if  the  Appellant
         leaves the United Kingdom".

11.  Consequently  whilst  on  the   face   of   it   that   would   appear
    straightforward, the matter is complicated by the abolition of  Section
    82(1) of the 2002  Act.   The  relevant  Section  is  to  be  found  in
    paragraph 8(2) of Statutory Instrument 371 of 2015 which goes under the
    title of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 4, Transitional and
    Savings Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015.  That Section states:

         "9   -   (1)  Notwithstanding  the  commencement  of  the  relevant
                  provisions the saved provisions continue  to  have  effect
                  and the relevant provisions do not have an effect  so  far
                  as they relate to the following decisions of the Secretary
                  of State -

                  (a)  a decision made on or after 6th April 2015 to  refuse
                      an application to vary leave to enter or remain  made
                      before 20th October 2014 where the person was seeking
                      leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant or as the  family
                      member of a Tier 4 Migrant and where  the  result  of
                      that decision is that the applicant has no  leave  to
                      enter or remain".

12. The application was made on 12th August 2014, i.e. before 20th  October
    2014.  The decision was made on 21st April 2015, i.e. a date after  6th
    April 2015.  Consequently the previous provisions of Section 104(4)  of
    the 2002 Act are preserved and there was no jurisdiction for the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to hear the appeal.   In  such  circumstances  that
    clearly is a material error of law and the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is set aside and is substituted with a decision that the
    Notice of Refusal stands on the basis that there was no jurisdiction to
    hear an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction

13. It is recorded, with the full consent  of  the  representative  of  the
    Secretary  of  State,  that  the  positive   findings   regarding   the
    Appellant's application as a Tier 4 Migrant are not challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Further, the basis upon  which  this  matter  came
    before the Upper Tribunal is, it is accepted through no  fault  of  the
    Appellant.  Her appeal was dealt with on the papers and  she  had  left
    the UK and assumed that nothing further would happen.  The fact however
    remains that her appeal was allowed.  The reason that  her  appeal  now
    must fail is simply because there  was  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal in the first place.  The reason  for  which  the  Appellant  has
    returned to Ghana is not a matter of controversy and is not in any  way
    to represent a  taint  on  the  Appellant's  character  or  immigration
    history.  With the full co-operation of the Secretary of State I direct
    that  in  the  event  that  the  Appellant  seeks  to  make  a  further
    application to return to the UK, presumably as a Tier 4  Student,  then
    the court directs that there is no objection to her attaching a copy of
    this decision to that application.

Administrative Direction

14. Both the Tribunal and the Secretary  of  State  are  advised  that  the
    address for contacting the Appellant in the UK is care of Ms  D  Aidoo,
    20 Wise Road, Stretford, London E15 2TQ, and all documents relating  to
    this appeal should be served on her care of that address.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The basis of the  material  error  of  law  is  that  the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction in which to hear the appeal.  As a  result  the
Notice of Refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  21st  April  2015  is
reinstated.
No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
