
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16964/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th September 2017               |On 5th October 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK


                                   Between

                              MR MOHAMMAD IHSAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Vatish   (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  He  appeals  against  the
    decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Manyarara)   ("FTT")
    promulgated on 2nd December 2016 in which she dismissed the  appeal  on
    immigration and human rights grounds.  In a decision and reasons  dated
    25.7.2017  this  Tribunal  set  aside  the  FTT  decision  and   issued
    directions for the re making of the decision in relation to EX 1(a) and
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended.

2.   The facts as found by the FTT were preserved.   It  was  accepted  that
    the partnership route was not applicable. The appellant  otherwise  met
    the requirements  of  the  Rules  including  finance.  I  consider  the
    position under the parent route and Ex 1. I heard  oral  evidence  from
    the appellant, his step son [H] aged 14 years  old  and  his  wife.   I
    found the evidence given by the appellant and his son  to  be  reliable
    and credible.  I was satisfied that [H] was able to give  detailed  and
    reliable evidence as to his life and  circumstances  and  that  he  was
    fully able to give evidence as to his wishes.  I found  him  to  be  an
    articulate and intelligent person who understood all the questions when
    explained clearly to him.  I  found  that  I  could  not  rely  on  the
    evidence from the appellant's wife as she was in a confused and muddled
    state possibly because of nerves and anxiety.  I found that nothing she
    said was capable of any evidential value or weight.  Even in  terms  of
    uncontroversial issues such as the date she moved to her present house,
    I found that she was unable to give a reliable or accurate answer.

Facts and discussion

3.   The appellant married a British citizen in 2011 after coming to the  UK
    as a student.  The parties in that relationship have a child [N],  born
    on [ ] 2013.  The appellant met his present wife (the sponsor) in  2012
    and they married in 2014. The sponsor has three children  two  of  whom
    were adults and the third, [H], was 14 years of age at the time of  the
    hearing and had ILR but now has naturalised as  a  British  Citizen  on
    13th June 2017. I find that the  appellant  has  a  close  and  genuine
    relationship with his step son aged 14 years.  I  find  that  over  the
    past 5 years they have developed a father and son relationship and that
    is a subsisting relationship.  The child's biological father  died  and
    so the appellant has fulfilled the role of his father  since  2013.   I
    place weight on the evidence that the appellant is closely involved  in
    the day to day life of the family and the family members regard him  as
    the father in the family unit. It is not  necessary  for  there  to  be
    evidence of any particular dependency or  close  relationship  -  there
    needs to be a genuine and subsisting  relationship.  I  find  that  the
    appellant and his son spend time together and the appellant is involved
    in his  education  and  social  activities.   The  child  is  currently
    studying at school and has reached an important and  significant  stage
    in his education, namely GCSEs in the summer and it is his intention to
    continue to study A levels.  He is a British citizen as is  his  mother
    and he is a qualifying child under section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  as
    amended.  In  Treebhawon & ors [2015] [19  &  20]  the  UT  found  that
    provision  in effect  to  be  free  standing  in  terms  of  its  clear
    statement that removal would not be in the public interests if  section
    117B6 applied.  In that instance no  weight  is  placed  on  the  other
    public interest consideration set out in section 117B(4-5). I  conclude
    that section 117B(6) does apply. It would be unreasonable to expect him
    to uproot to Pakistan at this stage of his life.   I  have  taken  into
    account that he lived in Pakistan until 2013 and  has  returned  for  a
    visit since to see friends and family.  However having  regard  to  his
    age and education I  conclude  that  his  best  interests  lie  in  his
    remaining in the UK with his mother and the  appellant  in  the  family
    unit which also includes the sponsor's elderly mother.  The  suggestion
    that [H] could be brought up and cared for by his elder siblings  fails
    to recognised  the  relationship  as  between  parents  and  child  (MA
    (Pakistan) & ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705). The appellant forms part of  the
    fabric of the  family  life  and  without  his  daily  involvement  and
    contribution to the care of his dependents and assistance to enable his
    wife to work, there would be an  interference  with  family  life  that
    would not be proportionate. I also take into account that the appellant
    has a child from a previous relationship who is also a British  citizen
    and in respect of whom he is  currently  pursuing  an  application  for
    access.  There was no evidence as to the interest of  that  child  save
    that in general it would  be  in  the  child's  interest  to  see  both
    parents.

Decision

4.    I  remake  the  decision  and  substitute  a  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.




                               Signed                 Date 4.10.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








No anonymity order made nor requested.




                               Signed                 Date 4.10.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


