
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16885/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 November 2014                  |On 24 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      mr Kenneth Chinedu Akabogu Nwanko
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr Armstrong, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Okoye, Legal Representative, House of
Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights here.
     The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do
    not consider that such a direction is required for these proceedings in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, whose date of birth is 11  March
    1978.  On 1 October 2012 House of Law  applied  on  his  behalf  for  a
    residence card.  The application was refused on 29 April  2013  due  to
    the lack  of  substantive  evidence  concerning  the  validity  of  the
    relationship between him and his EEA national  sponsor.   The  marriage
    certificate  provided  with  the   application   was   deemed   to   be
    insufficient.   The  document  bore  no  resemblance  to  any  previous
    marriage certificate that had been seen  from  Nigeria.   Additionally,
    the certificate did not state whether the marriage was conducted  under
    customary or civil law.  Therefore it had been decided  to  refute  the
    confirmation that he sought with  reference  to  Regulation  7  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the claimant  said
    he was ready to marry his spouse in the UK but the Secretary of State's
    policy of not allowing people to marry who did not have valid leave  to
    remain in the UK prompted them to marry under the Customary Marriage of
    Nigeria, which also accepted marriage by  proxy.   The  decision  maker
    failed to consider that it had long been  established  in  English  law
    that if a proxy marriage was legal in the country where it took  place,
    it was recognised in English law.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The claimant's appeal came before  Judge  Callender  Smith  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 30 July 2012.  Both parties were  legally  represented.
    The judge received oral evidence  from  the  claimant,  who  adopted  a
    witness statement dated 28 April 2014.  He married  his  sponsor  in  a
    traditional wedding ceremony conducted  under  the  Customary  Laws  of
    Nigeria on 24 January 2011.  His marriage certificate had  been  issued
    to him by the Nigerian courts and all the  required  legal  formalities
    and customs in Nigeria had been followed.  He and his wife  were  happy
    as a couple, and planned to have a baby soon.   They  would  arrange  a
    church wedding as soon as he received leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His wife gave "confirming evidence".

 5. In his subsequent determination, Judge Callender Smith said  the  point
    in question in the appeal was a short  one.   The  Secretary  of  State
    sought to challenge the marriage certificate - and the validity of  the
    marriage - but at the appeal hearing the  Presenting  Officer  had  not
    sought to cross-examine either of  the  witnesses  or  to  produce  any
    evidence that the documentation was fraudulent or otherwise flawed.  In
    the circumstances, he found the evidence offered by both  the  claimant
    and his wife cogent and credible.  It established that on  the  balance
    of probabilities they had  been  through  a  valid  customary  marriage
    ceremony in Nigeria, and so the claimant was entitled to be issued with
    a residence card to confirm  his  right  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the husband of his wife.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 6. The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  and  on  1
    October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         There is arguably  an  implicit  finding  by  the  judge  that  the
         marriage was a proxy marriage (see [11] where he  referred  to  the
         rights being performed on the couple's behalf).   If  the  marriage
         was a proxy marriage, it was arguable that the  judge  should  have
         considered  the  authority  of  Kareem.   Failure  to  follow  that
         authority is likely to be material to the outcome,  but  the  judge
         does not refer to any evidence that the marriage is  valid  by  the
         law of the EEA state which the sponsor was a national.  It is right
         that the  respondent's  representative  does  not  appear  to  have
         referred the judge to Kareem, but it is  still  arguable  that  the
         judge erred in law in failing to follow the  approach  set  out  in
         that case, if the marriage was a proxy marriage.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. At the hearing before me, Mr Okoye relied on  a  skeleton  argument  in
    which he submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not
    fall foul of Kareem.  This was because there  was  no  doubt  that  the
    marriage certificate had been issued by a competent authority,  and  so
    there was no justification for investigating whether the  marriage  had
    been contracted according to the national law of the EEA country of the
    sponsor.  Alternatively, he relied on the fact that  the  claimant  had
    been able to produce for the hearing before me a certified  copy  of  a
    French marriage certificate.  The certificate was issued  in  Marseille
    on 6 November 2014.  Mr Okoye explained that the  sponsor,  who  was  a
    French national, had travelled to Marseille to  obtain  this  document.
    He said that the certificate demonstrated that the  French  authorities
    recognised the customary marriage which had  taken  place  between  the
    claimant and the sponsor on 24 January 2011 in Nigeria.

 8. Mr Armstrong relied on the grant of permission to  appeal.   The  judge
    had failed to decide whether or not the marriage was a proxy  marriage,
    and it was now an agreed fact that it was a proxy marriage.  The  judge
    had failed to apply and follow Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
    UKUT 00024 (IAC) and TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT
    00316 (IAC).  The French marriage certificate had only  being  produced
    on the day of the  hearing,  and  it  needed  to  be  verified  by  the
    Secretary of State.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 9. The law always speaks, and so the failure by the Presenting Officer  to
    rely on Kareem and TA and Others is not  fatal  to  the  error  of  law
    challenge.

10. Mr Okoye seeks to defend  the  judge's  approach  by  reference  to  an
    interpretation  of  Kareem  which  was  decisively  rejected  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor in TA and  Others.   The  headnote  of  TA  and
    Others reads as follows:


         Following the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]
         UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         member state from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.


11. Mr Okoye submits that TA and Others was wrongly decided.  But it  is  a
    reported decision of the Upper Tribunal, and it is binding on  me.   Mr
    Okoye does not seek to explain why it  was  wrongly  decided,  and  the
    ruling of Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor reflects the following  passage
    in Kareem at paragraph [18]:

         Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification  of
         the legal  system  of  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  member  states.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a member state and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted.

12. In conclusion, I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    vitiated by a material error of law, such that it should be  set  aside
    and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

13. The parties were directed to prepare for the hearing on the basis that,
    if the Upper Tribunal decided to set aside  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, any further evidence the Upper Tribunal might need
    to consider  if  it  decided  to  remake  the  decision,  could  be  so
    considered at that hearing.

14. The late production of the  French  marriage  document  is  potentially
    unfair to the Secretary of State. But having reflected on the matter  I
    do not consider that it is in accordance with the overriding  objective
    to give the Secretary of State the opportunity to verify the  document.
    This is because the burden rests with the claimant to  prove  that  his
    customary marriage by proxy to the sponsor is in  accordance  with  the
    laws of France, and he does  not  discharge  this  burden  through  the
    production of the French marriage document.  I  reach  this  conclusion
    for two reasons.

15. Firstly, the proper way to prove that a customary marriage by proxy  is
    recognised under French law is to produce the relevant extract from the
    French Civil Code and/or expert  evidence  from  a  suitably  qualified
    expert in French law and/or a relevant decision by a French court.

16. Secondly,  the  route  which  the  claimant  has  taken  is  manifestly
    unsatisfactory, as a vital piece  of  evidence  is  missing.   What  is
    missing is proof that the French authorities were  made  aware  of  the
    fact that the  customary  marriage  was  a  proxy  one.   There  is  no
    reference in the French marriage certificate to the customary  marriage
    having been  conducted  by  proxy.   Indeed,  the  implication  of  the
    document  is  that  the  sponsor  falsely  represented  to  the  French
    authorities that she and her husband were present at the marriage.  The
    last paragraph  of  the  marriage  certificate  reads  as  follows  (in
    translation):

         [The claimant] and [the sponsor] have declared one after the  other
         to marry each other traditionally and we have declared in the  name
         of the law that they were united in marriage  in  the  presence  of
         their respective witnesses Jean-Claude and  Sona  David.   Readings
         done, and invited to read the  certificate,  the  spouses  and  the
         witnesses have signed with us...

17. When I explored this passage with  Mr  Okoye  in  the  course  of  oral
    argument, I initially understood the certificate to represent that  the
    claimant and the sponsor had attended in person at the Town Hall of the
    15th and 16th District in Marseille, from  which  the  certificate  has
    been issued.  But Mr Okoye said that the claimant had  not  accompanied
    his wife to Marseille, and what was being described was what had  taken
    place at the customary marriage.  But it is an  agreed  fact  that  the
    claimant and the sponsor were not united in marriage "in  the  presence
    of their respective witnesses".

18. Accordingly, despite the production of this French  marriage  document,
    the claimant has not discharged the  burden  of  proving  that  he  has
    contracted a valid marriage by proxy to the sponsor under French law.

19. The question of whether the claimant might qualify for a residence card
    on the basis of a durable relationship was not raised  in  the  refusal
    decision, and was not explored by the First-tier Tribunal.

20. No Article 8 claim was raised by way of appeal, and this issue was also
    not addressed by the First-tier Tribunal.

21. No evidence relating to either issue (durable relationship  or  Article
    8) was tendered before me.

22. I find that any interference consequential upon the refusal decision is
    not such as to engage Article 8(1) because the claimant is  not  facing
    removal, and it is open to him  to  make  a  fresh  application  for  a
    residence card relying on evidence of a durable relationship.  As  this
    avenue is open to him, the refusal decision is  plainly  proportionate,
    having regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In particular,  I  have
    in mind the consideration that the maintenance of  firm  and  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal against the decision by the Secretary  of
State to refuse to issue him with a residence card is dismissed.



Signed        Date 24 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
