
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/16447/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 May 2017                        |       On 19 June 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                       ms olubulni fummilayo ogunrinde
                          aka ms olubulni fummilayo
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid of Counsel instructed by David A
                  Grand Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mulholland sitting at Taylor House on 12  September
    2016.  The Appellant had appealed against the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse him Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  based  on  the  20  year  long
    residence Rules. Paragraph 276 and other  grounds  were  rejected.  The
    Judge had concluded that there was insufficient evidence  and  she  set
    out in some detail why she thought the Appellant's account could not be
    believed.

2.   Permission was sought on various  grounds  which  were  succinctly  set
    out. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly by way of a decision dated 20 April 2017  when  it  was  said  at
    paragraph 2:

         "It is arguable, as the applicant contends, that the Tribunal erred
         in law by failing  to  (i)  have  regard  to  relevant  documentary
         evidence, (ii) make a specific credibility finding in  relation  to
         the uncorroborated testimony of a supporting  witness,  (iii)  give
         reasons for not  accepting  the  appellant's  explanation  for  the
         absence of documentary evidence  for  1998/99,  (iv)  consider  the
         evidence (including that of her General Practitioner) in the  round
         rather than compartmentally.  Permission to appeal  is  accordingly
         granted."


3.   In the submissions before me today Mr Al-Rashid said that  he  had  had
    the opportunity to have a discussion with Mr Nath and that there was  a
    measure of agreement.   The  position,  in  particular  in  respect  of
    Nationwide Bank statements, was highlighted.   It  was  said  that  the
    Judge had noted at paragraph 4 of her decision that,

         "I have considered the appellant's bundle  which  consists  of  her
         witness statement, witness statement of Kasimu Lawal,  letter  from
         Dr Chaudhry  (locum  GP)  3  September  2013,  certified  duplicate
         Nationwide statements for the period from 2000."


    whereas in her findings of fact section at paragraph 16 the judge said:


         "The  appellant  has  produced  duplicate   statements   from   the
         Nationwide  Building  Society.   These  were  submitted  with   the
         application form however were not  certified  and  accordingly  the
         respondent refused  to  consider  them.   The  appellant  tries  to
         distinguish  between  'duplicates'  and  'copies'  however   I   am
         satisfied  that  they  are  not  originals  and  as  such   require
         certification.   I  am  not  prepared  therefore  to   take   these
         statements into account as they are not certified...".

4.   It has been explained by Mr Al-Rashid, who  also  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that a bundle of documents  was  relied  upon
    and that had included the certified duplicate bank statements.  I  have
    seen Mr Al-Rashid's copy of that bundle, as has Mr  Nath.  It  is  very
    clear from the documents that there is indeed an endorsement on them in
    the bottom right hand corner of each.  There are some 93 pages and each
    page is similar.  Mr Nath agrees that in  the  circumstances,  if  this
    bundle was indeed before the Judge, (there is no  doubt  that  it  must
    have been firstly because Mr Al-Rashid of Counsel says it  was  but  in
    any event the Judge herself at paragraph 4 of her  decision  refers  to
    it) then it indeed was an error of law for the Judge to have  made  the
    findings that she did.  I therefore agree with both  parties  that  the
    Judge did materially err in law. That is because, on one hand  she  had
    the certified copies of the Nationwide Bank account statements, but  on
    the other she then said that they were not in front  of  her.   I  note
    that the Judge sought to make an alternative finding  at  paragraph  16
    but in my judgment the damage was done.  As a consequence it  means  it
    is not necessary for to consider the other grounds of appeal which have
    also been raised because this particular  aspect  shows  a  fundamental
    deficit in the findings of the Judge such as to  mean  that  the  whole
    decision is infected and thereby flawed.

5.   I canvassed with the parties as to the appropriate way  forward  having
    found that error of law.  Mr Al-Rashid was initially of the  view  that
    there could be a further consideration of the case before me today.  Mr
    Nath was of the opinion that the appropriate place for rehearing was at
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In my judgment, in view of the other findings
    made by the Judge  including  references  that  the  Tribunal  will  be
    assisted  by  having  other  evidence,  then  the  appropriate   course
    therefore is for there to be a de novo hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That will enable the Appellant, if so  advised,  to  produce
    such other evidence as she considers necessary and indeed to enable her
    to present her case once again to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  whole
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  There will be
    a rehearing and there will be further directions  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House.

6.   I note for completeness  sake  that  the  Appellant's  bundle  was  not
    before me and was not in the Upper  Tribunal  file,  but  that  is  not
    unusual.  It may well be that that file is elsewhere but in any  event,
    it appears Mr Al-Rashid has copies of the  Appellant's  bundle  and  no
    doubt that can be produced in due course at Taylor House.

7.   For the reasons outlined I allow the Appellant's  appeal  and  I  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and
is therefore set aside.
There shall be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date: 19 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood



