
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16283/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2017                             |On 26 January 2017            |
|Extempore judgment                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                  Ms lansage vajiranginie chanddrika perera


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Yong, Counsel instructed by Sriharans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Ms Perera who  had  sought  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  Her application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State and her appeal against that decision was heard on 28
    June 2016.  Her appeal was dismissed on 22 July 2016 and on 23 November
    2016 she was granted permission to appeal.

2.   The appellant relied solely upon Article  8.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    against the First-tier Tribunal decision did not challenge the decision
    taken by the judge that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules HC 395  as  amended.   In
    his  consideration  of  the  requirements  of  276ADE(vi)   the   judge
    considered the appellant's assertions and her submission that she would
    face very significant obstacles to integration into Sri Lanka given the
    cumulative effect of the lack of treatment facilities for mental health
    in Sri Lanka in tandem with a society riven by war and natural disaster
    in which  the  incidence  of  mental  illness  is  high,  the  lack  of
    opportunity for her to work in Sri Lanka with the attendant risk to her
    mental health and her ability to support herself, her estrangement from
    her family, her age which makes it harder for her to  replicate  social
    connections and her religious identity as a Pentecostal Christian.  The
    judge went through each  of  those  elements  of  her  claim  and  made
    findings none of which have been challenged or sought to be  challenged
    in the grounds of appeal.  Although Ms Yong said that her  instructions
    were today that there  were  elements  of  those  findings  which  were
    disputed, permission was neither sought nor granted  on  any  of  those
    matters.

3.    In  particular  one  of  the  issues  that  she  raised  was  that  an
    application for an adjournment had been made to enable the person  with
    whom the appellant  is  having  a  relationship  to  attend  (it  being
    referred to in paragraph 60(c) that he was unable to attend because  he
    had a medical appointment on that day).  There is no reference  in  the
    decision to a request for an adjournment on those grounds and there  is
    no reference  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  to  an
    incorrect refusal of an  adjournment.  Any  challenge  to  the  adverse
    finding that was made by the judge in connection with the attendance of
    that person does not even get off the ground.

4.   The judge found that there were no very significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Sri Lanka.  The judge,  in  paragraph  59,
    considers whether there were exceptional/very compelling  circumstances
    which meant that  the  refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences or that refusal would not be proportionate  under  Article
    8.  That is not the correct test.  It is  not  a  question  of  whether
    there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  but  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances, but Ms Yong is left with the difficulty  that
    there is no challenge to the findings under paragraph 276ADE(vi).   The
    appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules and therefore in order to
    succeed on Article 8 there is going to have to be  something  that  has
    not already been  considered  by  the  judge  which  should  have  been
    considered which could or would have made a difference.

5.   The judge considers  proportionality  in  paragraph  61  onwards.   The
    judge makes the point that this is an appellant whose leave  to  remain
    in the UK has expired but she entered in order to study  and  that  she
    wants to be able to remain in the UK.   The  judge  specifically  found
    that the appellant speaks good English and that she is capable of being
    financially independent.  He also finds that, for the reasons  that  he
    gave above, he gave little weight to the private  life  formed  because
    her immigration status was precarious.   Ms  Yong  submitted  that  the
    appellant had leave to remain between 2008 and  2012.   Thereafter  she
    had 3C leave until about  2014  when  her  appeal  against  an  earlier
    decision was dismissed.  A very  short  time  after  that  she  made  a
    further human rights claim and she  was  therefore  for  a  very  short
    period without leave.  That however does  not  render  her  immigration
    status non-precarious.  She came in as a student.  She  remained  as  a
    student.  She then had 3C leave and at the time of this application she
    was an overstayer.  Her stay throughout her time in  the  UK  has  been
    precarious and although the judge in paragraph 65 does  not  spell  out
    the different periods of her leave that does not alter  the  fact  that
    there is nothing wrong with those findings.

6.   The judge then goes on to confirm that she does not have  any  criminal
    convictions and he concludes by saying in paragraph  67  "nevertheless,
    when taking into account my findings regarding  the  Immigration  Rules
    the lack of exceptional/very compelling circumstances and all I know of
    the appellant, I find that the respondent's decision  is  proportionate
    and in the public interest  of  firm  but  fair  immigration  control."
    Although  the  judge  made  a  finding  that  there  was  a   lack   of
    exceptional/very compelling circumstances, the findings that he made in
    connection with 276ADE(vi) are clearly significant and relevant to  the
    issue of proportionality.

7.   There is nothing in the appellant's case that has not  been  considered
    by the judge and the decision under Article 8 and  the  proportionality
    of her removal cannot be  in  doubt.   The  judge  considered  all  the
    issues, took them all into account, and reached  a  decision  that  was
    plainly open to him that it was not disproportionate that the  decision
    to refuse her claim and to remove her was  not  disproportionate.   For
    these reasons I am satisfied that there is no material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that was  promulgated  on
    22 July 2016 and I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 24th January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
