
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/16296/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 December 2016                       | On 16 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                           muhammad asadullah umar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Pakistan who was born on 27
    February 1984.  He entered this country as a student in  2011  and  his
    permission to remain was extended until 3 May 2014.   On  3  May  2014,
    that is the day on which his leave  expired,  he  applied  for  further
    leave to remain in order to study for a diploma but on 21 December 2014
    the respondent informed him that the college at which  he  intended  to
    study had had its licence revoked but he was provided  with  a  60  day
    period in order to obtain a new Certificate of Acceptance for  Studies.
    An extension was granted  to  produce  this  but  the  respondent  when
    granting this extension informed the  applicant  that  if  he  did  not
    provide a Certificate of Acceptance for Studies by  the  extended  date
    consideration would be given to the application on  the  basis  of  the
    material  which  the  respondent  then  had.   There  were   apparently
    difficulties in connection with the appellant's passport which it seems
    he had allowed to expire and so he asked for  a  further  extension  of
    time, but it is the appellant's case  that  this  application  was  not
    considered.  The respondent considered the application on the basis  of
    the material which was before her and refused it for reasons which  are
    given in the decision letter which is dated 13 April 2015.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision on the very narrow  ground
    that following the decision  of  the  President  of  this  Tribunal  in
    Sultana and Others (rules: waiver/further enquiries; discretion) [2014]
    UKUT 0540 it was incumbent on the respondent  following  a  request  to
    exercise discretion at the very least to give reasons  if  she  decided
    not to exercise discretion in the appellant's favour, why this was  so.
    Reference was made during the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal to
    the decision in Sultana, and in particular to  what  was  said  by  the
    President at paragraph 20 as follows:

         "Furthermore, in the event of an invitation to exercise  discretion
         being refused, one would expect a brief explanation  to  be  given.
         For the avoidance of doubt, we take this opportunity  to  emphasise
         that an adequate, intelligible explanation for any discrete refusal
         of this kind should always be provided by the ECO."

 3. Accordingly, the argument advanced before the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that because no explanation had been given as to why  discretion  would
    not be exercised in the appellant's favour, the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 4. The appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Row  sitting  at
    Birmingham Sheldon on 25 July 2016 but in a decision which is dated  27
    July 2016 and promulgated on 8 August 2016 the  appeal  was  dismissed.
    The appellant now appeals against this decision with permission granted
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 8  November  2016,  the  sole  ground
    being that the judge ought to have considered the failure  to  grant  a
    further extension of time in  light  of  the  President's  decision  in
    Sultana; it is the appellant's case that the judge's failure so  to  do
    was a material error of law.

 5. What is interesting about not  just  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    skeleton argument  prepared  in  support  of  the  appeal  (by  Counsel
    previously instructed) but also  in  the  reasons  given  for  granting
    permission to appeal is that nowhere in any of these documents is there
    any reference to what was the  main  reason  why  the  application  was
    refused which was that the  appellant  had  submitted  false  documents
    within his application.  The application was not just  refused  because
    of the failure to submit  a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    (which  also  led  to  the  appellant  being  awarded  no   funds   for
    maintenance) but it was also refused on general grounds as follows:

         "As part of your application, you submitted an official  transcript
         and  letter,  titled  Leyton   College,   with   reference   number
         AC1091809VB.  This document has been  confirmed  as  false  by  the
         issuing authority.  You  have  therefore  used  deception  in  this
         application and it  is  refused  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

 6. By paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules it is provided that

         "Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application"

    leave to remain or variation of leave is to  be  refused.   This  is  a
    mandatory ground of refusal.

 7. As the judge noted within his decision (at paragraph 19) the  appellant
    had had since 13 April 2015 to  answer  the  allegation  of  dishonesty
    (which is set out at paragraph 18) but  "the  appellant  did  not  give
    evidence  orally  or  in  a  witness  statement"  and  "has  given   no
    explanation or denial of the allegations made.  His notice of appeal is
    silent on the matter".

 8. Although at paragraph 9 of his decision the judge notes  that  "on  the
    deception grounds it was argued that the respondent had  not  satisfied
    the burden  of  proof  that  the  appellant  had  used  deception",  at
    paragraph 18 it is recorded that the respondent had produced copies  of
    the two documents in question and an email from  Leyton  College  which
    said that the documents had not been issued by them and on  this  basis
    the judge was satisfied (as he states at paragraph 19) that "there  was
    a case to answer".

 9. This aspect of the decision has never been challenged and in  light  of
    it, it is in my judgment  surprising  that  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted but I have to consider whether or  not  there  was  a  material
    error of law on the basis of the material which I consider.

10. I do not need to embark on any detailed analysis of the effect  of  the
    decision in Sultana, because even though it may have been desirable for
    the respondent to state briefly why it was not  considered  appropriate
    to grant any further extensions of time  the  appeal  would  have  been
    bound to fail in any event because of the failure to make any effective
    challenge to the finding of dishonesty.  Accordingly, any  error  there
    may have been with regard to the failure to  explain  in  terms  why  a
    further extension of time would not be  granted  could  not  have  been
    material to this decision because, as already stated, it had to fail in
    any event.

11. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed and I so find.







Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                 Date: 25 January 2017

