
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16081/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 6 October 2015                  |On : 8 October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               MD ruhul quddus
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hossain, instructed by Liberty Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 13 March 1988. He has  been
given permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Rothwell who found that there was no  valid  appeal  before  her  with
respect to the respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave  to
remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the
points- based system.

The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3 October  2009  with  leave  to
enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until  30  January  2012.  On  8
October 2011 he was granted leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post  Study)
Migrant until 8 October 2013. On 8 October 2013 he submitted an  application
for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.  That  application
was, however, rejected as invalid on 5 December 2013 on the  basis  that  he
had failed  to  provide  his  biometric  information  as  requested  in  the
respondent's letter of 14 October 2013 and again in a letter of  6  November
2013. On 3 January  2014  he  re-submitted  his  application.  However  that
application was also rejected  as  invalid,  on  9  January  2014,  on  that
occasion owing to his failure to  pay  the  specified  fee.  The  respondent
advised the appellant in her letter of 9 January 2014 that,  whilst  credit/
debit card details had been provided, the  issuing  bank  had  rejected  the
payment.

On  16  January  2014  the  appellant  re-submitted  his  application.   His
application was refused on 11 March 2014, partly on the basis  that  it  had
been made more than 28 days from the expiry of  his  previous  leave,  under
paragraph 245DD(g) of the Immigration Rules. The appellant was advised  that
he had no right of appeal against  that  decision,  the  application  having
been made after the expiry of his leave.

The appellant, however, lodged a notice of appeal, asserting in his  grounds
of appeal in regard to the first  attempted  application  that  he  did  not
receive the letters of  request  for  his  biometric  information  and  with
respect to the second attempted application that he had sufficient funds  in
his bank account and that the inability of  the  Home  Office  to  take  the
payment was due to their own technical problems. Reliance  was  placed  upon
the decision in JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
[2009] EWCA Civ 78 in asserting that his leave was  extended  by  virtue  of
section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, the initial application having  been
made when he had extant leave, and he  was  thus  entitled  to  a  right  of
appeal.

The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell on  16
December 2014. The judge noted that directions had  previously  been  issued
to the respondent to provide evidence of the correct  fee  not  having  been
made, pursuant  to  the  guidance  in  Basnet  (validity  of  application  -
respondent) Nepal [2012] UKUT 113.  The  respondent  had  not  responded  to
those directions, but the judge found that the  burden  of  proof  had  been
discharged by the respondent as the appellant's bank statement  showed  that
he had insufficient funds in his bank account between 3 and 6  January  2014
which must have been the time when the respondent sought to take the  funds.
She therefore concluded that the application submitted  on  3  January  2014
was not a valid one, that the appellant had made a  valid  application  only
after the expiry of his leave  and  that  there  was  accordingly  no  valid
appeal before her.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought by the appellant on the  basis
that the respondent would not have sought to take the fee  until  6  January
2014 or thereafter, at  which  time  there  were  sufficient  funds  in  his
account, and that the judge had therefore made an error in her  findings  of
fact and had misapplied the principles in Basnet.

Permission was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  on  20
February 2015 on the grounds that, even if the judge had arguably  erred  on
that basis, that was immaterial given that the appellant's leave ended on  8
October  2013  and  he  therefore  had  no  leave  when  he  submitted   the
application on 3 January 2014.

Permission was, however, subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb
on 28 May 2015 on renewed grounds, on the basis that  the  validity  of  the
first decision had still to be considered.

Appeal Hearing

At the hearing Mr Norton produced copies of the respondent's letters  of  14
October 2013 and 6 November 2013 in regard to the request for the  appellant
to provide his biometric information, together with CID notes.

Mr Hossain accepted that the  respondent's  first  invalidity  decision  was
correct. However his submission was that the judge had  failed  to  consider
the findings in JH, according to which the appellant's  leave  was  extended
beyond 8 October 2013 by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration  Act  1971,
since he had rectified his  error  within  28  days  by  making  the  second
application. His leave was extended until the decision was made on 11  March
2014 and the application was therefore made at a time  when  he  had  extant
leave.  UTJ  Grubb  had  therefore  misdirected  himself  in  his  grant  of
permission. Mr Hossain submitted further that FTTJ Rothwell had  misdirected
herself in relation  to  Basnet  and  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
discharge the burden of proving that the funds were  not  available  to  pay
the application fee.

Mr Norton submitted that FTTJ Rothwell was entitled  to  make  the  findings
that she  did  in  relation  to  Basnet  and  the  validity  of  the  second
application, but even if she had erred in that respect that  was  immaterial
since the appellant's leave had already expired on 8 October 2013.

Mr Hossain reiterated his previous submissions in response.

Consideration and Findings

It is apparent from the  appellant's  Lloyds  Bank  statements  before  FTTJ
Rothwell that the balance of his account was insufficient to  meet  the  fee
payment for his application for leave to remain  between  3  January  and  6
January 2014, as the judge found. It was only later on 6 January  2014  that
the balance increased to an amount sufficient to meet the  fee  payment.  As
such the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  respondent  must  have
attempted to take payment for the application fee between 3 January and  the
early part of 6 January 2014. She properly recognised  that  the  burden  of
proof lay upon the respondent, as stated in Basnet, but she was entitled  to
distinguish the appellant's circumstances from those in Basnet, in that  the
appellant in that case had provided evidence of having  the  required  funds
in his account at all material times, whereas this  appellant  had  not.  In
such  circumstances  she  was  entitled  to  find   that   the   appellant's
application submitted on 3 January 2014 was not a valid one.

However, even if  FTTJ  Rothwell  was  wrong  in  finding  that  the  Basnet
principles did not apply and even if the respondent had failed to show  that
the appellant's application submitted on 3 January 2014 was invalid,  it  is
the case, as recognised by FTTJ Andrew in her decision of 20  February  2015
refusing to grant permission, that  the  appellant  was  still  without  any
leave at the time he made that application.  His  leave  had  expired  on  8
October 2013 and accordingly he had not made an in-time  application  giving
rise, on refusal, to a right of appeal.

In granting  permission,  UTJ  Grubb  recognised  that  FTTJ  Andrew's  view
depended upon  an  assumption  that  the  first  invalidity  decision  of  5
December 2013 was correct, yet no findings had in fact  been  made  in  that
regard.

Mr Hossain, however, did not dispute  that  the  invalidity  decision  of  5
December  2013  was  incorrect.  He  accepted  that  it  was  correct.   His
submission was that the appellant had corrected the omission leading to  the
invalidity within the permitted 28 day period and that his leave  to  remain
was therefore extended beyond 8 October 2013 by virtue of section 3C of  the
1971 Act in accordance with the principles in JH.

However I fail to see how the principles in  JH  assist  the  appellant  and
consider that Mr Hossain has misunderstood the findings  in  that  decision.
The appellant, whilst claiming not  to  have  received  the  letters  of  14
October 2013 and 6 November 2013, has failed to provide any explanation  why
he did not do so, when both letters were sent to the solicitors  acting  for
him at the time. He has produced no evidence of having made a  complaint  to
or against the solicitors for failing to pass the letters on to him  and  to
advise him accordingly and I therefore do not accept that he was  not  aware
of the requirement for him to have his biometric information taken.  As  the
letter of 14 October 2013 advised him, he  was  given  15  working  days  in
which to submit his biometric information. He failed to do so and was  given
a further 17 working days, as  advised  in  the  respondent's  letter  of  6
November 2013. Having provided  the  appellant  with  ample  opportunity  to
rectify his omission the respondent was then perfectly  entitled  to  reject
his application as invalid on 5 December 2013.  Indeed  the  appellant  does
not challenge that invalidity decision.

There is  nothing  in  the  decision  in  JH  to  suggest  that  an  invalid
application, albeit made prior to the expiry of leave to remain, can  extend
that period of leave under s3C of the 1971 Act. On the  contrary,  paragraph
13 of JH makes it clear that the  application,  in  order  to  extend  leave
under section 3C, has to be a valid  one.  In  JH  it  was  found  that  the
application was a valid one. In the appellant's case before me,  it  clearly
was not.

Accordingly, whether or not the application submitted on 3 January 2014  was
wrongly rejected as invalid on the basis of  non-payment  of  the  fee,  the
fact is that the application was made at a time when the  appellant  had  no
extant leave and that he did not make  any  valid  application  for  further
leave to remain prior  to  the  expiry  of  his  leave  to  remain.  He  was
therefore not entitled to a statutory right of appeal against  the  decision
of 11 March 2014 or indeed against  any  decision  made  on  an  application
submitted after 8 October 2013. FTTJ Rothwell was  accordingly  entitled  to
find that there was no valid appeal before her.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law such that the  decision  has  to  be  set  aside.  I
uphold the decision. There was and is no valid appeal before the Tribunal.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
