

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 16041-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   29.10.2013|
|on    29.10.2013                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |20.11.2013                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                         Kenneth Kayode Kehinde EKE
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Samina Iqbal  (counsel instructed by Sam)
For the respondent: Mr J Parkinson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge John Cooper and a  lay  member),  sitting  at  Kingston
    Crown Court on 3 July 2013, to  a deportation appeal by  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria, born 18 August 1990. There are a number of  grounds,  but  the
    first is about the panel's failure to apply the  'new  Rules'  on  such
    cases, in force from 9 July 2012.

 2. As both sides agree, this was a clear error of law, particularly in the
    light of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  which  has  since  become
    available. It will require the decision to be  re-made,  and  the  only
    issue is about the form of the hearing that will  need.  Mr  Parkinson,
    having at first been inclined to insist on pursuing his  challenges  to
    the panel's findings of fact, argued that I could  re-decide  the  case
    for myself on the evidence as  set  out  in  their  decision,  and  the
    principles laid down in MF (Nigeria). Miss Iqbal pointed to  the  steps
    which were under way to get up-to-date evidence about  the  appellant's
    condition from the consultant psychiatrist who has  been  treating  him
    for some time in hospital, and asked for a full fresh hearing.

 3. If the further  evidence  awaited  had  been  from  a  purely  forensic
    psychiatrist, in the sense of one  engaged  for  the  purpose,  then  I
    should have taken the view that it ought to have  been  made  available
    for today, and gone on to decide the case myself on what was before me.
    However, since this appellant is actually under treatment in  hospital,
    first those representing him are to an extent in  the  hands  of  those
    representing him there; and, second the  situation  itself  amounts  to
    some confirmation that  he  has  an  ongoing  condition  considered  to
    require treatment at present.

 4. So I shall direct a full fresh hearing: since fresh evidence is  to  be
    taken in any case, and it will not come before the original panel,  all
    findings of fact will be open. This will inevitably be a time-consuming
    exercise, for which a full day will be required,  and  I  have  decided
    that it should take place before a different panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. They will have to decide whether  the  extent  to  which  any
    continuing psychiatric needs of the appellant could be met  in  Nigeria
    would amount  to  the  'very  compelling  reasons'  (see  MF  (Nigeria)
    paragraph  43)  required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   his
    deportation. It is hard at present to see anything else  in  this  case
    which could amount to reasons of that kind, though that  too  would  be
    for the panel to decide in due course.

 5. The date for the fresh hearing will be set by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Hatton Cross, since as the  appellant  is  detained  in  hospital  a
    secure court will be required. Immediate steps  should  be  pursued  to
    ensure  the  provision  of  an  up-to-date  report  from  his   current
    psychiatrist. When a hearing date is received, any difficulties it  may
    give over that requirement should lead to an immediate  application  to
    the resident judge. While any further orders will be for the First-tier
    Tribunal, it would not be wise for those representing the appellant  to
    put their hopes in any application for adjournment at a later stage.


Home Office appeal
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal,  not  before  Judge  Cooper  or  Mr  A
    Richardson JP



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



