
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA163442014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th May 2016                              |On 8th June 2016              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Ali Abulgasem Errabou
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of  Judge  Cheales
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the  FTT)  promulgated  on  30th  September
    2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Libyan citizen born 6th January 1995 who is  now
    21 years of age.  He applied for leave to remain as  the  dependant  of
    his father, a points-based system migrant.

 4. The application was refused  on  30th  April  2013  with  reference  to
    paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Secretary  of  State
    finding it undesirable to permit the Claimant to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom in the light of his conduct because he had been "convicted of a
    number of violent robberies."

 5. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 2nd  September  2014  and
    dismissed with reference to paragraph 322(5), the FTT finding that  the
    Secretary of State was correct to refuse the Claimant's application for
    leave to remain under this paragraph.  The FTT stated that  the  nature
    and  seriousness  of  the  Claimant's  offences  had  been  taken  into
    consideration and noted that although the Claimant stated that  he  was
    not involved in robbery, he had pleaded guilty.

 6. The FTT found that the Claimant's family and private life could not  be
    considered with  reference  to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    because he had not made a valid application for leave to remain relying
    on Article 8.  The FTT went on  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention)  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and on this basis allowed the  appeal,  taking  into
    account that the Claimant had lived in the United Kingdom since he  was
    11 years of age, and  his  family  currently  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the FTT had erred  when
    considering proportionality under Article 8,  by  failing  to  consider
    sections 117A-117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act).

Error of Law

 8. At a hearing on 18th January 2016 I heard submissions from both parties
    regarding error of law.  It was contended on  behalf  of  the  Claimant
    that the FTT had not materially erred in  law.   I  set  out  below  my
    conclusions and reasons for finding that the FTT had erred in law,  and
    therefore the decision of the FTT was set aside;


         14   The FTT erred in paragraph 20 in finding  that  an  Article  8
             claim could not be considered under the Immigration Rules  and
             had neglected to consider GEN.1.9(a)(iii) of Appendix FM which
             provides that the requirement to make a valid application  for
             leave to remain relying on Article 8, does  not  apply  in  an
             appeal.
         15   The FTT did not  materially  err  in  proceeding  to  consider
             Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  but  did  materially
             err in its consideration of Article 8.  This is because  there
             is  no  reference  whatsoever  to  sections  117A-D,  and   in
             particular section 117B which sets  out  the  public  interest
             considerations which are applicable in all  cases,  and  which
             must be considered.  Sections 117A-D were brought into  effect
             on 28th July 2014, and applied to  all  appeals  heard  on  or
             after that date.
         16   Failure to refer to section 117B  is  not  an  error,  if  the
             decision demonstrates that the considerations set out  therein
             have been considered.  The FTT decision does  not  demonstrate
             that  those  considerations  have  been  properly  taken  into
             account.
         17   In particular  the  FTT  has  neglected  to  consider  section
             117B(5) which states that little weight should be given  to  a
             private life established by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the
             person's immigration status is precarious.  In this  case  the
             Claimant had always had limited leave to remain, and therefore
             had always had  a  precarious  immigration  status.   The  FTT
             should have considered this,  and  was  bound  by  statute  to
             attach little weight to that private life.
         18   It is not clear if the FTT allowed the appeal based  upon  the
             Claimant's family or private life or both.  If the appeal  was
             allowed with reference to the Claimant's family life, the  FTT
             erred as there was no adequate consideration  of  whether  the
             Claimant had established  a  family  life  that  would  engage
             Article 8.  He is an adult, and therefore the FTT should  have
             considered whether it had been demonstrated that the  Claimant
             had more than the  normal  emotional  ties  with  his  family.
             There is no such consideration.
         19   Having set aside the decision of the FTT I indicated that  the
             only finding preserved was the conclusion that the  Claimant's
             appeal could not succeed with reference to paragraph 322(5) of
             the Immigration Rules.  There had been no  challenge  to  that
             finding.
         20   Mr Sarwar indicated that the Claimant wished to adduce further
             evidence and I agreed that it was appropriate  to  adjourn  so
             that further evidence could be given and considered.

 9. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, and the submissions made by both parties are  contained  in
    my error of law decision promulgated on 29th January 2016.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 27th May 2016

10. There was no attendance by or on behalf of  the  Claimant.   There  had
    been a previous hearing on 7th March 2016 when  the  Claimant  and  his
    father attended together with the Claimant's solicitor.   That  hearing
    was adjourned at the request of the Claimant's  solicitor  because  the
    Claimant's case had not been prepared.   The  Tribunal  file  indicates
    that on 23rd March 2016 the Claimant's solicitors notified the Tribunal
    that they had ceased to act for the Claimant.

11. Mr Mills submitted that it was appropriate to proceed with the  hearing
    in the absence of the Claimant.  I considered rule 38 of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, which provides that if  a  party
    fails to attend a hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  may  proceed  with  the
    hearing if satisfied that the party has been notified of the hearing or
    that reasonable steps have been  taken  to  notify  the  party  of  the
    hearing, and considers that it  is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing.

12. I was satisfied that proper notice of the hearing had been given to the
    Claimant on 7th April 2016, advising that  the  resumed  hearing  would
    take place at Centre City Tower, Birmingham on Friday 27th May 2016  at
    10 a.m.  That notification was not returned to the  Tribunal  by  Royal
    Mail.  The Claimant had not notified the  Tribunal  of  any  change  of
    address and I was  therefore  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  had  been
    notified of the hearing.  There was no application for an  adjournment,
    and I took into account the length of time that had elapsed  since  the
    Secretary of State's decision was made, which was on 30th  April  2013,
    and the length of time that had elapsed since the error of law hearing.
     I decided that it was appropriate and in the interests of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing.

13. I heard oral submissions from Mr Mills.  He advised that the  Appellant
    and his father had made claims for asylum but the  Secretary  of  State
    had not yet made decisions on those claims.

14. Mr Mills submitted that the Claimant's appeal could  not  succeed  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules, by reason of
    sub-paragraph (i) which provides that the application should  not  fall
    for refusal under any of the grounds in section S-LTR.1.2 to  S-LTR.2.3
    and S-LTR.3.1 of Appendix FM.  Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  Claimant
    could not succeed because of S-LTR.1.4 and 1.6 in that his presence  in
    the UK is not  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  he  has  been
    convicted of an offence for which he was sentenced to imprisonment  for
    less than four years but at least twelve months,  and  because  of  his
    conduct, character, and associations which made it undesirable to allow
    him to remain in the United Kingdom.

15. In relation to  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  Mr  Mills
    submitted that the Appellant had not established family life that would
    engage Article 8.

16. In relation to his private life it was accepted that the Appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom since 2006, but I was  asked  to  take  into
    account that he had engaged in  criminality  and  anti-social  conduct.
    The Appellant had always had a precarious immigration status in that he
    had only ever had limited leave to remain, and therefore little  weight
    should be attached to his private life.  Mr Mills submitted that  there
    was a significant public interest in removing the Appellant because  of
    his criminal behaviour.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. I have taken into account all the documentary evidence that was  placed
    before the FTT.  This includes the Secretary of State's bundle, and the
    Claimant's bundle comprising 46 pages,  together  with  the  Notice  of
    Appeal submitted by the Claimant, and the Claimant's PNC record.

19. That record shows the Claimant received a reprimand for taking a  motor
    vehicle without consent on 13th July 2011, and that on 25th May 2012 at
    Warwick Crown Court he received  a  detention  and  training  order  of
    eighteen months,  for  three  offences  of  robbery,  two  offences  of
    attempted robbery, and two offences of affray.

20. I have taken into account the witness statements made by the  Appellant
    and his father, both of which are dated 22nd August 2014.  I also  note
    a letter of support from the National Probation Service dated 29th July
    2014, and a letter of support from Coventry  Youth  Offending  Services
    dated 30th July 2014, and Stoke Heath Community Centre dated 25th  July
    2014.  I also note that Coventry University on 3rd  July  2014  made  a
    conditional offer to the Claimant to undertake a computing  engineering
    and science course.

21. I find that the Claimant  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    September 2006 as the dependant of his father who had leave as a Tier 4
    Student.

22. I remind myself that when considering the Immigration Rules in relation
    to Article 8, the burden of proof is on the Claimant, and the  standard
    of proof is a balance of probability.

23. The finding made by the FTT that the Claimant's appeal  cannot  succeed
    with reference to paragraph 322(5) is preserved.  Paragraph  322(5)  is
    set out below;

         'the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct   (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph  322(1C),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security.'

24. The Claimant places no reliance upon Appendix FM.

25. I find that the  appeal  cannot  succeed  by  reliance  upon  paragraph
    276ADE(1)  because  of  sub-paragraph  (i)  which  provides  that   the
    application;

         '(i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  section
             S-LTR.1.2 to S-LTR.2.3 and S-LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM;'

26. I set out below S-LTR.1.4 and 1.6;

         '1.4 The presence of the applicant in the UK is  not  conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to  imprisonment  for  less
             than four years but at least twelve months.

         1.6  The presence of the applicant in the UK is  not  conducive  to
             the public good because their conduct  (including  convictions
             which  do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3  to   1.5)
             character, associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable
             to allow them to remain in the UK.'

27. I consider  that  the  appeal  cannot  succeed  because  of  the  above
    suitability requirements.  The judge who  sentenced  the  Claimant  and
    others stated;

         "But I have to look at the gravity of the  matters  that  you  have
         pleaded guilty to  and  in  particular,  the  robberies  are  grave
         robberies because they involve people who are in the city centre in
         the evening.  You are part of a group,  you  are  hooded,  you  are
         menacing.  You attack like cowardly jackals with overwhelming force
         and do use force, in some instances the  victims  are  badly  hurt.
         And I simply cannot ignore the gravity or the need that  people  in
         Coventry would expect me to take into account to ensure that  their
         town centre is as safe as possible."

28. Therefore  the  Claimant's  appeal  cannot  succeed  by  reliance  upon
    paragraph 276ADE because he cannot satisfy 276ADE(1)(i).

29. I find that it  is  appropriate  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, having taken into account the guidance given by  the
    Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387  and  in  particular
    paragraph 33 in which it is stated that the general  position  is  that
    compelling circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim
    for a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

30. Article 8 provides;

         '1   Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2    There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.'

31. In considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules I  have  adopted
    the five-stage approach  advocated  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  which
    involves answering the following questions;


    (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?


    (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


    (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


    (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?


    (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

32. I do not find that the Appellant, as an adult, has proved that  he  has
    established a family life in  the  United  Kingdom  that  would  engage
    Article 8.  There is no evidence that he is married  or  has  children.
    The Court of Appeal in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 decided that  family
    life is not established between an adult child and his parents or other
    siblings unless something more exists than normal emotional ties.

33. The Upper Tribunal in Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC)  recognised  that
    family life may continue between a parent  and  child  even  after  the
    child has attained his majority and there should be no blanket rule  in
    cases such as this, but each case should be analysed on its own  facts,
    as each case is fact sensitive.

34. The Claimant has provided no  up-to-date  evidence  as  to  his  family
    circumstances, and in the absence of such evidence, I do not find  that
    he has proved that he has established a family life that  would  engage
    Article 8.

35. However I accept that the Appellant has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since September 2006 and has established a private life  and  therefore
    Article 8 is engaged on that basis.

36. I find that his proposed removal would  be  an  interference  with  his
    private life, and the interference  would  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

37. Dealing with the third  Razgar  question,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, in that the Appellant
    cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules in order to be  granted  leave  to
    remain.

38. I find  that  it  is  necessary  for  a  state  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control,  which  is  necessary  in  the  interests  of  the
    economic well-being of the country.

39. I must decide whether the proposed  interference  with  the  Claimant's
    private life is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  In considering this, I take into account section 117B of the
    2002 Act.  Sub-section (1) provides that the maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.

40. Sub-section (2) provides that it is  in  the  public  interest  that  a
    person seeking to remain can speak English.  I accept that the Claimant
    can speak English as he gave  his  evidence  to  the  FTT  in  English.
    However the Upper Tribunal decided in  AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT  0260
    (IAC) that an applicant can obtain no positive  right  to  a  grant  of
    leave to remain from either section 117B(2) or (3) whatever the  degree
    of his fluency in English or the strength of his financial resources.

41. In relation to sub-paragraph (3) I do not find that up-to-date evidence
    has  been  provided  to  prove  that  the  Appellant   is   financially
    independent.

42. Sub-paragraph (5) provides that little weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.  It was confirmed in AM (Malawi) that
    a person  has  a  precarious  immigration  status  if  their  continued
    presence in the United Kingdom  is  dependent  upon  them  obtaining  a
    further grant of leave.  Therefore  a  person  with  limited  leave  to
    remain has a precarious immigration status.

43. The Claimant has only ever had limited leave to remain as the dependant
    of his father.  I therefore have to attach little weight to the private
    life that he has established since  his  arrival  in  this  country  in
    September 2006.

44. In any event, I must take into account the criminal offences  committed
    by the Claimant, and because of this I find that there is  particularly
    strong weight to be attached to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control.

45. I also attach weight to the fact that the Appellant cannot satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules in order to be granted leave to remain.

46. The Appellant did not attend the hearing to give oral evidence, and has
    not submitted up-to-date evidence,  despite  having  been  given  every
    opportunity to do so.  I have not been  provided  with  any  up-to-date
    background evidence in relation to  the  current  situation  in  Libya.
    That may well  be  a  matter  to  be  considered  in  relation  to  the
    Claimant's separate asylum claim.

47. In relation to the issues before me, I conclude that the weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest, and the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control outweighs the weight to be attached to  the  wishes
    of the Claimant to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   I  find  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision does not breach Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.






Signed                              Date 2nd June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 2nd June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
