
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16224/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 10 August 2016                            |On 11 August 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           BASHARAT MEHMOOD MALIK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Ali Instructed by Maliks and Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Aboni Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Parkes who at a hearing at Sheldon Court  in  Birmingham  on  the  25
       November 2015, after hearing from the advocates, found there  was  no
       valid appeal and instructed the administration to issue a  notice  to
       that effect. Accordingly a letter dated 26 November 2015 was sent  to
       the parties containing the following text:


          NOTICE OF APPEAL WHERE THERE IS NO RELEVANT DECISION ETC


          You have given a notice  of  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
          Respondent.


          The decision against which you are seeking to appeal  is  not  one
          against which there is an exercisable right of appeal to the First-
          tier Tribunal or is one where the notice of  appeal  falls  within
          rule 22 (2) (a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
          (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014.   Accordingly  the
          notice of appeal you have lodged is invalid and the Tribunal  will
          take no further action in relation to it.


    2. The Judges note appears to refer to submissions that  the  method  of
       challenge should have been by way of judicial review, that  there  is
       no regulation 26 appeal conferring an in-county right  of  appeal  as
       regulation 27(i)(c) applies, and as the appellant is still in the  UK
       there is no valid appeal.
    3. Regulation 27(i)(c) provides that  a  person  may  not  appeal  under
       regulation 26 whilst he is in  the  United  Kingdom  against  an  EEA
       decision to refuse to issue him with a family permit. Regulation 2 of
       the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (as
       amended) defines a family permit in the following terms:


          "EEA family permit" means  a  document  issued  to  a  person,  in
          accordance with regulation 12, in connection with his admission to
          the United Kingdom.


    4. Regulation 12 sets out the circumstances in which an Entry  Clearance
       Officer must issue a family permit to a person  meeting  the  various
       criteria.
    5. The application in this case related to a residence  card  sought  as
       confirmation of a right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national
       exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom, which was refused  on
       the basis the marriage was said to be a marriage  of  convenience.  A
       residence card is defining in Regulation 2 as:


          "residence card" means a card issued to a person who is not an EEA
          national in  accordance  with  regulation  17,  as  proof  of  the
          holder's right of residence in the United Kingdom on the  date  of
          issue.


    6. There is, arguably, a clear difference in the definition of a  family
       permit as opposed to a residence card. As a family permit  is  issued
       by an Entry Clearance Officer the applicant is ordinarily outside the
       UK. As such any appeal against the refusal will be  issued  with  the
       appellant out of country.  An  applicant  for  a  residence  card  is
       ordinarily in the UK.  The refusal to issue  the  residence  card  in
       this case  confers  upon  the  appellant  a  right  of  appeal  under
       regulation 26.
    7. At the hearing it was accepted that the  finding  that  the  decision
       under appeal is the refusal of a family permit is incorrect as it  is
       the refusal to issue a residence card.
    8. Ms Aboni submitted that even if the Judge was in error in relation to
       this element there was no jurisdiction for the Upper Tribunal to hear
       the case as a finding as to the validly of an appeal is  an  excluded
       decision. It is said  the  challenge  should  have  been  by  way  of
       judicial review.





Discussion


    9. A similar issue was considered by the  Upper  Tribunal  in   Ved  and
       another  (appealable  decisions;  permission  applications;   Basnet)
       [2014] UKUT 00150 (IAC) where it was found:


        3.    A jurisdictional decision in a determination of the First-tier
        Tribunal (IAC) can be appealed.


          8.  Rule 9 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
          Rules 2005 reads as follows:-


             "9   Where the Tribunal may not accept a notice of appeal


                 (1)   Where a person has given a notice of  appeal  to  the
                 Tribunal and the circumstances in paragraph (1A) apply, the
                 Tribunal may not accept the notice of appeal.


                 (1A)  The circumstances referred to in  paragraph  (1)  are
                 that-


                     (a)   there is no relevant decision;


                     (b)   the notice of appeal concerns the refusal of  an
                     application for entry clearance which was not made for
                     a purpose falling within section 88A(1)(a) or  (b)  of
                     the 2002 Act, and the notice of appeal does  not  rely
                     on  either  of  the  grounds  specified   in   section
                     88A(3)(a) of the 2002 Act; or


                     (c)   the Lord  Chancellor  has  refused  to  issue  a
                     certificate of fee satisfaction.


                 (2)   Where the  Tribunal  does  not  accept  a  notice  of
                 appeal, it must-


                     (a)   notify the person giving the  notice  of  appeal
                     and the respondent; and


                     (b)    take  no  further  action  on  that  notice  of
                     appeal."


          9.  The Senior President's Practice Statements of the  Immigration
          and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
          Tribunal (2010, as amended) contain the following:-


             "3   Where the Tribunal may not accept a notice of appeal


                 3.1   First-tier rule 9 (where the Tribunal may not  accept
                 a notice of appeal) imposes a duty on the Tribunal  not  to
                 accept an invalid notice of appeal  (in  the  circumstances
                 described in rule 9(1A)) and to serve notice to this effect
                 on the person who gave the notice  of  appeal  and  on  the
                 respondent.


                 3.2   The Tribunal will scrutinise a notice  of  appeal  as
                 soon as practicable after it has  been  given.   First-tier
                 rule 9 makes no provision for the issue of validity  to  be
                 determined by means of a hearing or  by  reference  to  any
                 representations of the parties.


                 3.3   Once the Tribunal has served the notice described  in
                 paragraph 3.1, First-tier rule 9 provides that the Tribunal
                 must take no further action in relation to  the  notice  of
                 appeal.   The  decision  under  First-tier   rule   9   is,
                 accordingly, a procedural or preliminary decision.


                 3.4   The fact that a hearing date may have been  given  to
                 the parties does not mean that the appeal must  be  treated
                 as valid.  Accordingly, if at a hearing  (including  a  CMR
                 hearing) it transpires that the notice of appeal  does  not
                 relate to  a  decision  against  which  there  is,  in  the
                 circumstances, an exercisable right of appeal, the Tribunal
                 must so  find;  but  it  will  do  so  in  the  form  of  a
                 determination, rather than by means of a notice under First-
                 tier rule 9."


         10.  Certain decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
         Tribunal are "excluded decisions" for the purposes of  sections  11
         and 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007,  which
         govern appeals from respectively the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
         Upper  Tribunal  and  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  the  relevant
         Appellate Court.  Amongst the excluded decisions, which may not  be
         appealed under those sections are:-


             "any procedural, ancillary or  preliminary  decision  made  in
             relation to an appeal against a decision under section 40A  of
             the British Nationality Act 1981, section 82, 83 or 83A of the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, or regulation 26
             of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006"
             (Article 3(m) of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions)  Order  2009
             (SI 2009/275 (as amended)).


         11.  In JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 78, the Court of  Appeal  construed  the  appellate
         scheme which applied to the former Asylum and Immigration Tribunal,
         which for present purposes is not materially  different  from  that
         under the 2007 Act. The effect of the  Court's  judgment  is  that,
         once the time for applying rule 9 of the 2005 Rules has  passed,  a
         jurisdictional decision  is  appealable,  rather  than  only  being
         susceptible to judicial review.  In order to reflect this important
         principle, Practice  Statement  3.4  provides  that,  although  the
         holding of a hearing of an appeal does not prevent the  judge  from
         finding there is, in the circumstances,  no  exercisable  right  of
         appeal, the proper means of recording such a  decision  is  in  the
         form of a determination, rather than a notice under rule 9  of  the
         2005 Rules. The result of this is that the rule 9 procedure applies
         only to the preliminary "screening" stage at which a Duty Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal scrutinises notices of appeal.


         12.  Practice Statement 3.4 was considered in some  detail  by  the
         Upper Tribunal in Abiyat & Others (Rights of  appeal)  [2011]  UKUT
         00314 (IAC).  Mr C  M  G  Ockelton,  Vice-President,  held  that  a
         decision as  to  jurisdiction  was  not  a  "procedural"  decision.
         Furthermore, a jurisdictional decision made otherwise than pursuant
         to rule 9 at the "screening" stage,  cannot  be  categorised  as  a
         "preliminary" decision:-


             "I conclude that JH  (Zimbabwe)  essentially  decides  that  a
             decision as to jurisdiction made after the Tribunal has  begun
             to  consider  an  appeal,   including   a   case   where   its
             consideration is limited to the  issue  of  whether  there  is
             jurisdiction, is not procedural, and is not preliminary in the
             sense intended by the legislation  governing  the  asylum  and
             immigration tribunals." [21]


         13.   Notwithstanding  the   judgment   in   JH   (Zimbabwe),   the
         determination in Abiyat and the provisions  of  Practice  Statement
         3.4, Judge Hawden-Beal's determination was sent to the  parties  by
         the First-tier Tribunal's administration in Birmingham under  cover
         of the following document:-


             "Notice of Appeal where there is no Relevant Decision


             You have given a notice of appeal against the decision of  the
             Respondent.


             The decision against which you are seeking to  appeal  is  not
             one against which there is an exercisable right of  appeal  to
             the First-tier Tribunal or is one where the notice  of  appeal
             falls within rule  9(1A)(b)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
             Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  Accordingly  the  notice  of
             appeal you have lodged is invalid and the Tribunal  will  take
             no further action in relation to it."


         14.  It was plainly wrong for such a  notice  to  have  accompanied
         Judge Hawden-Beal's determination.  The only  proper  time  to  use
         that notice is at what we have termed the "screening" stage,  where
         a notice of appeal is scrutinised by a Duty  Judge,  who  considers
         that rule 9 applies.  In the present case, what the parties  should
         have received from the First-tier Tribunal  was  a  notice  stating
         that a determination  was  enclosed  and  explaining  how  a  party
         dissatisfied with that determination could challenge it by applying
         to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal, pursuant to section 11 of the 2007 Act.


        4.    The First-tier Tribunal's refusal to entertain the application
        for permission to appeal


         15.  Undaunted by the  misleading  notice,  those  acting  for  the
         appellants filed an application with the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal.  On 12 April 2013  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         from its office in Leicester, wrote to the  appellants'  solicitors
         as follows:-


             "Your  application  for  permission  to   appeal   cannot   be
             entertained by the Upper Tribunal (sic).  This is because  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal you seek to  challenge  is
             an excluded decision and therefore no appeal against  it  lies
             to the Upper Tribunal: see section 11 of the Courts, Tribunals
             and Enforcement  Act 2007 (sic) and, in particular, the  order
             made pursuant  to  section  11(5)(f):  the  Appeals  (Excluded
             Decisions) Order 2009 (as amended)."


         16.  It is unclear whether the letter  of  12  April  followed  any
         judicial scrutiny of the appellants' application.  In any event, it
         was not only ineptly drafted but, in the  circumstances,  wrong  in
         law.


         17.  In so finding, we are not to be taken as saying that a (better-
         drafted) version of the 12 April letter should not be sent whenever
         a notice of appeal has  been  rejected  by  a  Duty  Judge,  acting
         pursuant to rule 9. On the contrary, where the rule 9 procedure has
         been followed by that Judge  and  a  person  seeks  to  appeal  the
         outcome, he or she should be told that the rule 9  decision  is  an
         excluded decision, which cannot be appealed to the Upper  Tribunal.
         But, as the present case bears witness, such letters  must  not  be
         used in connection with decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
         are given in the form of determinations.


        5.     The  Upper  Tribunal's  response  to  the   application   for
        permission to appeal


         18.   Following  their  rebuff  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
         appellants filed  completed  form  IAUT-1,  seeking  permission  to
         appeal from the Upper Tribunal itself.  On 6 August 2013 the  Upper
         Tribunal at Field House wrote to the appellants as follows:-


             "You have submitted to the Upper Tribunal an  application  for
             permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.  This, however, cannot be  entertained  by  the
             Upper Tribunal because Rule 21(2) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
             (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides that a person  may  apply
             to the Upper Tribunal for permission  to  appeal  only  if  an
             application has been made to the First-tier Tribunal  and  has
             been refused.  It is not apparent that this is the case and no
             further action can be taken in respect of the application  you
             have made to the Upper Tribunal."


         19.  Rule 21(2) of the Upper Tribunal Rules reads as follows:-


             "(2) A person may apply to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission
             to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of  another
             tribunal only if:-


                 (a)   they have  made  an  application  for  permission  to
                 appeal to the tribunal which made the decision  challenged;
                 and


                 (b)   that application has been refused  or  has  not  been
                 admitted."


         20.  As can  immediately  be  seen,  the  letter  of  6  August  is
         inaccurate, in so far as it refers only to an  application  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal having "been refused".  No reference is made to
         the alternative possibility, whereby the application "has not  been
         admitted".


   10. The appeal was received by the Tribunal on the 5 May 2015 and  notice
       of hearing was sent to the parties on  3  July  2015.  The  issue  of
       jurisdiction was not raised by the respondent  and  the  hearing  set
       down for 25 November 2015. Notice was sent that the appeal  had  been
       put on the reserved list, on 17 November 2015, but again no issue  of
       jurisdiction was taken.
   11. The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 have  been
       replaced by The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration
       and
   12. Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. Rule 9  is  in  different  form  and  the
       relevant rule is rule 22 which states:


         Circumstances in which the Tribunal may  not  accept  a  notice  of
         appeal


         22. -    (1)  Where a person has provided a notice of appeal to the
              Tribunal and any of the circumstances in paragraph (2) apply,
              the Tribunal may not accept the notice of appeal.


              (2) The circumstances referred to in paragraph (1) are that-


                  (a)  there is no appealable decision; or


                  (b)   the  Lord  Chancellor  has  refused   to   issue   a
                  certificate of fee satisfaction.


              (3) Where the Tribunal does not accept a notice of appeal, it
              must-


                  (a)  notify the person providing the notice of appeal  and
                  the respondent; and


                  (b)  take no further action on that notice of appeal.


   13. In this case the appeal was accepted and  listed  for  hearing  as  a
       result of which the procedural  stage  went  beyond  the  time  limit
       provided by rule 9 and 22. The use of  the  notice  of  'no  relevant
       decision' was arguable wrong as the time for  the  use  of  such  had
       passed. The Judge heard  argument  and  was  required  to  provide  a
       written decision with reasons. As found in JH (Zimbabwe)  a  decision
       as to jurisdiction made after the Tribunal has begun to  consider  an
       appeal, including a case where its consideration is  limited  to  the
       issue of whether there is jurisdiction, in not procedural and is  not
       preliminary in the sense intended by the  legislation  governing  the
       asylum and immigration tribunals.
   14. I find the Upper Tribunal does  have  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
       appellants appeal for which permission to appeal has been granted. It
       has not been made out that the only avenue of challenge is restricted
       to an application by way of judicial review.
   15. I find the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  law  in  finding  that
       tribunal were excluded from considering the merits of the appeal  for
       want of jurisdiction.
   16. The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
       Sheldon Court, on a date to be fixed by that Tribunal, for hearing as
       the appellant has yet to have a fair hearing of  the  merits  of  his
       claim.
   17. The grounds refer to the suspensive effect of the decision  but  that
       is separate from the issue of  jurisdiction.   It  is  debatable  the
       assertion the appeal is suspensive is correct in any event.


Decision

   18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. This appeal is
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a lawful decision to be made.


  Anonymity.


   19. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 August 2016

