
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/16221/2013,
                                                               ia/16226/2013
                                                               ia/16229/2013
                                                               IA/16230/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2014                           |On 11th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. MR JUSTICE JAY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                         OYEGOKE ADEGBOYEGA ADEFUSI
                            FUNKE ADEFUSI ADEFUSI
                           DANIEL AYOOLUWA ADEFUSI
                          EMMANUEL OREOLUWA ADEFUSI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A K Stone, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first two  appellants  are
    married to each other.  The third and fourth appellants are their sons.
     The third appellant was born on 24 April 2008 and so is  now  6  years
    old.  The fourth appellant was born on 13 January 2006 and so is now  8
    years old.  The first appellant entered the United  Kingdom  some  time
    before 15 September 2004 with permission  as  a  visitor.   The  second
    appellant had a multi-entry visitor visa and  she  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, with permission, some time before 19 December 2004.  They have
    lived in the United Kingdom since then. The third and fourth appellants
    were born there.

 2. The first appellant applied for an EEA residence card on 10 March  2009
    but the application was refused on 12 January 2010. This application is
    of little, if any, relevance to the issues that we have to  decide  but
    it does show that the  first  appellant  had  some  concern  about  his
    immigration status before making the application  on  15  October  2009
    which, eventually, led to the appeal before us.

 3. On 15 October 2009 each of the appellants applied for further leave  to
    remain but their applications were refused on  19  February  2010.  The
    decisions of 19 February 2010 were not immigration decisions within the
    meaning of the phrase in section 82(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and so could not be appealed to the Tribunal.

 4. The appellants asked the respondent to make immigration decisions. They
    then brought judicial review proceedings in an effort to secure such  a
    decision and those proceedings were compromised on 14 February 2013. On
    26 April 2013 the respondent made removal decisions in  each  case  and
    explained the decision in a letter of the  same  date.  The  appellants
    subsequently appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  They  said  that
    removing them interfered  disproportionately  with  their  private  and
    family lives. The First-tier Tribunal's determination of their  appeals
    was promulgated on 28 November 2013. It dismissed the appeals and it is
    that decision that is the subject of the appeal before us.

 5. The chronology concerning the judicial review proceedings and the terms
    of the compromise are considered below.

 6. In the letter dated 26 April 2013 the respondent said that because  the
    appellants had remained in the United Kingdom beyond  their  period  of
    permitted leave they were liable to administrative removal.

 7. The respondent considered their "family life under Article 8 which from
    9th July 2012 falls under Appendix FM EX.1 of the rules" but found that
    they were not entitled to remain. We note that Appendix FM is  set  out
    as an amendment to the Immigration Rules in HC 194.  According  to  the
    provisions   headed   "Implementation",   "Appendix   FM   applies   to
    applications made on or after 9 July 2012 as set out in paragraph 91 of
    this Statement of Changes". It is apparent that  Appendix  FM  did  not
    apply to applications made but not decided before 9 July  2012  but  it
    was (the  appellants  say  wrongly)  applied  in  these  cases  by  the
    respondent.

 8. Appendix FM is the Family Members Appendix of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Section EX bears the title "Exception" but is probably best  understood
    as identifying further conditions that  an  applicant  relying  on  the
    Family Members Appendix must meet before that  person  is  entitled  to
    remain under the rules. It is not a "free standing" consideration which
    trumps other rules (see Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1  not  free  standing)
    [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC))

 9. In the case of both the  first  and  second  appellant  the  respondent
    addressed her mind to the "Requirements of Limited Leave to Remain as a
    Partner" (R-LTRP in the Immigration Rules). Although both the first and
    second appellant wanted to remain in the United Kingdom the respondent,
    correctly,  treated  each  appellant  separately  and  examined   their
    circumstances to see if they were entitled to remain. This required the
    slightly artificial exercise of examining their relationship with their
    partner (in fact their spouse) without regard  to  the  partner  having
    also made an application.

10. The respondent decided that neither of these appellants came within the
    scope of this rule because neither of their partners  were  settled  in
    the United Kingdom or otherwise able to satisfy the requirements of  E-
    LTRP.1.2.

11. Additionally, because in each case the  appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration  laws  (which  E-LTRP.2.2  prohibits),
    each  application  had  to  be  refused.  This  requirement,  that  the
    applicant is not in the United Kingdom in breach of immigration law, is
    excused if EX.1 applies but the requirement (broadly) that the  partner
    is lawfully in the United Kingdom cannot be excused.  It  follows  that
    even if EX.1 does apply neither appellant could show that they met  the
    requirements of the rules concerning leave to remain as a partner.

12.  The  respondent  then  asked  if  the  appellants  came   within   the
    Requirements of Leave to Remain as a Parent (R-LTRPT). To satisfy these
    requirements the first two appellants would have to satisfy each of the
    requirements of Section  E-LTRPT  (Eligibility  for  Limited  Leave  to
    Remain as a Parent.)

13. The respondent decided that the first two appellants are joint  parents
    bringing up their children together and so  did  not  come  within  the
    rules (E-LTRPT 2.3). Section EX1 does not apply to this rule.  This  is
    important.  If the Secretary of State is right in her application of E-
    LTRPT.2.3, EX1 is not relevant to the applications by joint parents.

14. Additionally, their applications could not succeed as  parents  because
    they were in the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  immigration  controls,
    contrary to E-LTRPT.3.2, and EX1 did not apply. These things meant that
    the first two appellants did not satisfy the requirement  of  leave  to
    remain as a parent.

15. The respondent then asked  if  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  had
    established  a  right  to  remain  with  reference  to  Section  E-LTRC
    (Eligibility for Leave to Remain as a Child). The respondent  concluded
    that they had not because neither of their  parents  had  or  would  be
    given leave to enter or remain as required by E-LTRC.1.6.

16. Section EX is not relevant to the application by the minor  appellants.
    It applies where the applicant has a "genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" and that is clearly not the case in an  application  made
    as a child.

17. It follows that even if  the  appellants  (or  any  of  them)  met  the
    requirements of section EX1 they could not satisfy the requirement  for
    leave remain as partners, parents or children.

18. However, even though the respondent decided that  appellants  were  not
    entitled to stay because of the operation of rules where  EX1  did  not
    apply, the refusal letter then explained that none  of  the  appellants
    came within EX1 even if it was a relevant consideration in their cases.
    It is a  requirement  of  EX.1.(a)(i)(cc)  that  the  applicant  has  a
    relationship with a child who "has lived in the UK continuously  for  a
    least 7 years immediately preceding the date of application" and it  is
    requirement of EX.1.(b) that "it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the UK". According to the respondent  the  children  had
    not lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least  7  years  immediately
    preceding the date of application and it would be reasonable to  expect
    the child to leave the UK. It follows  that  the  respondent  gave  two
    reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellants  did   not   meet   the
    requirements of EX.1 even if, contrary to the respondent's contentions,
    the appellants could satisfy the rules if EX.1 applied.

19. The refusal letter than considered the appellants' cases with regard to
    paragraph 276ADE  of  HC  395.  This  rule  purports  to  set  out  the
    "requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life". Having decided that it would be reasonable to
    expect the minor appellants to leave the United Kingdom and  live  with
    their parents the respondent decided that the parents could not rely on
    276ADE because they had  not  lived  for  long  enough  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The respondent then refused the  application  with  regard  to
    paragraph 276ADE(iii) and (vi). Paragraph 276ADE  (iii)  applies  where
    the applicant has at least 20 years' residence and paragraph 276ADE(vi)
    applies where the applicant has lost ties with his or  her  country  of
    nationality.

20. The respondent then considered the appellants' circumstances  including
    the length of their residence in the United Kingdom and representations
    made on their behalf to see if there were  "exceptional  circumstances"
    that would justify a decision to allow the applications. She found none
    and refused the applications.

21. We consider now the decision  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    recorded that the relevant Rules are 276ADE and Appendix FM of HC  395.
    It then set out the approach to Article 8 cases set out in R v SSHD  ex
    parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. It acknowledged the documents in the  case
    and summarised the cases of the respective parties.

22. The first and second appellants came to the United Kingdom in 2004 with
    permission as visitors but apparently without having any  intention  of
    returning to Nigeria.  They had lived in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    permission from 2004 until making an application in 2009.  Their  first
    two children, the third and fourth appellants were  born  in  2006  and
    2008.

23. The appellants concentrated on the rights of the minor  appellants.  It
    was said that they were well integrated into the United Kingdom and had
    never visited Nigeria and so were being returned  to  a  country  whose
    culture and society was alien to them.  The appellants' core point  was
    that they should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom because the
    oldest child had lived in the United Kingdom continuously for at  least
    seven years.  The first two appellants would ordinarily have to  depart
    from the United Kingdom because they were in breach of  UK  Immigration
    Laws (see E-LTRP.2.2.) but  they  maintained  there  was  an  exception
    because  paragraph   EX.1   applied.    This   paragraph   applies   if
    (EX.1.1(a)(i)(cc)) the appellant "has lived in the UK continuously  for
    at least seven years immediately preceding the  date  of  application".
    This Rule also requires that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK (EX.1.(a)(ii)).

24. The Tribunal noted that  the  appellants  attended  a  church  that  is
    aligned to a Pentecostal denomination that had  originated  in  Nigeria
    and was  still  active  there.   Although  the  adult  appellants  were
    described as integrated into the community by their pastor there was no
    particular evidence about any integration on the part of the third  and
    fourth appellants.  Their school reports noted that they  got  on  well
    with their peers but the fourth appellant was known to  distract  other
    children.  The First-tier Tribunal said, and we find this impossible to
    criticise, that:

         "there was no evidence that the third and  fourth  appellants  were
         other than normal 5 and 7 year old boys, albeit the  former  having
         particularly positive personal qualities.  I identified no need for
         any further evidence as to their needs and welfare."

25. The judge found that the appellants did not satisfy the requirements of
    the Rules to remain.

26. The judge also noted an earlier refusal letter commenting on the  first
    and second appellants choosing to travel to Nigeria in February 2004 to
    marry where their wedding was well attended by family and friends.  The
    Secretary of State saw this as an indication that they had strong links
    in Nigeria and that facilitated their return.

27. The First-tier Tribunal then said at paragraph 17:

         "In qualification of what I have stated above I do find the  fourth
         appellant as having established,  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Rules, a private life in the United Kingdom but it is  my  decision
         that that conclusion is academic in terms of the fourth appellant's
         best interests and the situation of the appellants as a whole.   It
         is a conclusion that, in terms of the Rules, does  not  assist  the
         other appellants in this appeal.  Outside of the Rules, it  is  not
         disproportionate,  given  the  poor  immigration  history  of   the
         appellants and the public policy of immigration control,  that  the
         first three  appellants  be  removed  to  Nigeria  and  the  fourth
         appellant, in his best interests and in the interest of  preserving
         the family unit, be returned with them."

28. It then dismissed the appeals.

29. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was given  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  because:

         "The grounds for  permission  contend  that  the  Judge  fell  into
         material  error  by  failing  (1)  properly   to   appreciate   the
         distinction between applications made by and after 8th July 2012 in
         terms of operation of the "new" Immigration Rules and (2) to  adopt
         a structured approach to the Article  8  inquiry  and  properly  to
         consider the section 55 best interests of the children."

30. We deal first with the second point because this is, we find, the  more
    straightforward of the two. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  expressly
    set out the five stage approach suggested by Lord Bingham in R v.  SSHD
    ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and the consideration of section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  is  somewhat  brisk.
    Nevertheless we identify no error of law. Clearly (see paragraph 17  of
    the determination) the First-tier Tribunal decided  that,  even  though
    the oldest child (the fourth appellant) had lived all of  his  life  in
    the United Kingdom, he had not established a very  strong  private  and
    family life outside the home and that his, and the  third  appellant's,
    best interests lay in continuing to live with his parents.

31. Removing the parents was clearly proportionate. They had stayed in  the
    United Kingdom without permission for many  years  and  there  were  no
    exceptional factors identified to justify their  remaining.  Preserving
    family unity was important and so it was proportionate for each of  the
    appellants to be removed.

32. We agree with Mr Walker that the judge's approach, if  not  ideal,  was
    sufficiently detailed in the light of the  case  as  a  whole  to  show
    proper regard for the needs of the children. No material error is shown
    in the decision to dismiss the appeal on human  rights  grounds  unless
    the appellants had shown that they were entitled to  remain  under  the
    rules which is what they contend.

33. This brings us to the first ground identified above, namely the alleged
    failure to "appreciate the distinction between applications made by and
    after 8th July 2012 in terms of  operation  of  the  "new"  Immigration
    Rules".

34. As we indicated above, Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of HC 395  were
    introduced by amendment of the  Immigration  Rules  in  an  attempt  to
    codify the conditions to be met by a person seeking to enter or  remain
    in the United Kingdom by reason of his "family life" (Appendix  FM)  or
    his "private life" (paragraph 276ADE). Both were  introduced  by  HC194
    and applied to applications made  after  9  July  2012.  Unusually  for
    amendments to the Immigration Rules, there were transitional provisions
    set out at the start of Part 8. Broadly, if an  application  for  entry
    clearance, leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain has been  made
    before 9 July 2012 and the application has not been decided, it fell to
    be decided in accordance with the rules in force on 8 July 2012.

35. The grounds develop this point by complaining that the  respondent  and
    subsequently the Tribunal had  regard  to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE.

36. For the reasons already given we are satisfied  that  the  applications
    had to be refused under Appendix FM if it applies.

37. The appellants contend at paragraph 6 of their  grounds  that  EX  1(a)
    applies because "the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a  child  who"  meets  certain  conditions  including
    having lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years before  the  application
    was made but even if it does, none of the appellants meet  all  of  the
    requirements of the relevant parts of appendix FM.

38. We set out below paragraph 276ADE as presently in force:

         276ADE.  The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the
         grounds of private  life  in  the  UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         (i)    does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
                  Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix
                  FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
                  grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment); or(iv) is  under
                  the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the  UK
                  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
                  imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
                  applicant to leave the UK; or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
                  UK for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
                  imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
                  applicant to leave the UK; or

         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
                  least half of his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
                  for  less  than  20  years  (discounting  any  period   of
                  imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural
                  or family) with the country to which he would have  to  go
                  if required to leave the UK.

39. It is obvious from inspection that neither the first, second, nor third
    appellants can come within the provision of this rule.

40. The fourth appellant might be able to benefit from it because he  is  a
    child aged over 7 years who has lived his entire  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom but he can only come within the rules of he had spent  7  years
    in the United Kingdom "at the date of application".

41. He was born on 13 January 2006 and so had spent 7 years in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 January 2013. By then paragraph 276ADE had  been  amended
    from its original form to the form set out above. The fourth  appellant
    would have to show that "it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK". These words were added to paragraph  276ADE
    by paragraph 201 of HC 760. The  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  decided
    that it was reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK  because
    he decided that the applicant's best interests lay  in  remaining  with
    his parents.

42. It follows that there can be no material fault in a decision dismissing
    the appeals with reference to paragraph 276ADE and Appendix  FM  of  HC
    395 if, in fact, they applied to the case.

43. The grounds supporting the application for permission to  appeal  argue
    that the date of application has been identified wrongly.  The  grounds
    contend there are two decisions.  The first was made in 2010 in respect
    of an application made in 2009.   That  generated  an  appeal  and  the
    appeal was dismissed.  However there is also  a  decision  made  on  26
    April 2013.  It was that decision that was the subject  of  the  appeal
    but, according to the grounds, the decision should have  been  made  in
    accordance with the law in force on 8 July 2012 because the application
    leading to the decision was made before 9 July 2012 so,  in  accordance
    with HC 194 which brought Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE into  force,
    the new Rules did not apply to applications that had already been made.
     It was submitted that the respondent and the First-tier Tribunal  were
    wrong to have regard to Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  because  the
    application was made before 8 July 2012 and had  not  been  decided  by
    then.

44. The high water mark  of  the  appellants'  case  that  the  application
    predated the rule change in July 2012  is  the  Form  of  Consent  that
    compromised the judicial review action on 14 February 2013. It said:

         "UPON THE DEFENDANT agreeing within 3 months of the date of lodging
         of the Acknowledgement of Service name by 23rd April 2013  agreeing
         to reconsider the Claimant's case".

45. The use of the word "reconsider" necessarily requires the respondent to
    look again at something that had already been considered, but we cannot
    accept  that  this  meant  that  the  parties  regarded  as  extant  an
    application that had been made and  decided  by  being  refused  on  19
    February 2010. The judicial review proceedings did not decide that  the
    decision of 19 February 2010 was wrong. The complaint  was  that  there
    had  not  been  an  immigration  decision.  Properly  understood,   the
    respondent agreed to make a  new  decision.  That  must  have  meant  a
    decision on the new evidence, that is  in  the  light  of  the  current
    circumstances and there is no sensible way in  which  circumstances  in
    existence in February 2013 could be considered in an  application  made
    in October 2009. However, if they were the then oldest child  was  only
    three years old and the appellants' applications could not be  expected
    to succeed.

46.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  respondent  was  right  to  decide  the
    applications as if they were made when she decided  them.  She  applied
    the  rules  to  the  appellants'  circumstances  and  found  that   the
    applications had to be refused.

47. The First-tier Tribunal Judge agreed with her. He did not err.  However
    the appeal was dismissed on human rights grounds and under  the  rules.
    It is, we find, immaterial if the First-tier Tribunal Judge wrongly had
    regard to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. If the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had thought that he had to dismiss the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds if the requirements of FM were  not  met  then  he  would  have
    erred, but he did not. He  plainly  dismissed  the  appeal  "under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds"  and  he  referred  at
    paragraph 17 to considering the case "[o]utside the rules".

48. If the First-tier Tribunal Judge had decided that the  post  July  2012
    rules did not apply then he would have made precisely the same decision
    that he did. There are no "pre July 2012 rules" under which the  appeal
    should have been allowed. The effect  of  article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights would have been considered without regard to
    the new rules, but it would not have made  any  difference.  The  judge
    would have found that the disruption to the private and family lives of
    the appellants was proportionate to the  proper  purpose  of  enforcing
    immigration control. The two older appellants decided to remain in  the
    United Kingdom without permission and cannot complain if they are  made
    to return to their country of nationality.  Their  private  and  family
    lives outside the home in mainly conducted  through  their  church  and
    whilst they have  no  doubt  made  a  positive  contribution  to  their
    community this does  little  to  weigh  against  the  need  to  enforce
    immigration control.

49. The youngest appellant is not old enough to have established a  weighty
    "private and family life" of his own.

50. The older appellant has built up a significant private and family life,
    but he will not be able to remember  his  early  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom and there is no evidence that he built up unusual or compelling
    ties in the community. His best interests lie in his going  to  Nigeria
    with his parents and siblings  rather  than  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom without them. Although it might be desirable for him to  remain
    in the country that he knows, he is not a British citizen and he can be
    expected to adjust to life in Nigeria with the support of  his  family.
    It is not so desirable that he is spared the disruption inherent on his
    going to Nigeria that the rest of  his  family  should  be  allowed  to
    remain with him. His case was even weaker when the First-tier  Tribunal
    heard the appeal in November 2013.

51. These appeals distil down to some simple points. None of the appellants
    are entitled to remain under the rules. None  of  them  can  show  that
    removing them would interfere disproportionately with their private and
    family lives. The First-tier Tribunal did not  err  materially  and  we
    dismiss these appeals.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2014                   |







