
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16154/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2016                      |On 24 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr Ziauddin Zaki
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Ahammod of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. No anonymity direction is made.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears who allowed the appeal of Mr Zaki ("the
    claimant").  The claimant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 9 April 2015 refusing  his
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.



Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 9  April  1990.
    On 2 May 2013 he made an application for further leave to remain in the
    UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.


 4. As set  out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  the  claimant's
    application of 2 May 2013 was initially refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 13 January 2014.  The claimant appealed against that  decision
    and in a determination promulgated on 29 July 2014 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Blum  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  discharged  the  burden  upon  her   of
    demonstrating that the two documents submitted  by  the  claimant  were
    forgeries.  Judge Blum allowed the claimant's  appeal  to  the  limited
    extent that the decision was not in accordance with the  law  to  allow
    the Secretary of State to give lawful consideration to the  application
    and to see whether the bank account and solvency  certificate  met  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended)   ('the
    Immigration Rules').

 5. On 9 April 2015 the Secretary of State again  refused  the  application
    (refusing to award 10 points in respect of maintenance)  for  the  same
    reason as  the  first  refusal,  namely,  the  documents  submitted  in
    relation to the claimant's bank account with First Security Islami Bank
    Limited were asserted to be false. The Secretary of State relied upon a
    document from the bank confirming the documents  were  fake.  As  false
    documents had been submitted the Secretary of State considered that the
    claimant had used deception.  Therefore  the  application  was  refused
    under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  claimant
    appealed against this decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Judge Pears took the prior decision  of  Judge  Blum  as  the  starting
    point.  He noted the that Judge Blum gave clear indications of what was
    lacking in the evidence. He found that that the Secretary of State  had
    not discharged the burden of proof upon her  to  demonstrate  that  the
    documents submitted by the claimant in support of his application  were
    forgeries.  In consequence he allowed the claimant's appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 23 May 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  refused
    permission to appeal.  The Secretary of State renewed  her  application
    for permission to appeal and on 17 June 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
    granted.

 8. In essence the grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    erred in concluding that the Secretary of State did not  discharge  the
    burden of proof.   It  is  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasoning for that finding are entirely inadequate.

 9. The Secretary of State  draws  attention  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's comments at paragraph 10 that no  confirmation  from  the  bank
    could be found which stated that the documents were fake.  Reference is
    also made to paragraph 11 where the judge records that there was no new
    evidence to discharge the burden of proof.  It is asserted that neither
    of those sentences is correct and that it was clear that  the  document
    at D3 of the bundle was the new evidence which was relied upon  in  the
    refusal decision and that this was the relevant confirmation  from  the
    bank.  The Secretary of State also asserts that the test is whether, on
    the balance of probabilities, the  claimant  submitted  documents  that
    were not genuine.

10. It is asserted that the document at D3 confirms that the 'account title
    as per FSIBL account statement  was  fake'.   The  Secretary  of  State
    asserts that whether or not the balance dates shown  on  that  document
    correspond with those of the documents at D1 to D2, the bank  confirmed
    that the account title was fake and that the Tribunal  should  consider
    the document as a whole.

11. It is also asserted that the document at D3 bears the reference  number
    16863026 which is the reference number for the verification checks made
    on the claimant's bank documentation.  The Secretary of  State  submits
    that regardless of how many documents seem to be  referred  to  in  the
    verification request, that reference number clearly  links  the  second
    request to the documentation supplied in the first one.  It is asserted
    that the document at D3 was clearly the response from the bank  to  the
    second request.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

12. Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge failed to appreciate that the  checks
    had been re-undertaken in  2015  and  failed  to  appreciate  that  the
    document at D3 was in fact  new  evidence  and  was  different  to  the
    documentation previously relied upon.  She  submitted  that  the  point
    made by the Secretary of State is that the document reference number on
    D3 bears the same reference number as  the  request  for  verification.
    She referred to the document at E1 which was the request made in  2015.
    She submitted that the new check was undertaken on the  same  documents
    and that the method was similar.   This  was  an  independent  document
    issued by a third party that was relied upon by the Secretary of State.

13. We referred Ms Ahammod to various inconsistencies as noted by the First-
    tier Tribunal in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the decision and in addition
    to a misspelling of the name of the claimant on  the  document  at  D3.
    She submitted that the ultimate point is that the information given  by
    the bank should have  been  considered  by  the  judge  as  independent
    evidence.

14. Ms Ahammod submitted that the judge gave an indication in paragraphs 8,
    10 and 11 of the problems that had been identified with the  documents.
    She submitted that the Secretary of State had failed to  discharge  the
    burden of proof on her.  There was not  one  error  but  two  or  three
    errors.  She also submitted that it was of concern to  the  judge  that
    the Secretary of State had failed to show where the  contact  had  been
    made with the bank.  The form at E1 was a form sent by the  UK  to  the
    commission in India.  There were no follow on details.  The document at
    E2 had not been filled in and did not therefore show who contacted  the
    bank or when the bank was contacted.

Discussion

15. The First-tier Tribunal took into account the document at D3  which  is
    the new  evidence  upon  which  the  Secretary  of  State  relied.   At
    paragraphs 8 - 11 the judge set out:

         "8.  At D3 was another document which Ms Bell thought was  the  new
             evidence that was relied on by the respondent to deal with the
             points raised in the previous determination and it  bears  the
             reference number 16863026 but then  it  refers  to  a  current
             balance on a date which does not correlate with the  dates  on
             D1-2 and it  says  that  the  account  number  was  fake  when
             previously the bank had apparently said it was genuine.

         9.   The new document verification  report  at  E1-5  is  dated  14
             January 2015 and says 'May I please request the documents  are
             therefore re-verified and ask  the  bank  to  provide  written
             confirmation if the document is  not  genuine'.   The  request
             seems to be for one document to  be  re-verified  rather  than
             two, the document is not attached or detailed in  the  request
             and despite my and Ms Bell's endeavours we could not find  any
             response to the bank.  Rather more importantly  we  could  not
             find  any  document  that  addressed  the  concerns  that  the
             previous judge had about the evidence to show forgery.

         10.  I refer to the refusal letter which makes no reference to  the
             previous determination and whilst there is  reference  to  the
             bank confirming in writing that the documents are fake,  there
             is no reference to the date of that confirmation and as I have
             said none could be found.

         11.  It seems to me therefore that there is no new evidence  before
             the Tribunal to discharge the burden of proof.  It seems to me
             that Judge Blum was correct in his conclusion and  that  there
             is no evidence that challenges that."

16. The Secretary of State referred to paragraph  10  in  the  grounds  but
    misquoted the judge's finding. The judge did not find, as stated in the
    grounds, that 'no confirmation from  the  bank  could  be  found  which
    stated that the documents were fake'. The judge was  referring  to  the
    reasons for refusal letter and found that there was no reference to the
    date of the bank's confirmation. Whilst paragraph 11 could be  read  as
    the judge making a finding that there is no new evidence  (which  would
    be incorrect as clearly the document at D3 is  evidence  that  was  not
    before Judge Blum) this paragraph could  also  be  read  as  the  judge
    indicating that there is no new evidence that discharges the burden  of
    proof. In any event the judge did take into consideration the  document
    at D3.

17. Where the Secretary of State asserts that the  claimant  has  submitted
    false documents the burden of proof lies upon her to satisfy the First-
    tier Tribunal. It is a serious  allegation  and  the  consequences  are
    significant for the claimant. In this case a finding that the  claimant
    had used deception would result in any future application for leave  to
    remain or entry clearance being refused for a period.  To discharge the
    burden, it is necessary for the Secretary of State to furnish  evidence
    of sufficient strength and quality.

18. In this case, whilst the Secretary of  State  appears  to  have  sought
    confirmation  from  the  bank  with  regard  to  the  validity  of  the
    documents, the judge had serious doubts as to what documents  had  been
    considered by the bank, when the bank undertook this  verification  and
    to the link between the request for verification made  and  a  response
    from the bank.

19. The judge quite correctly pointed out that the  dates  on  D3  bear  no
    resemblance to the documents submitted by the claimant  in  support  of
    his application. In D2, which is a statement of account,  the  relevant
    dates are 1 January 2013 to 4 April 2013.  The document at D3 refers to
    the period being 21 May 2013 to 4 December 2013.  In  relation  to  the
    balance the document at D3 refers to a balance as on 13  October  2014,
    whereas the balance statement in the bundle at D1 refers to  a  balance
    as at the date of 4 April 2013.  Those  dates  are  inconsistent.   The
    other significant inconsistency noted by the Tribunal  judge  was  that
    the document at D3 says that the account number is fake,  whereas  when
    the (purported to be the same) documents were  initially  verified  the
    bank had apparently confirmed that  the  account  number  was  genuine.
    Although the reference on the document  at  D3  is  to  16863026  which
    relates to the verification request  at  E1  it  also  relates  to  the
    verification at E6 which was some two years earlier.

20. The judge also noted that it was not made  clear  what  documents  were
    sent to the bank in January 2015 or whether it was one document or  two
    documents. Further, there was no date on the document at  D3.  We  also
    noted that the document at D3 misspelt the claimant's  name,  referring
    to Zia Ussin, rather than Zia Uddin.

21. Given the inconsistencies contained within the document at D3  and  the
    documents submitted in  support  of  the  claimant's  application,  the
    inconsistency between what had  been  asserted  by  the  bank  in  2013
    together with the lack of an audit trail as to what had  been  sent  to
    the bank, the finding of the judge that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to discharge the burden of proving that the documents were  fake
    was one that was open to him.

22. We therefore do not find any material error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error  of  law
and shall stand.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 23 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
