
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16004/2013
                                                               IA/16023/2013
                                                               IA/16030/2013
                                                               IA/16040/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 November 2016             | On 29 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     P I
                                     M I
                                     R I
                                     O I
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs P I and Mr M I in person, on behalf of the
                    family as a whole.
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The immigration history of these appellants' is not  in  dispute.  They
    form a family unit, all  of  whom  are  Nigerian  citizens.  The  first
    appellant, who was born on 7 September 1972, is the wife of the  second
    appellant and mother of the third and fourth appellants, who were  born
    on 8 October 2002 and 22 August 2006 respectively. At the date  of  the
    hearing the children were 14 and 10 years of age. The second appellant,
    who was born on the 9 January 1969, is the father of the children.
 2. The first appellant left Nigeria in January 2001 and travelled to Italy
    upon her marriage to the second appellant who had lived in Italy  since
    1994. The first and second appellants were granted a right of permanent
    residence in Italy as was the third appellant  who  was  born  in  that
    country.
 3. In October 2004 the first appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully
    as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  to  enable  her  to  study  at
    Nottingham Trent University, leading to a  degree  of  LLM  (Master  of
    Law). The second and third appellants joined her in the United  Kingdom
    as student dependants in July 2005. At that time  the  third  appellant
    was three months short of her third birthday.
 4. Following  graduation  the  first  appellant  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom, together with her family members,  as  dependants,  under  the
    International Graduate Scheme and thereafter obtained further leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant. During this  time  the  fourth
    appellant was born in the United Kingdom. A further child  born  during
    the course of the appeal process is not the subject of this appeal  and
    shall not be mentioned further.
 5. The first appellants last grant of leave  expired  on  the  15  January
    2013. On the 9 January 2013 an 'in time' application for further  leave
    was made based upon a right to a private life in  the  United  Kingdom,
    outside the Immigration Rules for the first appellant and  the  family
    members with, in addition  in  relation  to  the  third  appellant,  an
    application under 276ADE of the Rules as she had by then lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for over seven years. The applications were  refused  by
    the respondent  and  directions  made  for  the  removal  of  all  four
    appellants to Nigeria pursuant to section 47  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.
 6. The appellants' appeals against the  refusals  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge V. A. Osborne sitting at Stoke on the 6  December  2013.
    Judge Osborne notes at [11] that the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    before  her  withdrew  the  section  47  decision  on  the  basis the
    applications had been made before the date on which amended legislation
    which cured previous defects had come into force,  which  would  render
    the same unlawful. At [12] Judge Osborne  noted  "the  only  matter  in
    issue was therefore whether the circumstances of the appellants  should
    cause me to find that the appeals should succeed by  reference  to  the
    Applicants Article 8 rights - in particular  their  rights  to  private
    life". Having considered the written and oral  evidence  Judge  Osborne
    found as follows:

         "43. As I find these appeals to be in some respects finely balanced
         I find that overall the decision to remove all  the  Appellants  to
         Nigeria is disproportionate to all the circumstances  of  the  case
         particularly taking into account the rights  of  the  children  and
         accordingly the appeals are allowed.


         44. I allow the appeals based upon  the  Appellants'  rights  under
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights."

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  Secretary
    of State and granted by Designated First-tier Judge  Woodcraft  on  the
    basis that in conducing the proportionality exercise Judge Osborne laid
    too much emphasis on the benefits to the children of  completing  their
    education in the United  Kingdom  and  insufficient  attention  to  the
    weight to be given to the legitimate aim being pursued.
 8. On the 8 October 2014 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Garratt  found  that
    Judge Osbourne had materially erred  in  law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remade. On 12 January 2015  Judge  Garratt  re-
    heard the appeals and in a decision promulgated on the 16  March  2015
    remade the decision dismissing the appeals. Permission  was  sought  by
    the appellants to appeal Judge  Garratt's  decision  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal. Such permission was refused by a judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and again refused on the papers following a renewed application by  the
    Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Lewison on  24  November  2015.  The  appellants'
    sought an oral hearing of the permission application which came  before
    Lord Justice Laws on the 16 June 2016. The  matter  was  adjourned  for
    further hearing at which the Secretary of State was to be  represented.
    On 22 July 2016 Lord Justice  Christopher  Clarke  approved  a  consent
    order granting permission to appeal and ordering that  the  appeals  be
    allowed and remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a second stage  hearing.
    The Statement of Facts annexed to the consent order is in the following
    terms:

         1. The Appellant challenges the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         dated 16 March 2015, and argues that  the  Tribunal's  decision  is
         flawed by reasons of various errors of law.


         2. The Respondent accepts that the Upper Tribunal erred in  law  in
         finding, at paragraph 3 of its determination, that having found  an
         error of law in the First Tier Tribunal's decision,  it  could  re-
         hear the appeal by way of submissions on Article 8 only taking into
         account evidence which had already been submitted.


         3. Accordingly the parties agree that the matter should be remitted
         to the Upper Tribunal for a second-stage hearing, with none of the
         factual findings on Article 8 to be preserved.


         4. The parties have accordingly agreed the terms  of  this  consent
         order.

 9. Following a case management hearing the matter comes before me for  the
    purpose of that  second-stage  reconsideration  hearing.  Although  the
    consent order states that no facts shall be preserved those relating to
    the composition of the family, the nature of their ties to  the  Untied
    Kingdom, the existence of family  and  a  private  life  recognised  by
    Article 8 and their immigration history are not disputed.

Discussion

10. Further documents were provided by the appellants at the hearing  which
    were admitted. The Tribunal was also advised that  an  application  had
    been made for British citizenship for the child OI based upon the child
    having been born and having lived in the United Kingdom for ten  years.
    The application was only made during the weekend preceding the  hearing
    and no decision upon the same could be made in such a short  period  of
    time before the hearing. As no timescale for determining the same could
    be provided it was considered appropriate in all the  circumstances  to
    proceed with the appeals.
11. The starting point shall be to consider the application by RI for leave
    to remain on the basis of her private life pursuant to paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules and the situation of OI, the best interests of
    the children being an important element of this  case.  The  date  of
    decision is the 23 April 2013.  For applications made after 9 July 2012
    when the decision was taken before 28 July 2014 the relevant wording of
    paragraph 276 ADE was "(vi) is  aged  18  years  or  above,  has  lived
    continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any  period
    of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural or family)
    with the country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
    UK".
12. However, the "reasonableness of return" test for children in paragraph
    276ADE now applies to all applications decided on or after 13  December
    2012 regardless of the date of application by virtue of  the  Statement
    of Changes to the Immigration Rules (HC 820).
13. As this Tribunal is also tasked with considering the Article 8  element
    of the children's cases regard has to be had to section 117 of the 2002
    Act. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a person  who
    is under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen,  or  (b)  has
    lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years  or
    more. If a child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B
    of the 2002 Act as amended, the issue will generally be whether  it  is
    not reasonable for that child to return. Both RI and OI are  qualifying
    children by virtue of their length of residence in the United Kingdom.
14. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that when
    the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed  in  relation
    to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must be posed  and  answered
    in the proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the  child
    to follow its parents to their country of origin; EV (Philippines).  It
    is not however a question that  needs  to  be  posed  and  answered  in
    relation to each child more than once.
15. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it was
    held (notwithstanding reservations) that when  considering  whether  it
    was reasonable to remove a child from the UK under  rule  276ADE(1)(iv)
    of the Immigration  Rules  and  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, a court or tribunal should not  simply
    focus on the child but should have regard to the wider public  interest
    considerations, including the conduct and immigration  history  of  the
    parents. It was also confirmed however that if section 117B(6)  applies
    then "there can be no doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as a self-
    contained provision in the sense that Parliament  has  stipulated  that
    where the conditions specified in the sub-section  are  satisfied,  the
    public interest will not justify removal."
16. The respondent has published guidance to case workers when  considering
    the issue of non-British national children, 'IDIs on  Family  Migration
    Paragraph 11.2.4. which deals with non-British  children'.  The  August
    2015 version states that the requirement  that  a  non-British  Citizen
    child has lived in the UK for a continuous period of  at  least  the  7
    years immediately preceding the date of  application,  recognises  that
    over time children start to put down roots and integrate into  life  in
    the UK, to the extent that being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
    unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the
    balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect
    the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order
    to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than 7 years. See
    Appendix A for  further  details  of  the  factors  a  Case  Worker  is
    required to consider.
17. There have also been a number of decisions of the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    Court of Appeal considering the issue of the best interests of children
    and how the same are to  be  assessed.  Both  parties  in  this  matter
    referred to the decision in EV (Philippines) and Others v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 in which it was held that the best interests of the  child
    were to be determined by reference to the child alone without reference
    to the immigration history or status of either  parent  (paras  32  and
    33). In then determining  whether  or  not  the  need  for  immigration
    control outweighed the best interests of the children, it was necessary
    to determine the relative strength of the  factors  which  made  it  in
    their best interests to remain in the UK; and also to take  account  of
    any factors that pointed the other way.
18. At paragraph 35 of  EV  (Philippines)  it  was  stated  that  the  best
    interests of children will depend on  a  number  of  factors  including
    their age, the length of  time  that  they  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom, how long they have been in education,  the  stage  that  their
    education has reached, to what extent they have been distanced from the
    country  to  which  they  are  to  be  returned,  how  renewable  their
    connection with it may be, the extent that they will  have  linguistic,
    medical or other difficulties in adapting to life there and the  extent
    to which the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
    other rights in this country. The longer the child had been in the  UK,
    the more advanced or critical the stage of his  education,  the  looser
    his ties with the country in question, and  the  more  deleterious  the
    consequences of his return, the greater the weight that fell  into  one
    side of the scales. If  it  was  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
    interests that he should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration
    control may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  was  in  the
    child's best interests to remain, but only on balance with some factors
    pointing the other way, the result may be the opposite. In the  balance
    on the other side there fell to be taken into account the strong weight
    to be given to the need to maintain immigration control in  pursuit  of
    the economic well-being of the country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,
    the claimants had no entitlement to remain. The immigration history  of
    the parents might also be relevant (paras 34 - 37).
19. In relation to both RI and OI, the following facts are noted:

      1.  Age at date of this hearing; RI is 14 and OI 10.


      2. Length of time RI has been in the  United  Kingdom,  July  2005  to
         November 2016, 11 years 4 months. OI was born in the United Kingdom
         on 22 August 2006 and has lived here all his life.


      3. How long they have been in education; evidence  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal included a letter dated 2 December  2013  written  by
         the Headteacher of the Robert Shaw Primary School attended by both
         RI and OI at that time. This  states  that  RI  had  attended  that
         school since 18 May 2011 and that OI has attended since 5 September
         2011. A letter provided for the purposes of this hearing before the
         Upper Tribunal shows that RI enrolled at the Bluecoat Academy on 1
         September 2014. A further  letter  from  the  Robert  Shaw  Primary
         school, dated 28 July 2016, shows that OI is in his  last  year  at
         the school. Both children have excellent attendance records.


      4. The stage that their education has reached; as stated, OI is in the
         final year of his primary education and RI began her  GCSE  courses
         in September 2016. The letter from the  Bluecoat  Academy  comments
         upon RI's progress in the following terms:


             "[RI] has  an  attendance  of  100%  at  the  moment  and  has
             constantly attended school throughout her  time  at  Bluecoat.
             [RI] has been punctual every day this academic  year  and  has
             developed  into  a  responsible,   polite   and   hard-working
             student.


             [RI] is strong communicator and can have a positive  influence
             on her peers.  There is no doubt [RI] has the desire to  be  a
             leader and constantly work hard throughout the year.  She  has
             continuously demonstrated her will to achieve at Bluecoat.


             [RI] has volunteered to take an active role in  promoting  and
             supporting charity work within the Academy through the  school
             leadership programme.


             Mr and Mrs [I] have always been a strong support for [RI]  and
             have attended regular events throughout the school year.


             As [RI] has just began her GCSE courses in  September,  it  is
             appropriate to highlight that any disruption caused could have
             major implications on her attainments.


             I support an application for her to remain in the UK.


             Yours sincerely






             Nathan Lewis-Gordon


             Year 9 Leader."


      5. In relation to OI, the letter from his school states:


             "[OI] has been at Robert Shaw Primary school since 5 September
             2011. He is about to transfer into year 6, the final  year  at
             Robert Shaw before transferring to  secondary  school.   Since
             joining our school [OI] has not had one day off,  making  100%
             for the last five years.


             He  is  very  settled  and  has  a  close  group  of  friends.
             Academically [OI] works hard and it would not benefit  him  in
             any way to remove him from school and return him to Nigeria.


             In my opinion, [OI] is  a  friendly,  sensitive  and  sensible
             member of our school  community,  his  personality  is  really
             beginning to show and he is able to hold a  good  conversation
             in a very mature manner.


             We would be loathed to lose him, particularly at this  crucial
             time in his education.  I cannot see any positive outcome  for
             [OI] or his family if they be made to return to Nigeria.


             Yours Sincerely






             Mrs K Coker


             Head Teacher"


      6. Whilst OA is not at a key stage in his education, other  than  SATS
         exams which are relevant to assessing progress at the end  of  year
         6,  RI  has  embarked  upon  her  GCSE  course,  albeit  for   only
         three months of the two year course at the date of this hearing.


      7. The educational aspects of their  lives  also  feature  in  letters
         written by the children and addressed  to  'The  Immigration  Judge
         Upper Tribunal'.  In her letter RI writes:


             "My name is [RI], I am 14 years old.  I am writing this letter
             to seek your help with my immigration status.


             I was born in Italy Verona 2002. I came to the UK in 2005 with
             my father  to  join  my  mother  who  was  studying  in  Trent
             University.  I have now lived in the UK for 11  years.   I  am
             currently in year nine attending Bluecoats Academy Nottingham.
             I have just started my GCSE  and  I  am  adapting  to  my  new
             lessons.


             I will appreciate if this can be resolved soon.  I have missed
             two school trips abroad - I missed them because I did not have
             a visa to leave the UK.  Both of these trips would have helped
             me further my education. One of the trips was a maths trip  to
             France.  The trip would have been beneficial to  my  learning,
             and would have been a great experience.  The second  trip  was
             to Spain and at the time I was learning the Spanish  language.
             If I was able to go  I  would  have  learned  more  about  the
             language/culture.  Due to the fact I missed out on these trips
             I fell behind on classwork.  Missing out disturbed me mentally
             and emotionally and made me wonder why I was  less  privileged
             than my friends and classmates.  It makes me sad to know I  am
             treated differently.


             What really disturbs me is to know that my place in the UK  is
             not safe.  I might be forced by the Home Office to leave and I
             don't want to.  My whole life is here.


             Over the years I have made a lot of friends  and  developed  a
             loving relationship with my family, church and community.


             Please! Hear the cry of a child.


             I don't want to go to Nigeria to live there.


             Please help ... thank you.






             [RI]


      8. In his letter OI writes:


             My name is [OI].  I am ten years old.  I am  in  year  six  in
             Robert Shaw Primary School.  I  am  a  member  of  the  school
             football team. Since I started Robert Shaw I have never missed
             a day off school.  I attend God's Vineyard Church  Nottingham.
             I have many friends at church and school and  in  my  football
             team.  I also have a lot of friends in my community.   When  I
             was two years old I visited Nigeria for three  weeks  with  my
             sister [RI] and my mum.  I had a bad experience and I asked my
             mum to take me back to England.  I am writing this letter  for
             your help so that the Home Office will not force me to go back
             to Nigeria against my will.  I would not like to leave any  of
             my friends because I have many friends.  I have lived  in  the
             United Kingdom.  I don't want to go back to Nigeria because  I
             am not used to anyone there and I don't  have  any  friend  in
             Nigeria.  My  parents  have  applied  for  Registration  as  a
             British Citizen for me. I do not want to miss out on the award
             my headteacher is giving me at the end  of  the  year  because
             throughout my primary school I did  not  miss  a  day  out  of
             school sections.  I am writing for your help.


             Yours Sincerely






             [OI]


      9. Neither child attended to give  oral  evidence  but  there  was  no
         objection to the letters being admitted as evidence or challenge to
         the provenance or weight to be attached to them by Mr Bates.


     10. To what extent they have been distanced from the country  to  which
         they are to be returned; neither RI nor  OI  have  ever  lived  in
         Nigeria, both being born elsewhere. Both children have lived  their
         formative years in the United Kingdom and to a great extent are no
         different from their British national classmates, who have grown up
         here, bar a lack of settled status.


     11. How renewable their connection with Nigeria may be; there are  no
         connections  to  Nigeria  for  the  children  to  renew.   No  such
         connections have been shown to have ever existed bar the  tie  they
         have to  their  parents  and  possibly  through  members  of  their
         local community  and  the  evangelical  church  they  attend   in
         Nottingham. It is accepted that the children's parents will  always
         be there to love and support the children in a physical  sense,  as
         the respondent proposes to remove them as a family  unit  and  that
         similar churches operate  in  Nigeria,  enabling the  children to
         continue their involvement in the Christian faith, but bar this the
         reality of living in Nigeria as a young person in relation to the
         norms of day to day life, culture, behaviour and expectations, will
         all have to be learned afresh.


     12. The extent  that  they  will  have  linguistic,  medical  or  other
         difficulties in adapting to life there and the extent to which  the
         course proposed will interfere with  their  family  life  or  other
         rights in this country; no  medical  issues  were  identified  and
         although the children only speak English this is widely spoken  in
         Nigeria and is the official language used in urban Nigeria. English
         language schools exist and it has not been shown that the children
         will not be able to access the same. For OI this means that  he  is
         likely to be able to continue to progress in his education,  albeit
         in a different learning environment and with possibly  a  different
         syllabus. The situation  for  RI  is  more  complex,  for  although
         alternative schooling is available, RI will too have to start again
         at an important part of  her  education  as  discussed  below.  The
         children will loose the ties  to  the  educational  system  in  the
         United Kingdom and the friends and associations they have formed as
         a result of such involvement, as they currently enjoy the same.  At
         14 it is possible that RI will view friends and peers as being more
         important to her than family, especially as she  matures  and  is
         developing a more independent personality.

20.  PI  was  asked  during  the  hearing   what   the   consequences   for
    the children having to go to Nigeria with  their  parents  would  be.
    Reference was made to the length of time in the United Kingdom, set out
    above, but also to the difficulties it is  thought  RI  would  have  in
    adjusting to a culture she is not familiar with. It was said that  most
    of her relatives are in the United Kingdom too. PI stated it  would  be
    difficult to give RI comfort as they had all been out  of  Nigeria  for
    some time. It would be stressful for her which would make it  difficult
    to meet the needs of the child too whilst both  parents  re-adjust.  PI
    also referred to the fact that RI will have to go from  an  environment
    she is familiar with, and used to, to one she is not used to  and  will
    have to learn new systems and culture and make new friends.  PI  stated
    that RI is aware of the hearing and is emotional about the outcome.  PI
    advised that in the past when RI has moved schools she had  been  upset
    at the thought of moving and having to  make  new  friends  at  another
    school. RI is described as "speaking  to  herself",  "moody  and  sad",
    "emotional" and a person who does not like change. PI also  raised  the
    issue of the method of punishment in Nigerian schools. In  the  United
    Kingdom there is no corporal punishment whereas in Nigeria flogging  in
    schools and in some families is the norm. The family will also have  to
    stay with other family members  in  Nigeria  if  returned  whilst  they
    obtain work and can afford housing of their  own,  which  may  have  an
    adverse impact upon the children who are not used to living in a shared
    family system.
21. The facts of this case  warrant  consideration  of  a  further  earlier
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals)[2013] UKUT 197(IAC)  (Blake  J)  in
    which the Tribunal held that (i) The case law of the Upper Tribunal has
    identified the following principles to assist in the  determination  of
    appeals where children are affected by the appealed decisions: (a) As a
    starting point it is in the best interests of children to be with  both
    their parents and if both parents are being  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom then the starting  point  suggests  that  so  should  dependent
    children who form part of their household unless there are  reasons  to
    the contrary; (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have
    both stability and continuity of social and educational  provision  and
    the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which
    they belong; (iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state
    of origin can lead to development of social  cultural  and  educational
    ties that it would be inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
    compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is
    not clear cut but past and present policies have identified seven years
    as a relevant period; (iv) Apart from the terms of  published  policies
    and rules, the Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely
    to be more significant to a child that the first seven years  of  life.
    Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than  their
    peers and are adaptable; (v) Short periods of  residence,  particularly
    ones without leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
    remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to give rise
    to private life deserving of respect  in  the  absence  of  exceptional
    factors. In any event, protection of the economic well-being of society
    amply justifies removal in such cases.
22. It is clear from the evidence that in relation to RI it is in her  best
    interests  to  have  both  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and
    educational provision and the benefit of growing  up  in  the  cultural
    norms of the society to which she belongs, which is the United Kingdom.
    RI is becoming a young woman  as  she  passes  through  the  period  of
    puberty. She only knows the United Kingdom as her home and  the  social
    norms she is familiar with are those of this country.  In  relation  to
    attaining her educational potential, it is clear  RI  is  committed  to
    doing well and is a hard worker. The letter from the school is evidence
    of this. RI's own letter bemoaning the lack of opportunity in not being
    able to attend school trips and the impact upon her classwork testifies
    to her desire to do well. It is not made out that there will be only  a
    minimal impact upon RI if she has to change schools at this time. RI is
    clearly a young person who finds it difficult to adjust to change  and
    who seems to find comfort in the security of what she knows. Having to
    re-adjust to a completely different way of  life,  different  education
    system and new cultural norms and expectations has not been shown to be
    something RI will adapt to well, especially as parental support may not
    be fully available to her initially, which is likely to have an adverse
    impact upon her ability to achieve her full potential. RI is older than
    OI and has embarked upon an important stage in her  education.   I  do
    not find it has been made out on the specific facts of this case  that
    it would be reasonable for RI to have to leave the United Kingdom  to
    live in Nigeria.
23. RI has insufficient ties to Nigeria of a cultural or any other nature,
    having been born in Italy and having lived in the  United  Kingdom for
    over 11 years, and I find she  is  entitled  to  succeed  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.
24. It was accepted by Mr Bates that this is a case in which  if  this  was
    the finding of the Tribunal the other family members  are  entitled to
    remain too. I agree.  This is a family unit and family life  recognised
    by Article 8 exists between the first and second appellants  and  their
    daughter, RI, and OI and his parents and  sister.  The  leave  of  the
    adults has always been lawful, pursuant to a grant of  leave  or  leave
    extended by virtue of section 3C whilst the appeal  process  continues.
    There is no evidence of the family posing a threat to the  security  of
    the United Kingdom or its citizens, or of their being  unable  to  work
    and to be  financially independent  in  the  future.  No  evidence  of
    reliance on public funds was asserted by Mr Bates.
25. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is relevant. This provides that in  the
    case of a person not liable for deportation, the public  interest  does
    not require the person's removal where (a) the person has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and,  (b)  it
    would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. I find a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  exists
    between PI, MI and their children who are qualifying children.  Neither
    parent is liable for deportation and I have found it is not  reasonable
    to expect RI in particular to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The  public
    interests does not therefore require the removal of either  PI  or  MI.
    The appeal of OI is allowed in line.

Decision

26. First-tier Tribunal Judge V Osborne has been found to  have  materially
    erred in law and her decision set  aside.  I  remake  the  decision  as
    follows. These appeals are allowed.

    Anonymity.

27. I continue the anonymity order of the Upper Tribunal pursuant  to  rule
    14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 December 2016

Appendix A

Relevant considerations are likely to include: (i) Whether there would be a
significant risk to the child's health: For example, if there is evidence
that the child is undergoing a course of treatment for a life threatening
or serious illness and treatment will not be available in the country of
return; (ii) Whether the child would be leaving the UK with their
parent(s): It is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests
to remain with their parent(s). Unless special factors apply, it will
generally be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK with their
parent(s), particularly if the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK;
(iii) The extent of wider family ties in the UK: The decision maker must
consider the extent to which the child is dependent on or requires support
from wider family members in the UK in important areas of his or her life.
(iv) Whether the child is likely to be able to (re)integrate readily into
life in another country. Relevant factors include: (a) whether the
parent(s) and/or child are a citizen of the country and so able to enjoy
the full rights of being a citizen in that country; (b) whether the
parent(s) and/or child have lived in or visited the country before for
periods of more than a few weeks. The question here is whether, having
visited or lived in the country before, the child would be better able to
adapt, and/or the parent(s) would be able to support the child in adapting,
to life in the country; (c) whether the parent(s) and/or child have
existing family or social ties with the country. A person who has extended
family or a network of friends in the country should be able to rely on
them for support to help (re)integrate there; (d) whether the parent(s)
and/or child have relevant cultural ties with the country. The caseworker
must consider any evidence of exposure to, and the level of understanding
of, the cultural norms of the country. For example, a period of time spent
living mainly amongst a diaspora from the country may give a child an
awareness of the culture of the country; (e) whether the parents and/or
child can speak, read and write in a language of that country, or are
likely to achieve this within a reasonable time period. Fluency is not
required - an ability to communicate competently with sympathetic
interlocutors would normally suffice; (f) whether the child has attended
school in that country; (v) Any country specific information, including as
contained in relevant country guidance; (vi) Other specific factors raised
by or on behalf of the child: Parents or children may highlight the
differences in the quality of education, health and wider public services
or in economic or social opportunities between the UK and the country of
return and argue that these would work against the best interests of the
child if they had to leave the UK and live in that country. Other than in
exceptional circumstances, this will not normally be a relevant
consideration, particularly if the parent(s) or wider family have the means
or resources to support the child on return or the skills, education or
training to provide for their family on return, or if Assisted Voluntary
Return support is available.

