
IAC-AH-vp-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16338/2014
                                                               IA/27972/2014
                                                               IA/27973/2014
                                                               IA/27975/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     ji
                                     ZI
                                     UI
                                     SI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Hopewell, Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens Bangladesh.  The  appellant  JI's  date
    of birth is 30 December 1980 and she is married to  SI  whose  date  of
    birth is 15 June 1979.  They have two children, Master ZI whose date of
    birth is 1 December 2005 and a daughter Miss UI whose date of birth  is
    9 July 2012.  They made an application on 21 November 2012 for leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom.   The  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 20 March 2014 under Appendix FM and
    paragraph 276ADE.  The Secretary of State considered Section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

2.   The appellants appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    and their appeals were dismissed by Judge O R Williams  in  a  decision
    that was promulgated on 15 September 2014  following  a  hearing  on  3
    September 2014.

The Immigration History of the Appellants

3.   The immigration history of the appellants is set out  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State.  SI applied for entry clearance as  a
    working holidaymaker on 20 January 2005.  This application was refused.
    Both he and his wife JI then made another application and they  entered
    the UK on 2 August 2006 having been granted entry clearance as  working
    holidaymakers.  Their visas were valid from 18 April 2006 to  18  April
    2008.  Their eldest child ZI entered the UK on  2  August  2006  having
    been granted entry clearance to accompany his parents.   His  visa  was
    from 16 May 2006 to 16 May 2008.

4.   SI on 27 March 2008 applied for leave to remain in the UK as  a  highly
    skilled migrant with ZI and JI as  dependants.   This  application  was
    rejected on 10 April 2008.  The family left  the  UK  and  returned  to
    Bangladesh and re-entered the UK on 21 May 2008.  SI was granted  entry
    clearance as a highly skilled migrant from 11 May 2008 to 11  May  2010
    and his wife and their son were granted entry clearance as  dependants.



5.   On 15 March 2010 SI applied to vary  his  leave  as  a  Tier  1  Highly
    Skilled (General) Migrant.  This application was rejected on  19  March
    2010.  On 24 March 2010 he made an application on the same basis  which
    was refused on 24 April 2010 with no right of appeal.  On 11  May  2010
    he applied for leave to remain on the same basis and this  was  refused
    again on 23 November 2010 with a right of appeal. He lodged  an  appeal
    on 15 December 2010.  His appeal was dismissed on 29 June 2011  and  at
    this stage all appeal rights were exhausted.  JI applied for  leave  to
    remain on 21 November 2012 under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention  with
    her husband and family.  This application was refused with no right  of
    appeal.  Following an application for judicial review the Secretary  of
    State agreed to  reconsider  the  application  which  resulted  in  the
    decision of 20 March 2014.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The Judge made the following findings:-

         "8.  I am satisfied that it would be reasonable for  the  appellant
             [ZI] to return to Bangladesh with his family.   I  reach  that
             conclusion for the following reasons.

         9.   Firstly, Master [ZI] arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  when  8
             months old on 2 August 2006.  At that time, at the date of the
             application (on 15/11/12), the appellant had not been  in  the
             United Kingdom for seven years.

         10.  Even if the appellant met EX.1(c) it would be  reasonable  for
             the child to return to Bangladesh.  I reach that conclusion as
             the family have retained ties to Bangladesh.  I heard evidence
             that both have relatives in Bangladesh: [JI]  has parents  and
             other siblings in Bangladesh with whom she  maintains  contact
             and [SI] has one sister in Bangladesh; with both returning  to
             Bangladesh in April/May 2008.  Both [SI and JI} speak  Bengali
             at home to each other; [ZI] can follow  the  conversation  and
             reply in English. [SI] conceded that if his son went to school
             in Bangladesh he would be able to pick up the language.

         11.   I  am  satisfied  that  a  return  to  Bangladesh  would   be
             reasonable.  Both have family members living in Bangladesh and
             it would be reasonable to  expect  a  level  of  support  from
             family members. [JI]  was  educated  at  university  level  in
             Bangladesh and her husband  also  has  a  good  education/work
             history - I am satisfied that both could get  jobs  and  hence
             support the children.  They have a  part  equity  purchase  of
             their flat in the United Kingdom and they/an  agent  on  their
             behalf would be able to sell this in order to raise  money  to
             return to Bangladesh with.

         12.  All the appellants are fit and healthy and there should be  no
             reason why they could not  re-establish  themselves  in,  say,
             Dhaka, notwithstanding the length of time they have  spent  in
             the United Kingdom.  They will be returning to Bangladesh as a
             family unit and they would be  able  to  support  their  young
             children as they become  used  to  living  in  Bangladesh  and
             enjoying the full rights a (sic) citizens of Bangladesh.  [ZI]
             has benefited from his education in the United Kingdom.  He is
             just entering year 4 in primary  school.   He  is  still  very
             young and I am satisfied that he would be  able  to  adapt  to
             life in Bangladesh and to a new school with the  help  of  his
             loving family.

         ...

         16.  I am satisfied that both [SI] and [JI] had valid  leave  until
             11/05/10 - that was accepted by  both  representatives.   From
             that point on matters became increasingly precarious  for  the
             family.  I have had regard to the determination of Immigration
             Judge Beg dated 10/02/11 in which [SI] appealed a decision  of
             the respondent dated 30/11/10 refusing his  application  as  a
             Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the  points-based  system  upon
             which his family were dependants.   [SI]  submitted  a  letter
             purporting to be from Huawei Technologies.  Immigration  Judge
             Beg found that the  appellant  had  never  worked  for  Huawei
             Technologies and the  letter  was  not  genuine.   During  the
             Tribunal [SI] admitted that he had also submitted  false  HSBC
             statements with his application dated 05/04/10.  The appellant
             was found to have acted dishonestly and that  his  credibility
             was significantly damaged.

         17.  Immigration Judge Beg's determination was subject to an appeal
             to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  subject  to  judicial   review.
             However, bearing in mind the appellant's dishonesty, it cannot
             have come as any surprise to the appellant that the appeal  to
             the Upper Tribunal was refused on 20/06/11 and the JR  refused
             on 20/03/12 - the  appellants  learning  of  this  failure  in
             September  2012.   Indeed,  [SI]  must  have  known  that  his
             immigration status was precarious prior to  Immigration  Judge
             Beg's decision.  [SI] had a valid visa up until 11/05/10.   On
             or about March/May 2010 he made the fatal decision  to  submit
             the application accompanied by  false  documents,  which  were
             eventually  dealt  with  by  the  Immigration  Judge.   I   am
             satisfied that ever since the date of application in March/May
             2010 (and then leading up to the dismissal of  the  appeal  by
             Immigration Judge Beg) the appellants would have always  known
             that their immigration position was precarious since they were
             relying on false documentation.

         18.  But despite the couple's precarious position they forged ahead
             with their private and family life in the United Kingdom  with
             [UI] born on 09/07/12 and [ZI] starting school.  It would have
             been sensible if they had returned to Bangladesh in 2010  when
             they knew they could not meet the  Rules  rather  than  acting
             dishonestly.  As it is, for the reasons  given,  it  would  be
             reasonable for them to return now.

         19.  Whilst it is incumbent to consider the child's interest  (sic)
             I am satisfied that those interests are covered by  the  Rules
             and Regulations.  Section 55 is  not  a  'trump  card'  to  be
             played whenever the interests of a child arise.  Based on  the
             evidence presented I am unable to find good  arguable  grounds
             or compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  by
             Appendix FM, paragraph EX.1.

         20.  In the circumstances I find there was  no  basis  to  consider
             this appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

         21.  Even if there had been good reason I am satisfied that I would
             have to have regard to Section 117B as inserted into the  2002
             Act by Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014.   Relevant  to
             any assessments on proportionality  would  have  been  Section
             117B(2), (3), (4), (5) and (6).

         22.  While Section 117B(6)  recognises  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying child and the  appellant's  son
             has now lived here for seven years, but for the reasons  given
             above it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
             United Kingdom.

         23.  The remaining Sections of 117B assist the  appellants  -  they
             are financially self-supporting  (albeit  they  are  currently
             unable to work due to their immigration  status  and  so  have
             debts) and  there  is  evidence  before  me  that  they  speak
             English.  However, notwithstanding the assistance  of  Section
             117B I take note of the fact  that  the  (sic)  little  weight
             should be given to a private life (such as getting a  job  and
             developing English skills) which is  formed  when  a  person's
             immigration status is precarious - as detailed above.

         24.  I am satisfied that even if Article  8  had  been  engaged  it
             would not have been disproportionate to remove the  appellants
             as a family unit  (which  would  have  safeguarded  the  young
             children's welfare when considered as a primary consideration,
             Section 55 of the  Border,  Citizenship  and  Nationality  Act
             2001) (sic) because of what the House of Lords in Huang [2007]
             UKHL 11 called,

                  'The general administrative desirability of applying known
                  Rules  of  a  system  of  immigration  control  is  to  be
                  workable, predictable, consistent and fair as between  one
                  applicant and another'; and

                  'The damage to good administration and  effective  control
                  if a system is perceived by applicants internationally  to
                  be unduly porous, unpredictable or perfunctionary'".

The Grounds of Appeal

7.   The grounds of appeal argue that  the  judge  should  have  given  full
    consideration of what would be in the children's best  interests.   The
    Immigration Rules do not replace Section 55 and a failure to assess the
    best interests is an error of law.

8.   The second ground of appeal  argues  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
    Appendix FM EX.1 of the Immigration Rules is unsatisfactory.  The judge
    failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  deciding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for ZI to return to Bangladesh with his family.   The  judge
    failed to take into account the impact of the decision on ZI.  There is
    no consideration of the fact that ZI is unable to speak  Bengali.   The
    appellant's bundle contained over 40 pages of evidence relating to ZI's
    education including school  reports  and  certificates  and  the  judge
    failed to take these into consideration in assessing whether or not  it
    would be reasonable for ZI to return to Bangladesh.

9.   The third ground of appeal argues that the judge  erred  in  concluding
    that there was no basis to consider the appeal under Article 8.  A full
    and thorough consideration of Article 8 should have been  carried  out.
    The judge should have  given  full  consideration  to  the  appellants'
    private life which was developed during a time when the  appellant  and
    her family's status was not precarious.  The judge failed to carry  out
    an adequate proportionality assessment.

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Hopewell submitted a skeleton  argument  of
    25 February 2015.  It was argued  that  the  judge  bluntly  rules  out
    considering Article 8 (see [20]) and his subsequent assessment of it is
    an afterthought.  The judge failed to set out  reasons  for  concluding
    that the decision to  remove  the  appellants  is  proportionate.   The
    appellants are entitled to have detailed the basis of such a decision.

11.  There is limited consideration of ZI and no or very  limited  reference
    to UI.  In any event neither child is considered by the judge  properly
    or at all when considering Article 8.

12.  Both representatives made oral submissions.  Mr Hopewell's were in  the
    context of his skeleton argument and Mr Walker submitted that there was
    no error of law.

The Evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the Children

13.  There was a witness statement from JI of 26 August 2014  in  which  the
    following is stated:-

         "12. My son started primary school in September 2010.  He has found
             many friends there.  My son has only been to Bangladesh  twice
             in his life.  He can understand Bengali but never uses it.  He
             has always considered London his home and does not want to  go
             back to Bangladesh.  I think he is afraid he will have  to  go
             back and live there.  He wishes to stay in  the  UK  with  his
             friends and keep playing football.  He also attends  homework,
             library and arts and crafts clubs.

         ...

         20.  My son will be going into year 4 in September.  My  son  loves
             going to school,  he  has  fantastic  school  reports  and  is
             achieving well.  He has had a hundred percent  attendance  for
             the last school year, something he is proud of.   My  son  has
             also started afterschool swimming and football sessions  which
             he enjoys.  Our son has started learning to play tennis at our
             local leisure centre and continues to play football.   My  son
             takes part in community activities and will be  attending  the
             summer activity programme but he  is  looking  forward  as  he
             enjoyed the football programme last year.

         21.  My son has made friends at school and their parents  have  now
             become friends of ours.  I take my son to  meet  friends  from
             his school regularly.  We all enjoy this.

         22.  I take my daughter to Marner Children's Centre in  Bromley  by
             Bow three times a week to attend  mother  and  baby  sessions.
             These are stay and play  sessions  where  she  interacts  with
             other children.  We both really enjoy this.  In June this year
             I started a cook for life course  for  five  weeks  which  was
             about healthy cooking and eating.

         23.  The life we have here cannot be replicated anywhere else.   My
             son will suffer the most as he will be deprived from education
             and all his friends.  However, my son and I will also struggle
             greatly.  I feel that I am part of the community here.  I have
             created an environment for myself, I have a home and a career.
              It will be unfair to my entire family to be  asked  to  leave
             all this behind.  If we were to return to Bangladesh, I cannot
             see how we could have all of this  again.   Therefore,  I  ask
             that my family and I are allowed to stay in the UK  and  enjoy
             our private and family lives together.

         ...

         27.  In relation to the comment about my son being able to adapt to
             the education system in Bangladesh this is  not  going  to  be
             easy for him.  My son is not confident in Bengali, he does not
             know how to read  in  Bengali  and  struggles  to  communicate
             unless it's very simple.  He would not be  able  to  adapt  to
             being taught in Bengali.  We have brought our son up  speaking
             English as we intended him to remain in the United Kingdom".

14.  SI relied on the statement  of  evidence  of  26  August  2011  and  in
    relation to his children his evidence contained in his statement  reads
    as follows:-

         "5.  ...  My wife and I knew we would be able to give our  children
             a better life and education in the  United  Kingdom.   We  now
             realise that we made the right decision as we can see how  our
             son [SI] loves to be here, he is always in the  top  group  in
             his classes.  He  enjoys  extracurricular  activities,  summer
             reading challenges, swimming; he is also enrolled to  football
             and tennis lessons at  the  Mile  End  Leisure  Centre.   This
             summer he was also enrolled for art burst where he learned art
             and played the character Charlie  for  the  'Charlie  and  the
             Chocolate Factory' drama.  He would have missed all  above  if
             we were to live in Bangladesh.

         ...

         11.  My son started primary school in September 2010.  He has found
             many friends there.  My son has only been to Bangladesh  twice
             in his life.  He can understand Bengali but never uses it.  He
             has always considered London his home and does not want to  go
             back to Bangladesh.  I think he is afraid he will have  to  go
             back and live there.  He wishes to stay in  the  UK  with  his
             friends and keep playing football.  He also attends  homework,
             library and arts and crafts clubs."

15.  In the  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
    asserted that ZI's first language is English and he has not returned to
    Bangladesh since he left.  He is doing well in school and has excellent
    attendance and that to remove him from  the  UK  is  not  in  his  best
    interests and not in accordance with Section 55 of the  2009  Act.   In
    relation  to  ZI  there  were  documents  submitted  relating  to   his
    attendance and progress at school. The evidence all suggested  that  he
    was doing very well.

16.  The skeleton argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  maintained  that
    the appellants left the UK on 19 April 2008  and  returned  on  17  May
    2008.  This was a holiday.  It was argued that ZI has spent all but the
    first eight months of his life in the  United  Kingdom  and  his  first
    language is English.  He cannot read or write Bengali and  he  is  only
    able to communicate using very basic sentences in  Bengali.   He  would
    encounter a number of problems and a serious language barrier.   He  is
    currently flourishing in all areas of  his  education.   Should  he  be
    forced to leave his school, friends and afterschool clubs and  relocate
    this would amount to a serious breach of his rights  under  Article  8.
    JI and SI would be required to sell  their  property  and  start  their
    careers from the beginning leaving their friends and start from scratch
    in Bangladesh which would not be justified.

17.  It was submitted in the skeleton argument that the  best  interests  of
    the two children should be the primary consideration in this  case  and
    that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  and  her
    children to relocate to Bangladesh.

Conclusions

18.  I have considered [19] of the determination and although it could  have
    been expressed  better,  it  does  not  cause  me  concern.  The  judge
    considered at some length the best interests of the children and made a
    finding that  it  would  be  in  their  best  interests  to  return  to
    Bangladesh with their parents. I refer  specifically  to  [8]-[12]  and
    [24], which should be read together with [19]. The  judge  acknowledges
    that ZI has been here for seven years and the significance of that  was
    clear to him.  The judge was of the  view  that  it  would  be  in  the
    children's best interests to return to Bangladesh with their parents as
    a family unit (see [24]). This decision was entirely open to him on the
    evidence before him. It  is  consistent  with  jurisprudence.  I  refer
    specifically to Azimi-Moayad and  Ors  (decisions  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 where the  Tribunal  noted  that  seven
    years from the age of four is likely to be more significant to a  child
    that the first seven years of life. Although  there  has  been  lengthy
    residence in this case, there was, before the judge, no evidence of the
    development of significant social cultural or  educational  ties  here.
    ZI is still young child  and  the  starting  point  is  that  his  best
    interests would be to be with both his parents who are  being  removed.
    The judge made lawful and  sustainable  findings  at  [9]  to  [12]  in
    relation to the  children.  There  is  a  difference  between  what  is
    reasonable (in the context of the rules) and what is in a child's  best
    interests, but there is an overlap of the relevant  considerations  and
    it was not necessary for the judge  to  repeat  findings  that  he  had
    already  made  in  respect  of  reasonableness  when  considering  best
    interests.

19.  There is no merit in  the  ground  that  the  judge  did  not  properly
    consider reasonableness. He considered the position of ZI at length and
    made a lawfully sustainable finding that it would be reasonable for him
    to leave. The judge made sustainable findings in relation  to  language
    and he took into account  the  evidence  from  the  school.  There  was
    nothing significant in the evidence relating to ZI that the  judge  did
    not take into account.

20.  The judge went onto consider Article 8 outside the rules  and  properly
    applied section 117B of the 2002 Act. The grounds do not  disclose  any
    material error in the balancing exercise conducted. The strength of the
    appeal is ZI. The adult appellants became appeal rights exhausted on 29
    June 2011. There has been a finding by the FtT that the appellant,  SI,
    submitted false documents in support of an application. The judge found
    that they have family in Bangladesh and that they are both  employable.
    The grounds  maintain  that  there  an  error  because  the  article  8
    assessment was  an  "afterthought",  but  they  fail  to  identify  any
    material error in the assessment.

21.   The  assessment  of  ZI's   best   interests   is   crucial   to   the
    proportionality exercise. If the judge erred (either by not  making  an
    assessment or in not doing  it  properly)  then  it  follows  that  the
    decision is flawed and should be set aside and remade. For the  reasons
    that I have given the judge properly  considered  the  children's  best
    interests.  On the evidence before the FtT I  would  have  reached  the
    same conclusion as the FtT.  The  judge  did  not  conduct  a  discrete
    assessment of UI's best interests. This is not a material error.  There
    was very little evidence about her  best  interests  and  she  is  very
    young.  It is  unarguable  that  a  discrete  assessment  of  her  best
    interests would have resulted in a different conclusion.

22.  There is no material error of law and the  decision  of  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal is maintained.

23.  I have made an anonymity direction  to  protect  the  identity  of  the
    children.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 12 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
