
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16900/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th November 2016                |On 30th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              ADAMA CEESAY CORR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kaihiva of Counsel instructed by Queens Park
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  McDade
    made following a hearing at Stoke-on-Trent on 11th December 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Gambia born on 27th April 1962.   She
    entered the UK in September 1996 and overstayed.  She claimed asylum on
    16th August 2002 and was refused on 2nd March 2003.  She  then  applied
    for leave as the spouse of a settled person and  was  refused  on  12th
    November 2003. On 3rd May 2012 she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on
    grounds of long  residency  and  was  refused  on  16th  January  2014.
    Further representations were considered and refused  on  4th  September
    2014.  Finally, she applied for leave to remain under  the  family  and
    private life ten year route, and was refused again on 27th April  2015.



 3. None of the appellant's immigration history  finds  its  way  into  the
    brief determination from Judge McDade.

 4. He concluded that she had not been in the UK for twenty years and could
    not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.   Neither  could  she
    satisfy paragraph EX.1(b) of  Appendix  FM.   He  said  there  were  no
    compelling or  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  cause  him  to
    consider the matter outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. With respect to the appellant's daughter, he acknowledged that she  was
    a student and currently living with her parents.  However, she  was  an
    adult, not significantly dependent upon them, and there was  no  reason
    why her relationship with them could not continue by her visiting  them
    in the Gambia.

 6. The judge then recorded that he considered that the appellant  and  her
    husband had compounded previous dishonesty by attempting to mislead the
    Tribunal by seeking medical evidence in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    husband's  epilepsy  when  in  fact  the   solicitors   had   no   such
    documentation.  He dismissed the appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was sought on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    failed to provide adequate reasons for his decision and had  failed  to
    properly  consider  the  position   of   the   appellant's   daughter's
    dependency.  Although permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by
    Judge Nightingale, it was subsequently granted by Judge Allen  on  20th
    July 2016, on he grounds that it was arguable that the judge had  erred
    with regard to his findings as to  family  life  with  the  appellant's
    daughter and as a consequence with regard to any proper  evaluation  of
    such private life as might be found.

 8. On  1st  August  2016  the  respondent  filed  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

 9. At the hearing Mr Avery accepted that the judge's  reasoning  was  poor
    and that the matter would have to be looked at again.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law.

10. This is a scrappy determination clearly written in haste.  At the  date
    of the hearing, on any view, the appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for
    nearly twenty years.  She had an adult daughter, with whom  she  lived,
    and an elderly husband who suffered from epilepsy.  The  sentence  "she
    is an adult and is not significantly dependent upon her parents" is not
    consistent with the evidence that she was living with  them  while  she
    attended university.

11. The judge's determination is not an adequate resolution of  the  issues
    which were before him.  Specifically, having found that the appellant's
    20 year old daughter lived with them, it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to
    consider whether or not there was family life deserving of respect  and
    then to consider whether the appellant was entitled to succeed on  that
    basis  either  within  the  Immigration  Rules  or,   if   there   were
    sufficiently compelling circumstances, outside them.

12. Mr Avery did not seek to argue that the decision should not be re-made.
     I gave him time to look at the papers in  order  to  prepare  for  the
    decision to be re-made.

Further Evidence and Submissions

13. An issue arose from a  letter  written  by  the  respondent  dated  4th
    September 2014 which states that the appellant had used various aliases
    and that she had applied  for  asylum  in  1995.   Mr  Avery  initially
    suggested that she had made an application under a false  identity  but
    acknowledged that there was no evidence  to  support  that  contention.
    Brief oral evidence was called.  Mrs Corr said that she did  not  apply
    for asylum in another name.  She said that she had been arrested before
    she claimed asylum and had given a different name, but when she went to
    the police station on the same day, she gave her real name.

14. Mr Avery relied on the reasons for refusal letter.  The  appellant  had
    not been in the UK for twenty years at the time of the application.  He
    accepted that she was in a genuine relationship with  her  husband  and
    her now adult daughter but said that the level  of  dependency  of  the
    daughter was unclear.  She was a long  term  overstayer,  with  a  poor
    immigration history and overall, removal would be proportionate.

15. Mr Kaihiva submitted that, aside from the significant overstaying,  the
    appellant did not have a poor immigration history.  Certainly there was
    no evidence of criminality.  On any view she had now been in the UK for
    over twenty years.  She had a British child and a  strong  relationship
    with her husband, who was unwell.  He was 73 years old and a pensioner.
     She had no links with anyone in  the  Gambia,  having  been  here  for
    twenty years.  It would be disproportionate to separate this family.

Findings and Conclusions

16. The first issue to be decided is whether the  appellant  can  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

17. There has been some confusion about the dates when she last entered the
    UK but it does now seem clear that she has been  here  since  September
    1996, albeit that she visited for a couple of months in 1995  in  order
    to see her husband here.  Their daughter was born on 2nd December 1995.
     The couple had some matrimonial difficulties  and  were  divorced  but
    remarried in 2003.

18. The appellant applied to remain in the UK on the basis of  her  private
    life which falls to be considered  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is clear that as at the date of the  application
    she had not lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty years  and
    therefore cannot meet the requirements of 276ADE(1)(iii).  Neither  can
    she meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because she spent the first  34  years
    of her life in Gambia and although she says that she has few,  if  any,
    remaining links there, it is likely that she is still familiar with the
    language and culture of her home country.

19. I therefore turn to  the  question  of  whether  there  are  particular
    circumstances which could be considered to be compelling or exceptional
    which require a consideration of this matter  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

20. The first question is whether the appellant enjoys a family  life  with
    her British husband and British adult child.  The relationships are not
    questioned.  She clearly enjoys family life with her husband.   So  far
    as her daughter is concerned, the unchallenged  evidence  is  that  she
    still lives at home whilst attending  university  locally.   Dependency
    between adults has to be more than the  usual  emotional  ties  between
    parent and child in order to constitute family life for the purposes of
    Article 8.  Given that the appellant is providing accommodation for her
    daughter and they still live together as a family unit, I am  satisfied
    that there is family life between the appellant, her  daughter  and  of
    course her husband.

21. She has also clearly developed a private life  over  the  twenty  years
    that she has lived in the UK.

22. Removal would be a clear interference with  the  appellant's  right  to
    family life but would be lawful since she has been in  the  UK  without
    leave  since  1997.    When   deciding   whether   removal   would   be
    proportionate, I am obliged to take into account Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act which states as follows:

         "(i) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (ii) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing of the  UK,  that  persons
             who seek to enter or remain  in  the  UK  are  able  to  speak
             English, because persons who can speak English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (iii)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing of the  UK,  that  persons
             who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  are  financially
             independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (iv) Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying person,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the UK unlawfully.

         (v)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (vi) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the UK".

 1. The appellant speaks English.  There is almost no  information  in  the
    papers about her finances, but her husband is a  state  pensioner.   In
    the absence of any information  from  the  solicitors,  it  has  to  be
    concluded  that  the  appellant  has  not  established  that   she   is
    financially independent.

 2. Section 117B(4) is clearly applicable.  The appellant has been  in  the
    UK unlawfully and therefore  little  weight  should  be  given  to  her
    private life or her relationship with her husband.

 3. Paragraph 117(6) does not apply because the appellant has no qualifying
    child.  All these matters are  either  neutral  or  count  against  the
    appellant.

 4. Furthermore, it seems that she gave a false name following  arrest,  as
    confirmed in her  oral  evidence  and  which  is  referred  to  in  the
    respondent's letter dated 4th September 2014.

 5. On the other hand, Mr Avery accepted that the appellant had never  been
    prosecuted, so far as he was aware, for having sought  to  mislead  the
    immigration authorities.  According to the letter of 4th September 2014
    she applied for asylum in her own name. Her evidence was that she  used
    a false name when arrested but corrected herself within the  day.   The
    respondent has not  pointed  to  any  information  to  counteract  that
    assertion.

 6. The letter acknowledges that the appellant has reported to  immigration
    control successfully since March 2003.  It is also clear that  she  has
    made  a  number  of  attempts  to  regularise  her  situation  in   the
    intervening years.  Most importantly, she has now accrued twenty years'
    living in the UK  and  has  a  British  husband  and  a  British  adult
    dependent child. Her husband suffers from a number  of  health  issues.
    There is evidence in the papers of appointments at the cardiology  unit
    at North Middlesex University Hospital.   It  is  also  clear  that  he
    suffers from epilepsy albeit that it is controlled by medication.

 7. The fact is that the appellant has now accrued twenty years' residence,
    and it is the policy of the Secretary of  State,  as  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules, not to require a person who has  lived  continuously
    in the UK for at least twenty years to be removed.  Given that  policy,
    and taking into account the fact that she has complied with  conditions
    set on her by immigration control since March 2003, I conclude that the
    public interest does not require removal in this case.

Notice of Decision

 8. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It is re-
    made as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 30 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
