
[pic]
IAC-AH-krl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               MD Golam Kibria
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marshall, NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Md Golam Kibria, was born on 31 December 1978 and  is  a
    male citizen of Bangladesh.  The appellant had  made  applications  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on account of his long
    residence and also for asylum.  These claims had been  refused  by  the
    respondent  in  decisions  dated  14  March   and   19 October   2014
    respectively.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Kelly) which, in a decision promulgated on 17 December 2014,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant asserts in his grounds of appeal that the judge failed to
    deal with one of those grounds, namely based upon Article 8, ECHR.  The
    judge noted [2] that the appellant had  appealed  on  Article  8,  ECHR
    grounds but his decision is silent thereafter as to Article 8.  In  her
    Rule 24 notice, the respondent asserts  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant and his family would be returned together to  Bangladesh  and
    that there would be no breach of family life.  That  may  well  be  the
    case but the judge should have dealt with a ground of appeal which  had
    been raised before him.

 3. Secondly, the appellant asserts that the judge has failed  to  consider
    how and why he may kerb his opposition political activities upon return
    to Bangladesh (see HJ (Iran) 2010 UKSC 31).  The  judge  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had been involved in politics,  as  he  claimed,  in
    Bangladesh prior to his departure in 2003 [30].  He was also  satisfied
    that the appellant had been involved in sur place activities whilst  in
    the United Kingdom [31].  The judge dealt at length [41]  et  seq  with
    the "brutal crackdown in Bangladesh" by the Government and its agencies
    against those who it considered had  been  associated  with  opposition
    violence during the election in January 2014 and the six  month  period
    preceding it [43].  The finding firmly made by the judge was  that  the
    appellant, upon his return to Bangladesh, would not be at real risk for
    that reason because he had left the country long ago.  I consider  that
    to be a sound finding for which  the  judge  has  provided  cogent  and
    adequate  reasons.   The  problem,  however,  is  that  the  appellant,
    notwithstanding his long absence from Bangladesh, may feel impelled  by
    his genuinely-held political  convictions  to  espouse  the  opposition
    cause and may, as a consequence, expose himself to risk.  Equally,  the
    appellant may choose to remain silent because he fears  that  the  open
    expression  of  his  political  views  may,  in  the  current   climate
    prevailing in Bangladesh, expose him to a  real  risk  of  persecution.
    These are questions with which Judge Kelly  has  not  grappled  in  his
    otherwise sound and thorough decision.

 4. Finally, the appellant asserts that the judge has not  made  a  finding
    regarding the appellant's own evidence and corroborative evidence  from
    the appellant's party leader that the appellant's  home  in  Bangladesh
    had been attacked after the appellant had given a speech  in  Leeds  in
    December 2013.  It is generally not  necessary  for  a  judge  to  make
    findings about each and every event detailed in an appellant's account.
    However, I consider that, in the light of all the  other  evidence  in
    this appeal, the judge should have made a  finding  as  to  whether  he
    believed that aspect of the appellant's account.

 5. I told the representatives in court that I considered  this  to  be  an
    unusual case where the judge's decision, so far as it goes,  is  sound;
    he has approached his analysis of the  appellant's  case  in  an  even-
    handed way giving  very  clear  reasons  for  accepting  parts  of  the
    appellant's account and rejecting other parts of the evidence.  He has,
    however, omitted to complete that analysis by considering  the  further
    important questions which arise from his acceptance  of  parts  of  the
    appellant's account.  He has also failed  to  deal  (as  I  have  noted
    above), with the Article 8, ECHR appeal.  The representatives  did  not
    disagree with my proposal that the appeal should be remitted  to  Judge
    Kelly sitting at Bradford so that he might  complete  his  analysis  by
    determining the Article 8, ECHR appeal, by making a finding of fact  as
    regards the appellant's claim that his home in Bangladesh was  attacked
    and (per HJ (Iran)) by determining whether the appellant  would  be  at
    real risk on return to Bangladesh if he espoused  his  political  views
    or, if he chose not to express them, his reasons  for  refraining  from
    doing so.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to Judge  Kelly
    in the First-tier Tribunal for him to further consider  the  appeal  in
    accordance with this decision of the Upper Tribunal.


Signed   Date 1 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

