

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16750/2013
                                                               IA/16752/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport, Cardiff                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 2 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Vice-President Arfon-Jones

                                   Between

                                  WZ & MEZM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr S Khan (of Counsel), instructed by Blakewells Solicitors
Respondent:       Mr  Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal has its origins in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the "Secretary
      of State"), dated 24 April 2013,  whereby  the  applications  of  both
      Appellants for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  were  refused.
      The Appellants are mother and son respectively.  Each is  of  Filipino
      origin.  The mother is aged 30 years and the  son,  born  on  20  June
      2007, is now aged 6 years.  The Appellants appealed unsuccessfully  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  They now appeal with  permission
      to this Tribunal.

   2. The  material  facts,  in  addition  to  those  rehearsed  above,  are
      uncontentious.  In  very  brief  compass,  the  two  Appellants  lived
      together in the Philippines as mother  and  son  following  the  son's
      birth in  2007  for  a  period  of  some  two  years.   There  was  no
      husband/father figure in their lives. Mother and son have been in  the
      United Kingdom since 2009.  Between 2009  and  2012,  the  mother  was
      studying.  This gave rise to some separation each week from  her  son,
      who lived with his grandmother, the first  Appellant's  mother.   This
      separation was intermittent in  nature.   Since  September  2012,  all
      three have been living together constantly.  More recently, the  first
      Appellant has been commuting to London at weekends for the purpose  of
      her part-time employment.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

     "It is arguable that, having found that the second Appellant [the  son]
           lived with and had established family life with his grandmother,
           the Judge gave inadequate  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
           child's best  interests  lay  with  him  being  removed  to  the
           Philippines with the first Appellant, his mother."

     We are mindful that the judicial duty to provide  a  properly  reasoned
      Judgment has been considered most recently in the reported decision of
      the Upper Tribunal in MK (Duty to give Reasons) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT
      641 (IAC).

   4. It is trite that the Determination of the FtT must be considered as  a
      whole and in its full context.  The  latter  includes  the  bundle  of
      evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellants  the  contents  whereof
      consisted of, inter alia, several witness statements,  a  letter  from
      the second Appellant's primary school,  documentary  evidence  of  the
      first Appellant's studies in London between late 2010  and  late  2012
      and evidence  of  her  weekend  employment  as  a  care  assistant  in
      Hammersmith, London.  In addition, the FtT heard  evidence  from  both
      the first Appellant and her mother.

   5. It is appropriate  to  reproduce  in  full  the  key  passage  in  the
      Determination of the FtT:
     "The second Appellant's interests  are  a  primary  consideration.   He
           will be returned to the Philippines in the care of  his  mother.
           I note that he lived in the Philippines for the first four years
           of his life.  He has spent more  of  his  life  so  far  in  the
           Philippines. His father remains in the Philippines.  It will  be
           in his interests to be able to have more frequent  contact  with
           his father and his  father's  family.   I  understand  that  the
           second Appellant has started school.  I consider that the second
           Appellant's best interests are to remain with his mother and  he
           will be removed with her  to  the  Philippines.   He  is  not  a
           British National and has only spent a little over two years  and
           four months in the UK.  He is at an  age  where  he  can  easily
           adapt to a return to the Philippines.  The family life he has so
           far enjoyed with his grandmother will not continue in  the  form
           that it is now.  However, his grandmother  can  maintain  family
           relations by visits and contact via the various forms  of  media
           (i.e. telephone, skype, Facebook etc)."

     On behalf of the Appellants,  Mr  Khan  criticised  this  passage.   He
      submitted that it did not accord with the standards identifiable in ZH
      (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC4,
      paragraphs [29]-[33].  In rejecting this submission, we draw attention
      to the full context in which the relevant passage must be  considered.
      Furthermore we consider the test to be one  of  adequacy  and  we  are
      satisfied that the Judge made an adequate  assessment  of  the  second
      Appellant's best interest.  In  addition,  we  would  caution  against
      unduly formulaic, slavish adherence to the  relevant  passage  in  the
      opinion of Baroness Hale.  We do not consider that this  was  intended
      to be, or constitutes, a prescribed checklist.  We  are  satisfied  in
      any event  that,  in  substance,  the  main  considerations  to  which
      Baroness Hale drew attention were duly considered by the  Judge.   The
      reasons  proffered  for  the  Judge's  conclusion  are  adequate   and
      intelligible,  do  not  lapse  into  the   prohibited   territory   of
      irrationality and are not vitiated by any material omission.

   6. It follows that we find no error of law in the  Determination  of  the
      FtT and the appeal is dismissed accordingly.



                           Signed:
                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date:   27  March 2014


