
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16934/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               Mr FOYSAL MIAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Harris promulgated on 11 May 2016.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh whose date of birth  is  3  February  1990  and  his  appeal
    relates to a refusal by the Secretary of State dated 22 April  2015  in
    relation to a human rights claim.  The matter was advanced  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules and there is a detailed consideration of the application of those
    provisions in paragraphs 7 to 25 of  the  determination.   The  judge's
    conclusion at paragraph 6 is that the appellant does not succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  There is no complaint  made  in  relation  to
    those factual findings.

2.   What the judge then goes on to do is, as I observed to  Counsel  during
    submissions, is slightly unorthodox, in that he  applies  his  mind  to
    whether this matter can succeed under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.
    Rather  than  addressing  the  SS  (Congo)  question  at   the   outset
    considering whether there are compelling circumstances for so doing, he
    immediately enters into an Article 8 assessment,  rejects  it,  and  in
    paragraph 40 states "Weighing up the matters before me,  I  find  there
    are no compelling circumstances  that  outweigh  the  factors  that  go
    against the  appellant".   This  approach  is  not  criticised  by  the
    appellant and does not form part of his grounds of  appeal  and  to  my
    mind even if this were  to  constitute  an  error  of  law  it  is  not
    material.

3.   The essence of the appeal as advanced before me today  by  Mr  Syed-Ali
    is that the judge did not properly carry out the assessment  he  should
    have done in looking at the application of Article 8 outside the Rules.
     He places particular reliance upon the decision in AM  (S117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) and relies expressly on paragraph 5 of  the  head
    note to that decision which reads as follows:

         "In some circumstances it may also  be  that  even  a  person  with
         indefinite  leave  to  remain,  or  a  person  who   has   obtained
         citizenship, enjoys a status that is  'precarious'  either  because
         that status is revocable by the Secretary of State as a  result  of
         their deception, or because of their  criminal  conduct.   In  such
         circumstances the person will be well aware that he has  imperilled
         his status and cannot viably claim thereafter that  his  status  is
         other than precarious".

4.   There seems to be no doubt in this case that the appellant,  who  spent
    a good many years in Bangladesh, nonetheless came to this  country  and
    that in the course of gaining entry a forged passport  was  used.   The
    appellant was a minor and any criminality which may  have  attached  to
    the use  of  the  forged  passport  should  not  be  visited  upon  the
    appellant, who was a child at the time.  That matter was  operative  in
    the mind of the judge when he carried out his  balancing  exercise.   I
    look particularly at paragraphs 37 and following of  the  determination
    which read as follows:

         "37. I accept that the appellant, who has been brought up  speaking
             English and is in a position to look for work if allowed, does
             not fall  foul  of  the  statutory  considerations  concerning
             economic independence and fluency in English.

         38.  It is a matter to be weighed in the appellant's  favour,  that
             through no choice of his own, he has found himself brought  to
             this country while still a child and required to make  a  life
             here for himself, which to his credit  he  has  done.   For  a
             considerable time he has believed himself lawfully settled  in
             this country.  The appellant does not have a  criminal  record
             and it  is  not  said  that  he  has  engaged  in  anti-social
             behaviour while in the UK.  I accept he  has  adopted  British
             culture and thinks of the UK as home.

         39.  Yet the difficulty for the appellant concerns s.117B(4) and  5
             of the 2002 Act.  In law I am required to have regard  to  the
             consideration that little weight should attach to private life
             established while residing precariously or  illegally  in  the
             UK.  This applies to the appellant as, at  most,  he  has  had
             indefinite leave to remain wrongly granted to him".

5.   In my assessment the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  rightly  identified
    all relevant features, both in the appellant's favour and  those  which
    go against him.  He has carried out a careful  balancing  exercise  and
    reached a conclusion which, although not every judge might have come to
    it,  is  nonetheless  unimpeachable.   I  do  not  consider  that   the
    suggestion that there is an error of law has been made out.  Issues  of
    weight are entirely for the primary decision maker and it  is  not  for
    the Upper Tribunal to re-make the decision.   In  the  absence  of  any
    material error of law this appeal must be dismissed and the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge accordingly is maintained.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date     11 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

