

                                    [pic]
In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|Heard at Birmingham                           |On 4 December 2013           |
|On 21 November 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M HALL

                                   Between

                              NANA YAW AMPOMAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     In person
For the respondent:          Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                       DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction



    1. This matter comes before us as a re-making of  an  appeal  concerning
       the appellant's claim that he is  entitled  to  confirmation  of  his
       right of permanent residence as someone who has resided in the UK for
       5 years as the family member of an  EEA  citizen  in  line  with  the
       requirements of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
       2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

    2. The respondent refused the  appellant's  application  in  a  decision
       dated 10 July 2012. The appellant's appeal was initially  refused  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal  in  a  determination  dated  9
       October 2012. That decision was found to contain an error of  law  by
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall in a decision dated 12 February 2013
       and was set aside to be re-made.

Preliminary Issue


    3. The appellant applied for his appeal to be linked  to  those  of  his
       wife and children. We did not  have  the  details  of  those  appeals
       before us but see no reason to dispute that they have  appeals  which
       are currently before the First-tier Tribunal. Where the  appeals  are
       within another tier of the Chamber, we indicated that this was not  a
       situation where they could be linked.


Our decision

    4. The appellant was granted  a  residence  card  following  a  Tribunal
       determination dated 2 April 2008 in his favour. The facts found  that
       led to the appeal being allowed were  that  one  of  the  appellant's
       children is an Irish national, the family, certainly since moving  to
       the UK, are self-sufficient and have comprehensive medical insurance.
       The Irish national  child  was  exercising  a  Treaty  right  by  his
       residence in the UK, being self-sufficient.

    5. As we see it, then, as now, the appellant was entitled to  reside  in
       the UK and to a residence card in 2008 in line with the  judgment  of
       the European Court of Justice in Case C-200/02 Kunqian Catherine  Zhu
       and  Man Lavette Chen v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       [2004] ECR I-9925 [2005] 1 QB 325, [2004] 3 WLR 1453 (Chen).

    6. In that case it was accepted the EEA citizen children were exercising
       Treaty rights on the grounds  of  self  sufficiency.  To  give  their
       rights of residence effect, their parents, as their  primary  carers,
       were allowed to remain. The parents derived their right of  residence
       from the child, therefore, rather than having them in their own right
       under  Directive  2004/38  (the  Citizen's  Directive).  Indeed,  the
       determination dated 2 April 2008 states at [33]  that  the  appellant
       "can derive rights of residence from" the Irish national child.

    7. However, the determination went on to state that the  appellant  fell
       within the definition  of  a  family  member  in  Article  2  of  the
       Citizen's Directive, incorporated into domestic law by  regulation  7
       of the EEA Regulations.

    8. The appellant relies on that statement now as showing that his  right
       of  residence  arises  from  the  Citizen's  Directive  and  that  he
       qualifies for permanent residence, having resided in the  UK  as  the
       family member of an EEA citizen for over 5 years. He  also  maintains
       that this must also be so as the residence card which was endorsed in
       his passport in 2008 refers to him as a  "family  member  of  an  EEA
       national".

    9. We should indicate that we did not find that the description  in  the
       determination of 2 April 2008 of the appellant as someone who met the
       requirements of Article 2 of the Citizen's Directive or regulation  7
       of the EEA Regulations was correct in law.

   10. In setting out our reasons for this we can do no better than to  cite
       [33]  to  [35]  of  Bee  and  another  (permanent/derived  rights  of
       residence) [2013] UKUT 00083 (IAC) (Bee).

        "33. Chapter IV of Directive 2004/38/EC  deals  with  the  right  of
           permanent residence. Article 16(2) states :


               2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also to  family  members  who  are
               not nationals of a Member  State  who  have  legally  resided
               with the Union  citizen  in  the  host  Member  State  for  a
               continuous period of five years.


           The appellants have resided lawfully for  at  least  five  years
           because they have been granted leave for at least  that  period.
           However, the definition of "family members" in Article 2 (2) (d)
           refers to:


               "the dependant direct relatives in the ascending line..."


    34. This was considered in Chen in relation to  the  earlier  Directive
        90/364:

               "42 Article 1(2)(b) of  Directive  90/364,  which  guarantees
               'dependent' relatives in the ascending line of the holder  of
               the right of residence the right to install  themselves  with
               the holder of the right of  residence,  regardless  of  their
               nationality,  cannot  confer  a  right  of  residence  on   a
               national of a non-member country  in  Mrs.  Chen's  situation
               either by reason of the emotional bonds  between  mother  and
               child or on the ground that the mother's right to  enter  and
               reside in the United Kingdom  is  dependent  on  her  child's
               right of residence.

               43 According to the case-law of  the  Court,  the  status  of
               'dependent' member of the family of a holder of  a  right  of
               residence is the result of a factual situation  characterised
               by the fact that material support for the  family  member  is
               provided by the holder of the right  of  residence  (see,  to
               that effect, in relation  to  Article  10  of  Regulation  No
               1612/68, Case 316/85 Lebon [1987] ECR 2811, paragraphs 20  to
               22).

               44 In circumstances such as those of  the  main  proceedings,
               the position is exactly the opposite in that  the  holder  of
               the right of residence is dependent on the national of a non-
               member country who is her carer and wishes to accompany  her.
               In those circumstances,  Mrs.  Chen  cannot  claim  to  be  a
               'dependent' relative  of  Catherine  in  the  ascending  line
               within the meaning of Directive 90/364 with a view to  having
               the benefit of a right of residence in the United Kingdom."

       35. It is  clear  from  this  that  the  appellants  are  not  their
           children's dependants. As  in  Chen  the  factual  situation  is
           exactly the opposite. Consequently,  they  do  not  satisfy  the
           definition of "family member" and so  cannot  benefit  from  the
           right to permanent residence in Article 16(2)."

   11. The appellant here is not the dependent of his Irish national  child.
       His child is dependent on him. He is  not  now  and  has  never  been
       someone coming within the definition of a "family member" as  defined
       in Directive 2004/38/EC.


   12. Further, none of the law or case law before us  showed  that  parents
       deriving rights of residence from their self-sufficient  EEA  citizen
       children had a permanent right to reside. Chen did not indicate  that
       was so.


   13. More recently, in the case of Case C-529/11 Olaitan Ajoke  Alarape  v
       SSHD the European Court of Justice confirms that there is no right to
       permanent residence to those in  the  situation  of  this  appellant,
       which concludes on similar facts at [48]:

           "In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the fifth question
           is that periods of residence in a host Member  State  which  are
           completed by family members of  a  Union  citizen  who  are  not
           nationals of a Member state solely on the basis of Article 12 of
           Regulation No  1612/68,  where  the  conditions  laid  down  for
           entitlement to a right of residence under Directive 2004/38  are
           not satisfied, may not  be  taken  into  consideration  for  the
           purposes of acquisition by those family members of  a  right  of
           permanent residence under that directive."


   14. Regulation 15A of the EEA Regulations, dealing with permanent  rights
       of residence, reflects the ratio  of  Alarape  in  regulation  15(1A)
       which states:


        "Residence in the United Kingdom as a result of a derivative  right
        of residence does not constitute residence for the purpose of  this
        regulation".

   15. We did not find that the judge in the determination of 2  April  2008
       or a later  determination  of  10  February  2009  referring  to  the
       appellant as the family member of an EEA  national  and  to  possible
       qualification under the Citizen's Directive or the EEA Regulations or
       to the appellant being able to apply for permanent residence in  2010
       could have the force of altering the true basis on which he  was  and
       is entitled to reside in the UK.


   16. Nor was it our view that a residence card endorsed  in  his  passport
       referring to him as a family member of an EEA national  afforded  the
       appellant any legitimate expectation of obtaining permanent residence
       under the Citizen's Directive or regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.



   17.  Further,  when  specifically  stating  that  a  right  to  permanent
       residence did not arise in the circumstances of this  appellant,  the
       European Court of Justice in Alarape used the term "family  members",
       confirming us in our view that nothing material turns on the  use  of
       this wording.

   18. The appellant also argued that he was  not  someone  with  a  derived
       right of residence as a result of the provisions of Schedule 3 of The
       Immigration (European Economic Area)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2012.
       That argument could not succeed where the  appellant  has  never  had
       residence rights covered by the EEA Regulations, before or after  the
       2012 amendments.


   19. As we understood it from the appellant, his  Irish  national  child's
       right to permanent residence is in the process of being considered by
       the First-tier Tribunal. That application, of course, does fall to be
       considered under the Citizen's Directive and EEA Regulations  on  the
       basis of whatever evidence is put before the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion


    36. We re-make the appeal,  finding  that  the  appellant's  derivative
        rights do not confer a permanent right of residence.

    37. We accordingly re-make this appeal by dismissing it.



Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination.

    We make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.




[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt                          21 November 2013
