
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/16870/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th December 2016                         |On 29th December 2016        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               Mr Sohail Nisar
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Wells Fast Track Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appealed, with permission granted by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne, against the decision dated 19th January 2016  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A Wilson allowing his appeal.   The  appellant  had
    appealed a decision of the Secretary of State dated 21st April 2015  to
    refuse his application for a residence card under Regulation 7  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  Although First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wilson had allowed the appeal he had  only  allowed
    it to the limited extent that the matter should be remitted back to the
    Secretary of State for reconsideration. The judge  did  not  allow  the
    appeal outright.  That, course of action, according  to  the  appellant
    was an error of law as the appeal, in the  circumstances,  should  have
    been allowed outright.  The judge erred in law by  finding  that  there
    existed a discretion open to the Secretary of State.

 2. The history to this appeal was that the refusal dated 21st  April  2015
    of the Secretary of State was based on  finding  that  the  appellant's
    marriage to his Romanian national partner, Olga  Neagoe,  was  a  sham.
    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was submitted  by  the
    representatives that none of  the  reasons  given  by  the  Immigration
    Officers and therefore in the Secretary of State's refusal stood up  to
    scrutiny.  The assertion that the answers in  interview  appeared  well
    rehearsed was contradicted by  the  fact  that  the  encounter  at  the
    registry office was a surprise visit to the wedding by the  immigration
    officers.

 3. The judge agreed that the Secretary of State had  failed  to  discharge
    the burden of proof and in line with Papjorgji (EEA Spouse  -  marriage
    of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38, allowed the appeal.

 4. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me  it  was  agreed  by  Mr
    Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State at the hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal that the judge was indeed in  error  in  his  course  of
    action in remitting the matter back to the Secretary  of  State  for  a
    consideration of the circumstances. Under Section 17(1)  the  Secretary
    of State must issue a residence card to a person  who  is  not  an  EEA
    national and is the family member of a qualified person or  of  an  EEA
    national with a permanent right of residence  under  Regulation  15  on
    application and production of (a) a valid passport and (b)  proof  that
    the applicant is such a family member.

 5. The judge at paragraph 11 of his decision recorded

         'I am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  parties  are  married,  the
         Registry  Office  ceremony  did  go  ahead,  the  decision  of  the
         Respondent to refuse the application was therefore  wrong  in  law.
         The matter therefore returns to the Secretary of State  to  make  a
         lawful decision.  The issue of a residence card  does  require  the
         exercise of discretion  by  the  Respondent.   In  exercising  that
         discretion no doubt the respondent will have  regard  to  the  full
         bundle of evidence lodged in support of the hearing asserting  that
         all other matters under the  European  Regulations  are  satisfied.
         That is a matter for the Respondent to exercise her  discretion  on
         and is not a matter for me'.

 6. The conclusion relating to the exercise of  discretion  was  incorrect.
    As I have indicated and agreed by the parties before me, this was not a
    matter for the exercise of discretion by the respondent and the  judge,
    on his findings,  should have allowed the appeal outright.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  was  communicated  to  the
    Secretary of State but however, was not communicated to the  appellant.
    Nor was it communicated to the appellant's solicitors.  In  both  cases
    it would appear that the Tribunal sent the decision to  old  addresses.
     It is apparent from the file that the Tribunal sent  the  decision  to
    the former address of the appellant  and  the  former  address  of  the
    solicitors.

 8. The next occurrence is that the Secretary of State,  following  receipt
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  proceeded  to  re-examine  the
    circumstances of the appellant and on 15th March 2016 made  a  decision
    to refuse the application.  No issue was  taken  with  the  appellant's
    sponsor exercising treaty rights, in the first decision of  April  2015
    by the Secretary of State.  HMRC  tax  details  and  payslips  for  the
    sponsor were included in the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    the judge directed the Secretary of State to  consider  that  evidence.
    Nonetheless the Secretary of  State  wrote  to  the  appellant  on  4th
    February 2016  requesting  further  information.   It  appeared  to  be
    accepted that this letter was  also  directed  to  the  wrong  address.
    Neither the appellant nor the legal representatives received the letter
    requesting further information.

 9. The Secretary of State again refused the appellant's  application  this
    time on 15th March 2016.  That decision was  also  sent  to  the  wrong
    address.  By this  time  the  appellant  had  still  not  received  the
    Tribunal's decision.  I note that despite a judge  finding  in  January
    2016 that the Secretary of State had not proved her case regarding  the
    sham marriage, the Secretary of State,  not  two  months  later,  still
    cited that as a reason for refusing the appeal as well  as  identifying
    that it had not been shown  that  the  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights.  There was no reference in that decision letter of  15th  March
    2016 to any of the wealth of material included in the bundle before the
    First-tier Tribunal in January 2016 or the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge 19th January 2016,

10.  The  appellant's  representatives  attempted  to  appeal  this  second
    decision of March 2016 on 5th July 2016 (out of time) but an  extension
    of time was refused by Tribunal (IAC) Caseworker Farrin on 18th  August
    2016 who appeared to think the addresses had not changed.  That was  an
    excluded decision. I can accept that the appellant and  the  solicitors
    both had changed addresses.

11. Undaunted, the legal representatives, accepting that there had been 'an
    unacceptable hiatus' had lodged, on 30th June 2016, an  appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson.

12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted permission to appeal  on  3rd
    November 2016, correctly in my view of the  extenuating  circumstances,
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson,  noting  that
    the decision was finally received by the  representatives  on  7th  May
    2016  and  'the  representatives  had  already  corresponded  with  the
    Respondent but received no response'.  He added

         'I  have  however  considered  the  merits  of   this   application
         simultaneously with the application to extend time.   Having  taken
         into account the merits  and  the  unhappy  administrative  history
         suffered by this appeal,  on  balance  time  is  extended  and  the
         application is admitted'.

    and further

         'In an otherwise careful, focused and well  reasoned  decision  and
         reasons, it is nonetheless arguable  that  having  found  that  the
         parties are genuinely married, the judge should  have  gone  on  to
         simply allow the appeal without referring the matter  back  to  the
         Respondent to make a lawful Decision'

13. At the hearing before me, at which both the appellant and  his  sponsor
    wife attended, Mr Whitwell submitted that the second  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State vitiated the first and that the Tribunal  no  longer
    had jurisdiction.  I do not accept that  proposition.  There  stands  a
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  which  permission  was
    granted and, in the circumstances, an extension of time permitted.   It
    is unfortunate that the Tribunal refused an extension of time to appeal
    the second decision but the second decision of the Secretary  of  State
    cannot extinguish the first decision and cannot expunge the decision of
    the Tribunal. There was nothing further for the Secretary of  State  to
    consider following the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  It is unfortunate that a further decision was made by the Secretary of
    State but it is clear that Regulation 17(1) and not 17(4) applied.   It
    is also surprising that the Secretary of State proceeded to ignore  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson on  the  marriage  and
    ignore the evidence which must have been submitted to  her  in  January
    2016 in relation to the sponsor exercising Treaty Rights.  The decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson was effectively  a  declaration  of
    the position of the appellants' rights under the Directive 2004/38/EC.

15. In the circumstances, having accepted that there is a  valid  grant  of
    permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision issued on
    15th  January  2016,  I  conclude  that  Upper   Tribunal   does   have
    jurisdiction.  This is not a case where there was a grant of permission
    conditional on the extension of time.  An extension of time was granted
    for permission.

16. I preserve the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson against
    which there has never been any challenge  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    (save the further  decision  based  on  a  lack  of  obtaining  further
    evidence for the reason I have given).  It was open to the Secretary of
    State to challenge that decision allowing the appeal on the  facts  but
    she did not.   The second decision of the Secretary of State  was  made
    without addressing the  finding  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the marriage was  not  a  sham,  without  addressing  the
    information regarding financial material within the bundle, and,  after
    failing to write to the appellant at the correct address  when  seeking
    further information.  I repeat that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is in effect declaratory of the appellant's rights under
    Regulation 7 and Regulation 14(2) of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

17. There was clearly an error of law, however,  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge with respect to the issue of Regulation 17 of
    the Regulations, as the appeal  should,  on  the  findings,  have  been
    allowed outright.  I remake the decision allowing the appeal outright.



Order

Appeal Allowed



Signed

                                        Date 14th December 2016
Helen Rimington
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

