
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA165482015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 May 2017                                |On 2 June 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     m n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a resumed hearing  of  the  appeal  brought  by  the  appellant
    against a decision made by the respondent on 13 April 2015 refusing her
    ILR as the spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant's appeal originally came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    (FtT) Broe who dismissed it on 27 June 2016.  Subsequently, however,  I
    set aside the FtT judge's decision for material error of law and set it
    down for a resumed hearing.  I observed that there was no dispute as to
    the facts up to the time of the  hearing  on  10  June,  but  that  the
    respondent would need to consider three  important  developments  since
    that date:

    -    that the oldest child became a  British  citizen  on  18  November
         2016;


    -    that her husband sponsor became a British  citizen  on  30  August
         2016;


    -    that the appellant was pregnant with a third child.

2.   I directed that the respondent be given an  opportunity  to  reconsider
    the case  before  I  listed  it  for  hearing,  but  when  nothing  was
    forthcoming the case was listed.  Mr Singh informed me that  an  e-mail
    had been sent to the Upper Tribunal  apologising  for  the  failure  to
    respond and indicating that  the  respondent  wished  to  withdraw  her
    defence of this case, as she was intending to make a grant of leave.  I
    pointed out that it was the appellant's appeal and that Rule 17 of  the
    Procedure Rules (Upper Tribunal) 2008 did not address withdrawal  of  a
    decision, only  withdrawal  of  an  appeal.   I  stated  that  in  such
    circumstances, in which there has not as yet been any formal withdrawal
    of the respondent's decision and no fresh decision, I would proceed  to
    determine the grounds of appeal.

3.   I heard very briefly from Mr Singh and the appellant in person.

4.   Given the respondent's indication that she no longer wished  to  resist
    the appellant's appeal it is unnecessary for me to set out  my  reasons
    in any detail.  In brief I have decided to allow the appellant's appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.  Applying the same approach adopted by the  Upper
    Tribunal in  SF  and  others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)  [2017]  UKUT
    120(IAC), I consider that:

    1.   The oldest child is now a British citizen and cannot be removed.


    2.   The appellant's circumstances now come within the scope of Section
         117B(6)  NIAA  2002  since  she  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with a British citizen child.


    3.   It is the policy  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  it  is  not
         reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK.


    4.   It is clear on the facts of this case that if the  appellant  were
         required to leave the  UK,  her  British  citizen  child  would  be
         compelled to leave the territory of the European Union.


    5.   There are  no  criminal  or  other  public  policy  considerations
         capable of making it reasonable to expect the appellant's child  to
         leave the UK.


    6.   The appellant is entitled to succeed on the basis that  she  meets
         the requirements of Section 117B(6).

Notice of Decision

5.   For the above reasons:

    -    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside
         for material error.


    -    The decision I re-make is  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on
         Article 8 grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 1 June 2017
           [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal














