


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16952/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 7 May 2014                               |On 14th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               sukhpreet singh
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (SSHD) against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr
   Singh's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
   remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and  to  remove  him  from  the
   United Kingdom by way of directions under section 47 of the  Immigration,
   Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr  Singh  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 7  November  1988.  He  first
   entered the United Kingdom on 15 July 2009  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
   student valid until 18  October  2011  and  was  subsequently  granted  a
   further period of leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  until  29
   September 2012. On 27 September 2012 he  applied  for  further  leave  to
   remain as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant,  but  his  application  was
   refused on 23 April 2013.

4. The application was refused under  paragraph  244DD  of  the  immigration
   rules  on  the  grounds  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the
   requirements of paragraphs 245DD(b). He was  awarded  zero  points  under
   Appendix A (Attributes) as he had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  was
   engaged in  business  activity  in  a  specified  occupation,  since  the
   business  contract  he  had  supplied  did  not   meet   the   evidential
   requirements in paragraph 41-SD(c) of Appendix  A.  Furthermore,  he  was
   unable to demonstrate that he had access to the required funds.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert on 13 February 2014.  The  judge  noted
   that he had since produced an updated statement  of  contract  rectifying
   the mistakes previously made and containing the missing details. However,
   since the contract was dated well after the decision to refuse  leave  to
   remain he found that the appellant could not succeed in his appeal  under
   the immigration rules. He also rejected submissions made with  regard  to
   the evidential flexibility policy, relying on the principles in Secretary
   of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2.  He  went
   on, however, to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds on the grounds that
   there  were  "special  circumstances"  in  the  appellant's  case   which
   outweighed the maintenance of immigration control.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had misdirected himself as to  the  correct
   test for the purposes of Article 8 and that his  decision  to  allow  the
   appeal on the basis that he  did  was  contrary  to  the  principles  and
   guidance in Patel & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2013] UKSC 72 and Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25.

7. Permission to appeal was granted on 9 April 2014.

Appeal Hearing

8. The appeal came before me on 7 May 2014. There was no  appearance  by  or
   on behalf of the appellant and no  explanation  for  his  absence.  There
   appeared to be no reason why the appeal could not proceed in his absence.
   I therefore went on to hear submissions from Mr Saunders, who relied  and
   expanded upon the grounds  of  appeal  and  asked  that  Judge  Herbert's
   decision be set aside and that the appellant's appeal be dismissed on all
   grounds.

Consideration and Findings

9. Judge Herbert plainly made material errors of law in  his  decision  such
   that it cannot stand and has to be set aside. Although he properly  found
   that the appeal could not succeed under the immigration  rules  and  that
   the  appellant's  circumstances  did  not  fall  within  the   evidential
   flexibility principles, his decision with respect to Article  8  took  no
   account of the relevant immigration rules relating to private and  family
   life and was inconsistent with the guidance provided in recent case law.

10. At no point did the judge refer to the  appellant's  inability  to  meet
   the requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  immigration
   rules, nor to the principles set out  in  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640  and
   Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 85, whereby  it  was
   necessary to demonstrate arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
   remain outside the rules before even being able to consider whether there
   were compelling circumstances. His  finding,  that  there  were  "special
   circumstances" in the appellant's case, was made without any reference to
   such principles.

11.  As  Mr  Saunders  submitted,  in  finding  that  there  were   "special
   circumstances" in the appellant's case the judge was simply using Article
   8 as a means of circumventing the  immigration  rules,  contrary  to  the
   guidance in Patel, as endorsed in Nasim.

12. In Patel, the Supreme Court found, at paragraph 57:

   "It is important to remember that article 8 is not a  general  dispensing
   power. It is to be distinguished from the Secretary of State's discretion
   to allow leave to remain outside the rules, which may be unrelated to any
   protected human right."

13. The Upper Tribunal, in Nasim, found that:


      "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
      State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72  serve  to  re-focus
      attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR  and,  in
      particular, to recognise that Article's  limited  utility  in  private
      life cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's
      moral and physical integrity."

14. In the appellant's case, the evidence before the judge relating  to  his
   private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  limited  to  his   business
   activities,  such  activities  having  been  found  not   to   meet   the
   requirements of the immigration rules so as to justify a grant  of  leave
   as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. The circumstances found by the  judge
   to be "special" amounted to little more than a desire by the appellant to
   conduct his business in the United Kingdom rather than in India, together
   with vague and speculative suggestions of  contributions  to  the  United
   Kingdom  economy  through  the  business.  Clearly  that  was  a   wholly
   inadequate basis for concluding that a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  was
   justified outside the immigration rules.

15. In all of these circumstances the judge plainly  erred  in  law  in  his
   decision to allow the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.  His  decision  is
   accordingly set aside.

16.  In re-making the decision, it is clear that the appellant  cannot  meet
   the requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  immigration
   rules and indeed it is not suggested that  he  could.  In  terms  of  the
   principles in Gulshan and Shahzad there  are,  for  the  reasons  already
   given above, no arguably  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
   outside the rules. It is thus not necessary to go on to consider  Article
   8 in any wider context. The appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom
   would not be disproportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  an
   effective immigration control and would not be in breach of Article 8  of
   the ECHR.

DECISION

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly allowed
   and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I  re-make  the
   decision by dismissing Mr Singh's appeal on all grounds.












                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
