











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16997/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Birmingham              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 14 March 2016                  |On 25 April 2016                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mrs Fatima Laatioui
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Martin, counsel (instructed by J R Jones
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew, promulgated on 5 August 2015  allowed
      the claimant's appeal under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


   3. The claimant applied for a residence card as the family member  of  an
      EEA national. The appeal was considered on the papers.


   4. The claimant had applied on 18 December 2014 for a permanent right  of
      residence as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK. She  had  to
      show that her sponsor has exercised Treaty rights  in  the  UK  for  a
      continuous period of five years. Moreover, she had to  show  that  she
      has been resident in the UK for a continuous period of five years.


   5. The Judge found that the claimant had sufficiently  demonstrated  that
      her sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights since 2009.  The  appeal
      was accordingly allowed.


   6. However, the Judge omitted to make a finding in respect of the  second
      ground for refusal, relating to the lack of  documentation  evidencing
      the claimant's own residence in the UK for a  period  of  five  years.
      Accordingly, it was asserted that she had not shown that she  met  all
      the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Omotosho
      on 16 December 2015.


   8. In the Rule 24 response, it was contended on behalf  of  the  claimant
      that she had provided in her appeal bundle documents showing that  she
      was continuously present in the UK for five years. She had given birth
      to two children in  the  UK  and  provided  documents  including  bank
      statements,  medical  letters  and  bills  which  proved   the   same.
      Accordingly, it is contended that the Judge did not  make  a  material
      misdirection in law.


   9. On behalf of the secretary of state, Mr Mills  accepted  that  it  may
      well have been that the Judge had before  him  evidence  showing  that
      there had been five years' continuous residence in the UK.


  10. He referred to the helpful schedule of evidence produced by Mr  Martin
      relating to the earliest period of such residence.


  11. This included her bank statement as well as her  husband's  statement.
      There was also an annual review of Tax Credits from pages 70-74  dated
      29 April 2010 referring to the claimant by name. There was a final tax
      credit decision dated June 2010;  a  tax  credit  for  the  period  25
      September 2009 to 5 April 2010; a letter from  NHS  Heart  of  England
      confirming the birth in the UK in June 2010 and October  2010  of  her
      children. This also confirmed her attendance at a  clinic  in  January
      2010.


  12. There was a letter from a GP practice dated  20  May  2015  confirming
      registration on 13 November 2009; birth certificates; and a  JobCentre
      Plus letter dated November 2009 confirming an interview  attended  and
      the NI number that was granted. There was also  a  bank  letter  dated
      March 2011 and a water bill dated November 2010.


  13. Mr Mills accepted that this evidence had not  been  addressed  by  the
      Judge. Although there has been 'a clear error  of  law',  it  was  not
      material. It is inevitable that the Judge would have  found  that  she
      had resided continuously in the UK for five years.


  14. I am grateful to Mr Martin for the schedule of evidence produced. I am
      satisfied that in the circumstances, the bundle of evidence  presented
      by the claimant disclosed satisfactory evidence that the claimant  had
      been continuously present in the UK for five years. This included  not
      only the fact that she gave birth to two children here, but there were
      further documents including bank statements, medical letters and bills
      which substantiated the claim.


  15. In the circumstances, I accept the submission that the asserted  error
      of law was not material in that it had been open to the Judge to allow
      the appeal on the evidence produced.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed                             Date   18 April 2016






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

