
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/16361/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |             Decision & Reasons         |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 11 May 2017                     |             On 20 June 2017            |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     A L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
                    Hartigan Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Lenier (FtJ), promulgated on 11 October  2016,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 05 July
        2012 to make a deportation order against him.

   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Kosovo, date of  birth  05  November
        1983. He entered the United Kingdom on 17 October 1999 and  claimed
        asylum the following day. He fled Kosovo because  of  the  conflict
        between Serbians and ethnic Albanians and left behind  his  parents
        and sister. His asylum claim was refused on 14 March  2000  but  he
        was granted Exceptional Leave to Remain until 14 March 2004. He was
        subsequently granted Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) on 3 February
        2005. The appellant worked as a cleaner and a  construction  worker
        in the UK but, due to his mental illness, he  has  been  unemployed
        since 2010.




     3. The appellant received one caution for shoplifting in 2003. Between
        2008 and 2010 he received  9  convictions,  mainly  for  dishonesty
        offences and breaches of court orders. 2 of his convictions  during
        this period resulted in the appellant being sentenced twice  to  12
        weeks imprisonment. On 6 July 2010 the appellant was  convicted  of
        an offence of possession with intent  to  supply  a  Class  A  drug
        (105.3 g of cocaine) and received a three-year prison  sentence  on
        10 September 2010. The sentencing judge accepted that the appellant
        was acting as a  caretaker  for  the  drugs  and  that  he  was  'a
        vulnerable  sort  of  person'  because   of   his   mental   health
        difficulties. Following his release he was convicted of battery  on
        18 August 2012, 2 offences of criminal damage on 31 August 2012 and
        3 March 2013, an act of outraging public decency on 8  March  2013,
        and a conviction for public nuisance in June 2016 (exposing himself
        to a medical worker).


     4. The appellant has received a diagnosis  of  paranoid  schizophrenia
        and has been admitted to a psychiatric ward on  6  occasions  since
        2008. His mental illness first manifested  itself  around  2004  or
        2005. While serving his custodial sentence for  his  index  offence
        the appellant was transferred to hospital on 10 October 2011  under
        the Mental Health Act 1983. He remained detained as a patient after
        his custodial detention ended.  He  was  sentenced  to  a  hospital
        order, without a restriction order, on 28 May 2013 for the  act  of
        outraging public decency (exposing himself on  the  tube).  At  the
        time of the appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  he  remained
        subject to a Community Treatment Order  (CTO)  under  the  care  of
        Brent South CMHT and saw a care coordinator weekly.

     5. In deciding to  make  a  deportation  order  on  5  July  2012  the
        respondent regarded the appellant's drug conviction as particularly
        serious and considered that the escalating nature of his  offending
        established a  risk  to  the  public.  After  considering  evidence
        relating to the availability of mental health treatment  in  Kosovo
        the respondent concluded that the appellant's deportation would not
        breach  article  3.  Whilst  accepting  that  the   appellant   had
        established a private life in the UK the respondent was of the view
        that the decision to deport him did not interfere with his  private
        life and that he could reasonably readjust to life in Kosovo.


     6. On 15 December 2014 the FTT allowed the appellant's appeal  against
        the  respondent's  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.   The
        respondent  successfully  appealed  this  decision  to  the   Upper
        Tribunal and the case was remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
        rehearing, which occurred on 08 August 2016.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     7. The  appellant  produced  two  witness  statements  and  gave  oral
        evidence at his hearing. The FtJ summarised the evidence  from  the
        appellant, which included assertions that he no longer took illegal
        drugs, that he wanted to be employed, that he would have no support
        in Kosovo which would worsen his  illness,  and  that  he  had  not
        spoken to his parents for over 6 years and had  lost  contact  with
        them and his sister.  The  appellant  had  cousins  in  the  United
        Kingdom and was said to be close to one in particular whom  he  saw
        at least twice a week (although none of the  cousins  attended  the
        hearing and none provided witness  statements  [132]).  His  family
        members  helped  him  to  curb  his  offending  and  supported  him
        financially. They came from Kosovo and often  returned  there.  The
        appellant had last been admitted to hospital some  6  or  7  months
        prior to the hearing and remained in hospital for 3  months  having
        been sectioned. He had been sent to the  hospital  because  he  was
        found talking to himself in the street and hurting his arm. He took
        medication 3 times a day which he collected  from  his  doctor  and
        went to a clinic to have two injections once every two  weeks.  The
        appellant saw a care coordinator once a week for an hour.  The  FtJ
        recorded the appellant's description of his life and  recorded  the
        details of the applicants offending and his hospital admissions.

     8. The FtJ made a number of very  detailed  findings,  extending  from
        [66] to [162],  based  on  the  documentary  evidence  before  her,
        including a medical report from Dr Obuaya dated 30 June  2016.  The
        following  findings  are,  for  the  purposes  of  this   decision,
        particularly relevant. Other than the public  nuisance  offence  in
        June 2016 the appellant had remained out of trouble since May 2013,
        which suggested some rehabilitation [73]. He had committed no other
        drug offences since the index offence but had  a  long  history  of
        using  illicit  drugs  [74]  to  [75]  and  the  FtJ  had   serious
        reservations about the appellant's claim to have stopped  his  drug
        abuse  [96].  The  appellant's  offending   history   displayed   a
        "disturbing  trend  of  sexualised  behaviour  to  women".  Medical
        reports  supported  a  link  between  the  appellant's   sexualised
        behaviour and relapses in his mental health [77], and  his  history
        supported a correlation between his mental health relapses and  his
        criminal offending [78] to [83] and [85] to [88] and [90]. When the
        appellant was fully compliant with his medications Dr Obuaya  noted
        that he had shown a reasonably good symptomatic response  and  that
        there was a moderately good improvement  with  a  robust  treatment
        plan [92]. The FtJ accepted that "... the  greater  the  degree  of
        intervention and  support,  the  better  the  appellant  responded,
        although there remained periods of mental  relapse,  and  offending
        had not stopped completely" [93]. The appellant's risk  of  suicide
        and self-harm, as of the date of the hearing, was low [94].


     9. Having regard to the appellant's unemployment since  2010  the  FtJ
        found it unlikely that he would be capable  of  regular  employment
        and that he  was  likely  to  struggle  with  finding  and  keeping
        employment in Kosovo given  the  regular  relapses  in  his  mental
        health [98] and [134]. Despite a number of inconsistencies  in  the
        appellant's account the FtJ  accepted  that  he  had  not  been  in
        contact with his parents for 6 years [100].


    10. Having satisfied herself that the appellant was a foreign  criminal
        and that sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
        Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) applied, the FtJ found that  the  appellant
        could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399A   of   the
        immigration rules because he had not been lawfully resident in  the
        UK for most  of  his  life  [107],  although  the  FtJ  was  (just)
        satisfied that the appellant was socially and culturally integrated
        in the UK given his long length of residence despite his history of
        offending and drug use and the absence  of  any  witnesses  at  the
        hearing [108 ] to [111]. The FtJ additionally found that there were
        'very significant obstacles' to the  appellant's  integration  into
        Kosovo in light of the inadequate medical treatment  available  and
        the appellant's loss of contact with family members [113].


    11. Having found that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
        paragraphs 399 or 399A of the immigration rules, the FtJ  proceeded
        to consider whether there were 'very compelling circumstances' over
        and above those described  in  399  or  399A.  In  determining  the
        existence of 'very compelling circumstances' the FtJ  took  account
        of the cumulative factors  identified  in  Ms  Loughran's  skeleton
        argument which included the circumstances of his arrival in the UK,
        his lawful leave, the severity and level of  support  required  for
        his mental health  problems,  his  lack  of  ties  to  Kosovo,  the
        obstacles to return, and the links between his  mental  health  and
        offending history, which was said to reduce the public interest  in
        deportation [117]. In considering  these  factors  the  FtJ  placed
        particular emphasis on the appellant's very serious  mental  health
        issues which included his history of compliance with his medication
        and illicit drug use.


    12. The FtJ found that  Dr  Obuaya's  concerns  about  the  appellant's
        ability to access available and affordable medication in Kosovo and
        his poor compliance with medication [123] - [124] were legitimately
        held. The FtJ was satisfied that,  without  a  robust  and  ongoing
        intervention, the appellant was likely to 'slip through the net' in
        Kosovo with consequences of  deterioration  in  his  mental  state,
        reawakening of delusional beliefs, paranoia and a greatly increased
        likelihood of offending [125]. The background  evidence  considered
        showed that the appropriate level of treatment was unlikely  to  be
        available in Kosovo [126] to  [129],  that  there  were  no  social
        grants for housing in Kosovo or  institutions  or  facilities  that
        provided housing assistance to vulnerable people [133], and it  was
        unclear whether the appellant would fulfil the  criteria  for  some
        social assistance or whether he would have the mental  capacity  to
        apply  for  assistance  [135].  The  appellant  would  struggle  to
        maintain employment and access accommodation  [141],  that  as  his
        mental health situation deteriorated he would be prone to increased
        self-neglect, and would struggle to eat and drink [142].


    13. The FtJ did not accept that much family support would be  available
        and that if it was initially offered it may well crumble given  the
        extent of the appellant's needs [130] to [131].  The  FtJ  accepted
        that there was a risk of the  appellant  manifesting  inappropriate
        sexual  behaviour  towards  women   [136],   that   there   was   a
        significantly increased likelihood of offending in  Kosovo  due  to
        the lower level of mental  health  support,  and  that  if  he  did
        approach women whilst in a psychotic and disinhibited  state  there
        would be a risk of others reacting in an angry or  violent  way  to
        him [138].


    14. Having considered the authorities of MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA  Civ
        279 and GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 the  FtJ  accepted  that  the
        appellant had established a  private  life  in  the  UK  given  his
        residence of nearly 17 years, his "well  established  relationships
        with his cousins", his employment, his friendships, his social  and
        cultural integration, and the  relationships  formed  with  medical
        professionals [147]. At  [148]  the  FtJ  indicates  that  she  had
        considered the factors in the case of Maslov v Austria [2008]  EHRR
        546.


    15. At [150] the FtJ states,


         On return to Kosovo, the appellant would be immensely vulnerable.
         The most likely scenario, given the availability of medication, but
         limitations of state help, would be a gradual dismantling of his
         physical and moral integrity, and sense of identity, for the
         reasons above. However, the root cause of this disintegration would
         be his naturally occurring mental illness.


    16. At [151] the FtJ states,

         However, even  taking  into  account  all  the  cumulative  factors
         weighing in favour of  the  appellant's  private  life,  with  some
         regret,  I  find  that  these  remain  insufficient  to  bring  the
         appellant within the "exceptional" category in GS.

    17. At [152] the FtJ explains that the risk of suicide was low and that
        the appellant was not so ill, physically or mentally, that he could
        approach the level of tests in N. v the  United  Kingdom  (App  no.
        26565/05) or D. v the  United  Kingdom  (2  May  1997,  Reports  of
        Judgments and Decisions 1997-III).


    18. At [153] the FtJ states,


         Moreover, when assessing proportionality in deportation cases, the
         scales are not evenly balanced. Greater weight has to be given to
         the public interest. In the appellant's case, the public interest
         is very strong. He committed a serious drugs offence, (albeit some
         time ago, and acting only as a "caretaker"), committed previous
         offences, and has continued to offend. Despite the underlying
         reasons behind offending, (and I accept it generally mirrored
         relapses in his mental state), there remains a strong public
         interest in the prevention of disorder and crime.


    19. The FtJ proceeded to consider Lord Bingham's step-by-step  approach
        in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, accepted  that  the  appellant's  removal
        amounted to an interference with his private  life,  and  indicated
        that she had considered the nature of his private  life  and  would
        "...not repeat the findings" [155]. The FtJ indicated that she took
        into account, when assessing proportionality, the factors  set  out
        in sections 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act [156] to [159].  The  FtJ
        concluded, having indicated that she considered all  the  evidence,
        that there were no very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
        those described  in  paragraph  399  and  399A  immigration  rules,
        sufficient  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   requiring   the
        appellant's deportation [162]. The appeal was dismissed.

The criticism of the First-tier Tribunal's decision and discussion

  20. The grounds of appeal, amplified by Ms Loughran at the hearing, are
      threefold. It is firstly contended that, at [153], the FtJ misdirected
      herself in law. By stating that "greater weight has to be given to the
      public interest" the FtJ proceeded on the basis that the public
      interest in deportation proceedings could not be outweighed. In so
      doing the FtJ treated the public interest considerations as a "trump
      card" instead of weighing all the factors in the balance in a fact
      specific way.


    21. I  have  no  hesitation  in  rejecting  the  1st  ground.  Properly
        considered in the context of [153], and the decision as a whole, it
        becomes apparent that the FtJ's reference to "greater weight" being
        placed on the public interest is an expression of the strong public
        interest considerations at  play  in  a  deportation  decision,  as
        opposed to a decision on a human rights claim that does not involve
        criminality. The sentence immediately preceding that relied  on  by
        the appellant refers to the scales  being  unevenly  balanced  when
        assessing proportionality in deportation  cases.  I  take  this  to
        reflect the significant public interest factors necessary to assess
        proportionality in deportation cases including the  need  to  deter
        offending  by  foreign  nationals,  the  expression  of   society's
        revulsion at serious offending, the need to ensure social  cohesion
        and public confidence, and the serious impact that criminality  has
        on society, as identified by the FtJ at [157]. The  FtJ  summarises
        the strong public interest factors at play in the instant appeal in
        the sentence immediately following that relied on by the appellant,
        and  then  goes  on  to  undertake  a  proportionality  assessment,
        something that would not be necessary if, as argued by Ms Loughran,
        the public interest factors acted  as  a  'trump  card'.  Far  from
        treating the public interest factors as a 'trump  card',  incapable
        of ever outweighing the particular circumstances of  an  individual
        case,  the  sentence,  reasonably  and   holistically   understood,
        indicates that the FtJ has  engaged  in  a  proper  proportionality
        assessment weighing  up  the  strong  factors  in  the  appellant's
        favour, which she identified at length, against the  strong  public
        interest factors for his deportation.


  22. The 2nd ground of challenge contends that the FtJ failed to consider
      that the "gradual dismantling" of the appellant's moral and physical
      integrity (at [150]) formed part of the aggregation of matters which
      could collectively constitute "exceptional circumstances" within the
      meaning of paragraph 398, notwithstanding the finding that it was not
      sufficient to bring him within the "exceptional category" in GS (at
      [151]). It was argued that the FtJ failed to take into account her own
      findings of the serious impact on the appellant if deported such as
      his increased risk of suicide, his increased self-neglect, and that he
      would struggle to eat and drink. These factors were capable of
      amounting to 'very compelling circumstances' but were not adequately
      considered in the balancing exercise because the FtJ focused, at
      [151], on whether the appellant fell within the "exceptional" category
      in GS, and she failed to make a finding as to whether the cumulative
      impact on his private life, established over 17 years in this country,
      would be disproportionate.


    23. The FtJ's consideration of GS cannot be read in isolation, and  her
        assessment at [150], [151] and [152] did not constitute the end  of
        her  consideration  as  to  the  existence  of   'very   compelling
        circumstances'. At [155] the FtJ indicates that, as she had already
        considered the nature of the appellant's private life, she will not
        repeat those findings. As summarised at paragraphs 8 to  13  above,
        the FtJ made a large number of very detailed findings  relating  to
        the nature and extent of the appellant's private life,  the  impact
        on his mental integrity if  deported  to  Kosovo,  and  the  likely
        consequences of a deterioration in his mental integrity.  At  [162]
        the FtJ indicates that she considered  "all  the  evidence",  which
        included the factors identified in sections 117B and  117C  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  those  Boultif  v
        Switzerland (2001) ECHR 497 and Maslov v Austria (App no. 1638/03).
        There is nothing in the structure or content  of  her  decision  to
        indicate that she  failed,  in  concluding  the  absence  of  'very
        compelling  circumstances',  to  take  into  account  her  findings
        relating to the gradual dismantling of the appellant's physical and
        moral integrity and the very  significant  impact  on  him  of  the
        deportation decision. The  decision,  read  holistically,  suggests
        that the FtJ very carefully considered the  significant  impact  on
        the  appellant's  private  life  against  the  significant   public
        interest factors at play. From [156] to [161] the judge  refers  to
        relevant and material factors in  her  proportionality  assessment,
        and  at  [162]  she  indicates  that  all  the  evidence  has  been
        considered  in  determining  the  existence  of  'very   compelling
        circumstances'. There was no need for the FtJ to have repeated  her
        findings when it came to balancing  the  competing  interests.  Her
        decision was ultimately one rationally open to her for the  reasons
        given.


  24. The 3rd ground contends that, despite properly directing herself in
      accordance with the decision in Maslov, the FtJ nevertheless fails to
      give 'very serious reasons' to justify the appellant's expulsion.


  25. In Akpinar, R (on the application of) v The Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2014] EWCA Civ 937 the Court of
      Appeal concluded that Maslov did not establish a new rule of law to
      the effect that, unless the state can show that there are "very
      serious reasons" for deporting a settled migrant who has lawfully
      spent all or the major part of his childhood and youth in the UK, that
      his article 8 rights will prevail. In so concluding the Court of
      Appeal considered a wide range of decisions from the European Court of
      Human Rights which highlighted the danger of treating "very serious
      reasons" as if they were a legislative requirement, as well as a
      number of domestic authorities. I find there was no misdirection by
      the FtJ.


  26. I am satisfied, in any event that the FtJ has adequately considered
      the factors identified in Maslov. These included the nature and
      seriousness of the offence committed, the length of the individual's
      stay in the country from which they were to be expelled, the time
      elapsed since the commission of the offence and the person's conduct
      during the period, the nationalities of the various persons concerned,
      the persons family situation, and the solidity of cultural, social and
      family ties with the host country in the country of destination. The
      decision, again read holistically, indicates that the FtJ has
      considered all of these factors. The judge was acutely aware that the
      appellant had resided in the UK for 17 years [147] and [148], the
      nature and seriousness of his offending [153], the history of the
      appellants criminal offending [79] to [90], his age when he arrived in
      the UK  [107], [118] and [148], his family situation in both the UK
      and Kosovo [132], [146] and [147], and the nature of the private life
      established in the UK [147] and impact on his private life if deported
      [130], [131], [142] and [143]. It is not arguable that the FtJ failed
      to substantively consider the Maslov criteria.

    27. In the circumstances I find that the judge did not  materially  are
        in law and I formally dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  materially  err  in  law.  The  appeal  is
dismissed.

Signed

[pic]
Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
            Date: 19 June 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]
Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
         Date: 19 June 2017


