
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 September 2014                          |On 19 September 2014         |
|Extempore                                     |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                     and



                          Mr Simon Kinuthia Njoroge
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:         Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Claimant:          No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Heynes   sitting   in
    Manchester.  The determination was promulgated on 22 May 2014 in  which
    Judge Heynes allowed the appeal of  Mr  Simon  Kinuthia  Njoroge  ("the
    claimant") against the decision of the Secretary of State  made  on  19
    March 2014 to refuse to grant him further leave to remain as a  Tier  5
    temporary worker (creative and sporting) and to remove him pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The claimant is a circus performer and on this occasion the application
    was made for him to be granted further leave to remain pursuant to  his
    employment  by  Zippos  Circus.    The   appropriate   certificate   of
    sponsorship was submitted and in  the  refusal  letter  issued  by  the
    Secretary of State on 19 March 2014 it is  clear  that  the  40  points
    requested and required were awarded.

 3. In the refusal letter, after stating that creative  workers  can  apply
    for an extension for a maximum of twelve months at a time up to a total
    of 24 months if they remain  with  the  same  sponsor,  the  respondent
    wrote:

         "In view of the fact that you have previously been granted leave to
         enter from 12 February 2013 until 9  December  2013  and  leave  to
         remain from 13 January to 14 March 2014 in the United  Kingdom  the
         Secretary of State is not satisfied that a further period of  leave
         to remain in this category can be granted."

    Nothing more is said.

 4. In the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the  claimant  says
    that he believes that the Secretary of State miscalculated the weeks in
    relation to the time he  was  allowed  to  have  leave  to  remain  and
    reference is made to a letter  from  his  employer  in  support.   That
    letter, dated 29 March 2014, gives a calculation of the time worked,  a
    total  of  93  weeks  which  is  under  the  104  weeks   allowed   and
    reconsideration is requested.

 5. There was no oral hearing and Judge  Heynes'  determination  is  short.
    The judge says:

         "It is common  ground  that  creative  workers  can  apply  for  an
         extension of leave for a maximum of twelve months at a time up to a
         total of 24 months if they remain  with  the  same  employer.   The
         refusal notice states that the [claimant]  having  previously  been
         granted leave to enter from 12 February 2013 until 9 December  2013
         and leave to remain from 13 January to 14 March 2014 in the  United
         Kingdom the Secretary of State is  not  satisfied  that  a  further
         period of leave to remain in this  category  can  be  granted.   No
         further explanation  is  offered.   It  is  not  claimed  that  the
         [claimant] has a different sponsor."

 6. After recording the total number of weeks'  leave  granted,  the  judge
    says:

         "There is nothing in the Rules preventing more than one application
         for an extension of leave.  The cumulative total is less  than  104
         weeks.  The [claimant] meets the requirements of the Rules."

 7. The Secretary of State then sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge had erred in finding that it had not been  claimed  that
    the appellant has a different sponsor and that that  was  in  fact  the
    respondent's case and thus on the basis of paragraph  245ZR(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules no extension  would  have  been  permissible  as  the
    appellant previously was granted leave on the basis of  his  employment
    with Tip Top Productions Limited and that he sought  further  leave  to
    remain as the employee of Zippos Circus.

 8. It is further said  that,  as  the  refusal  letter  notes,  since  the
    claimant has already completed a  twelve  month  period  with  Tip  Top
    Productions a further period of leave can only  be  granted  where  the
    claimant remains with the same employer and it is for the  claimant  to
    establish that the requirements of the Rules are met.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
    28 July 2014.  Judge Holmes said:

         "As  the  grounds  complain,  it  is   arguable   the   judge   has
         misunderstood the issues with  which  he  was  required  to  engage
         and/or the applicable Immigration Rules.  The appellant was seeking
         to change sponsor and was seeking to extend his  leave  beyond  the
         maximum twelve month period applicable if he did so."

10. Subsequent to that, although there was no response pursuant to Rule  24
    of the Procedure Rules, the claimant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal
    on 13 September 2014 stating that the claimant and other members of his
    troupe had decided to voluntarily leave the United Kingdom.  A copy  of
    a notice sent to the respondent to that  effect  is  attached  to  that
    letter.  The letter requests that the hearing be vacated.

11. The adjournment request or rather the request to vacate the hearing was
    refused on the basis that this was an appeal made by the  Secretary  of
    State and the claimant's solicitors  were  informed  that  the  hearing
    would take place.  Perhaps inevitably there was no appearance for or on
    behalf of the claimant when the matter came before me.

12. It transpired from the submissions made by Mr Bramble on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State that there had been on the Secretary of State's file
    evidence of the fact that the claimant had been  employed  by  Tip  Top
    Productions Limited prior to working for Zippos Circus.  That is not of
    course evidence which could be taken into  account  at  this  stage  in
    assessing whether the judge erred in law.  I  am  satisfied  that  that
    material was not before  Judge  Heynes  at  the  time  he  reached  his
    decision. Despite the statement as to what  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case had always been, that was not the case  set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter or disclosed in the material put before the First-tier Tribunal.
    It follows that the grounds on which permission were  granted  were  at
    best misleading if not disingenuous.

13. It is, however, apparent that there is no  acceptance  in  the  refusal
    letter that that requirement of the Immigration Rules,  that  is  there
    has been no change of  sponsor,  had  been  satisfied.   Whilst  it  is
    correct to say, as Judge Heynes did, that that had  not  been  claimed,
    nonetheless it is incumbent on an  appellant  to  demonstrate  that  he
    meets all the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   This  is  not  a
    case where the Secretary of  State  had  expressly  accepted  that  the
    claimant met that  specific  requirement,  although  it  was  expressly
    accepted that  he  was  entitled  to  the  40  points  claimed  in  his
    application.

14. Whilst Judge Heynes says that all the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules had been met it is not clear how he came to that conclusion  with
    respect to the requirement for there to have been no change of sponsor,
    as there is no evidence o that issue either way, and on that  basis,  I
    am satisfied that his conclusions are not adequately reasoned. For that
    reason, it is evident that the determination did involve the making  of
    an error of law and I therefore set it aside.

15. In proceeding to remaking the decision I am satisfied that it would  be
    appropriate to take into account the letters handed up  by  Mr  Bramble
    which had been sent to the Secretary  of  State  by  Zippos  Circus  in
    support of the application.  It is evident from these that the claimant
    and indeed other members of the same troupe had been  employed  by  Tip
    Top Productions and that they had been granted  visas  on  that  basis.
    The letter expressly states that they are now changing  employers  with
    the  full  knowledge  of  the  previous  sponsor   and   the   previous
    certificates of sponsorship are to be withdrawn.

16. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the claimant has not  met  the
    requirement of paragraph 245ZR(b) and 245ZR(f) of the Immigration Rules
    which permit an extension beyond twelve months  only  where  there  has
    been no change in employer, and on that  basis  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules falls to be dismissed.

17. It is not submitted that the appeal should  be  allowed  on  any  other
    basis, and I dismiss it on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



Signed                                  Date:  18 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

