
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16852/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9th March 2016                        |On 8th April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Miss Vanessa Ramos Dyson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Dyson in Person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Brazil, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 17th April 2015 to
    refuse her application for a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family
    member of an European Economic Area national.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson allowed the appeal finding  that  the
    Appellant had established that she is in a  durable  relationship  with
    her partner as claimed within the provision of Regulation 8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. The judge went on to state at paragraph 14: "I am satisfied that theirs
    is a durable relationship in all the circumstances and that the  appeal
    be allowed." The judge allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in allowing the appeal outright given the provision of Regulation
    17(4) of the  EEA  Regulations  which  gives  the  Secretary  of  State
    discretion as to whether to issue  a  residence  card  to  an  extended
    family member.

Error of Law

 6. There is no challenge to  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  or  to  his
    conclusion that the Appellant is in a durable relationship with an  EEA
    national and therefore an extended family member within Regulation 8(5)
    of the Regulations.  These findings therefore stand.

 7. However, the contention that the judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
    outright is made out.  This is because Regulation 17(4) (b)  gives  the
    Secretary of State discretion as to whether to issue a  residence  card
    to an extended family member and the Secretary of  State  has  not  yet
    exercised that discretion. Regulation 17(4) provides;



         "17 (4) The Secretary of State may issue a  residence  card  to  an
         extended family member not falling within regulation  7(3)  who  is
         not an EEA national on application if-

             (a)the relevant EEA  national  in  relation  to  the  extended
             family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with  a
             permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and

             (b)in all the circumstances it appears  to  the  Secretary  of
             State appropriate to issue the residence card."


 8. In these circumstances, in light of the findings of  fact,  the  appeal
    should have been allowed only to  the  extent  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is not in accordance with the law leaving  the  matter
    of the exercise of the discretion to the Secretary of State.

 9. I therefore preserve the findings of the First-tier Tribunal and  allow
    the appeal only to the extent that it is not in accordance with the law
    and the issue of the exercise of discretion is yet to be  exercised  by
    the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set the decision aside preserving all of the findings of fact.

I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
decision is returned to the Secretary of State to await the exercise of  her
discretion under regulation 17(4)(b) of the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 23rd March 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date: 23rd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

