
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16821/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  6th March 2015                            |On 10th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                        MRS VICTORIA AKIINYI ONYANGO
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore, Counsel, instructed by Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of  Kenya  born  on  30th  May  1976.  She
       arrived in the UK on 17th August 2002 as a  student.  She  had  leave
       until 30th November 2009 and then made a number of applications which
       were rejected. On 6th march 2014 she made a human rights  application
       to remain. This was refused on 19th March 2014.  Her  appeal  against
       the decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell in a
       determination promulgated on the 11th November 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       PJM Hollingworth on 8th  January  2015  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  as  the  private
       life of the appellant and her daughter had been established when they
       were  lawfully  present  in  the  UK  and  at  paragraph  20  of  the
       determination Judge Mitchell had said that little  weight  should  be
       given to their private lives as they had been established when  their
       leave was precarious.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    4. Ms Gore relied upon her grounds of appeal. In her grounds  of  appeal
       she argues that the appellant had not established her private life in
       the UK when her leave was precarious  and  therefore  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law in stating this was the case.  Insufficient
       weight had been given to the seven years the appellant  had  been  in
       the UK lawfully. Leave as a student was  not  precarious  as  it  was
       possible to extend the leave, work permission had been granted and it
       was possible to get indefinite leave to remain  after  ten  years  in
       this capacity.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal had also failed to give sufficient weight  to
       the appellant's daughter's six years of residence in the UK.  It  was
       also not open to the Tribunal to hold that  she  had  not  shown  she
       would not be a burden on tax payers  when  the  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal was that the appellant and her daughter had lived  supported
       by friends and charity organisation and that they had never  received
       benefits.

    6. Mr Kandola relied upon the Rule 24 notice.  The  Secretary  of  State
       defined precarious leave for s.117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 as  any  sort  of  immigration  status  which  is
       temporary in nature or limited or finite. This was the definition  in
       the Home Office Immigration Directorate Instruction Family Migration:
       Appendix FM Family and Private Life 10 Year Routes, November 2014  at
       paragraph 3.6. As such all of this appellant's leave was  precarious.
       There was no error of law in Judge Mitchell defining precarious leave
       as he does at paragraph 38 of his determination.

    7. Mr Kandola submitted that it was a matter for the judge to decide how
       much weight to accord to any particular matter and so there could not
       be an error of law in  failing  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  any
       particular matter. Judge Mitchell was clearly aware of how  long  the
       appellant had been in  the  UK.   At  paragraphs  9  and  15  of  his
       determination he notes the age of the appellant's  daughter  and  her
       period of residence.

    8. The appellant had conceded she could not meet the  Immigration  Rules
       for herself or her  daughter  and  Judge  Mitchell  had  gone  on  to
       consider Article 8 ECHR outside of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  had
       given good reasons for dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

    9. Judge  Mitchell  was  required  to  have  regard  to  s.117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  when  considering  the
       appellant's appeal under Article  8  ECHR.  He  was  guided  by  this
       legislation at s.117B (4) and (5) to give little  weight  to  private
       life  established  when  the  appellant's  leave  was   unlawful   or
       precarious. There is no statutory definition of precarious leave, nor
       was I pointed to any guidance  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  higher
       courts. I do not find the definition placed on this term at paragraph
       35 of Judge Mitchell's determination, which included student leave as
       precarious leave as the appellant had had to apply for  a  number  of
       extensions of that leave which had on  a  couple  of  occasions  been
       initially refused, irrational.

   10. Judge Mitchell is clear at paragraph 16 that the appellant  had  been
       in the UK with student leave until November 2009; he  is  also  clear
       that the appellant's daughter had been born in the UK and lived  here
       for six years at paragraph 15. I find that he gave  consideration  to
       these matters and was fully aware of their period of lawful presence.
       As Mr Kandola argues it is not an error of law to fail to  give  this
       matters particular weight.  Likewise it was not  irrational  to  find
       that the appellant had not  shown  she  would  not  be  a  burden  on
       taxpayers, as Judge Mitchell does at paragraph 38, given that Ms Gore
       submits that she had been reliant on charity and  friends  whilst  in
       the UK.

Decision

   11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
       an error on a point of law.

   12. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  is
       upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
6th March 2015

