
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 November 2017                  |On 13 December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              Mr Martin Mulumba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J L Blair, Counsel, instructed by Haringey
                    Migrant Support Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of the DRC,  appeals  against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Devittie,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 17 October 2016 dismissed his claim for leave to  remain
    on human rights grounds.  The appellant did  not  appear  before  Judge
    Devittie and it is argued in the grounds of appeal that is because of a
    mistake of the solicitors whom he instructed to represent him.

2.   When granting permission to appeal Judge Kamara stated:-

         "A  detailed,  candid  explanation  was  provided  by  a  voluntary
         organisation who continue to assist the appellant and I accept that
         the appellant was unaware that his hearing would proceed after  his
         previous solicitors ceased acting very shortly before  the  hearing
         owing to the absence of legal aid for Article 8 cases."

3.   The reality is  that  the  appellant  has  been  in  Britain  for  some
    considerable time and it appears that he has  four  children  who  have
    been born here who may all, or some of them may well be,  British.   It
    also appears that the Secretary of State was only aware  of  the  first
    two children when making the decision.  I cannot find on the papers any
    clear statement from the appellant regarding his various  relationships
    and the children which he has had.

4.   Nevertheless, the issue of the relationship between a  father  and  his
    children is one of particular importance and one which requires anxious
    scrutiny, not only because of the terms of Section 55 but also those in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act - this is highlighted in the  decision  of
    Judge Kamara.

5.    In  taking  into  account  all  these  factors  I  consider  that  the
    appropriate course of action, given the potential procedural unfairness
    in what has happened, is for me to set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Devittie and to remit this appeal for a hearing afresh  in  the  First-
    tier.  Ms Blair, who now represents the appellant, will be  well  aware
    that it will be important to prepare, immediately, a detailed statement
    regarding the appellant's various relationships here and  full  details
    of the children, their ages and nationality and the  involvement  which
    the appellant may or may not have with  the  children.   The  appellant
    must appear at the hearing and be prepared  to  give  further  evidence
    regarding his relationship with the children.

Decision

I therefore have set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  having
found that there has been procedural unfairness in this case.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 11 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
