
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16102/2014
     IA/16103/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 15 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                              joyce ama boateng
                          nichole akua osei-martin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Praisoody, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Ghana born  on  31  March  1977  and  21
    February 2007.  They are mother and daughter.  They appeal  with  leave
    against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hawden-Beal  in
    which she dismissed their appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision
    made on 20 March 2014 to issue a removal direction under Section 10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and  to  refuse  to  grant  further
    leave under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellants were granted permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that
    given that the second appellant is a minor who was born in the  UK  and
    who faces removal to Ghana, it is arguable that the judge's failure  to
    consider her best interests under Section  55  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.

3.   The judge found that at the date  of  the  respondent's  decision,  the
    appellants were mother and daughter aged 37 and 7, who had  applied  to
    stay in the UK on the basis that the  first  appellant  had  been  here
    since 1998 and the second appellant had been born  here  to  a  British
    father and that to remove them would breach their rights under  Article
    8.

4.   According to the refusal letter, the applications were a review of  the
    decision from December 2010 when their applications to remain in the UK
    outside the Immigration Rules were refused with  no  right  of  appeal.
    The first appellant claims to have come to the UK on 10 July 1998, on a
    passport which had not been issued to her.  There was  no  evidence  of
    her entering the UK or of residence in the UK until 2003.  In  February
    2007 the second appellant was born and in 2010  the  application  which
    was the precursor to the appeal was lodged.

5.   The first appellant said in oral  evidence  that  she  and  the  second
    appellant could not return to Ghana because she had  lost  her  parents
    and they have no one there.  Life would be  difficult  financially  and
    the education system is not good.  The second appellant  is  integrated
    here and has made friends at school.  Since disease is rife the  second
    appellant cannot live in Ghana.

6.    She  said  in  evidence  that  she  did  not  know  where  the  second
    appellant's father was, that in April this year, she  went  to  collect
    her daughter from school and was told by the teacher  that  her  father
    had come to the school to see her.  They did not recognise him but they
    asked the second appellant if she did and she said yes.   According  to
    the second appellant and the teachers, she and her father had  a  chat.
    The first appellant said the child's father was born here and that  she
    saw his birth certificate and passport when they both went to  register
    the second appellant's birth.  She did not however have a copy of these
    documents.  The judge noted that the second appellant's father did  not
    attend the hearing because they have not had contact with him for  some
    time and the first appellant did not know where he was.  The last  time
    she had contact with him was about a year or more before he went to the
    school.  On that occasion she called him on his telephone and  he  came
    to put a birthday card through the door.  She  shouted  at  him  as  he
    walked away but they did not talk.  He was aware of  their  status  and
    was not prepared to assist.  She said he was concerned about the second
    appellant but not about her because they had a  fight.   She  has  been
    told that he is proud of his daughter and has her photograph  which  he
    took from the first appellant's Whats App profile after a friend tagged
    it for him.  She thought he was willing to see the second appellant and
    would not be able to if she went to Ghana.   The  second  appellant  is
    pressing to see him. She has lived  here  for  sixteen  years  and  her
    daughter has a life here.

7.   She said when she left Ghana she was 21 years old, an  only  child  who
    had lived in a small village.  Until the deaths of her parents in 2006,
    she had kept in touch with them.  When she came to the UK in  1998  her
    plan was to work and support  her  family  who  were  very  poor.   Her
    daughter could not go to school in Ghana because the standard there was
    not very good.

8.   She said that after her and the second appellant's father separated  in
    December 2009, they arranged that he would see her every  Friday  while
    she went to church, but when she went to his one day to  drop  off  the
    second appellant, he would not answer the door or his  telephone,  even
    though she knew that he was there.  He only saw  the  second  appellant
    four to five times in between December 2009 and April 2014.   She  said
    that he did intend to get a British passport for the  second  appellant
    but when they separated he did not.  He did not know  that  the  second
    appellant may have to return to Ghana because she  has  not  told  him.
    She has tried to contact him but he will not pick up his phone.

9.   The judge found as follows:

         "25. Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix A states that if the child for whom
             the first appellant has sole responsibility has been here  for
             7 years, the first appellant may succeed under Appendix FM but
             only if it is not considered to be unreasonable for the  child
             to leave the UK.   In  this  case  her  daughter,  the  second
             appellant has been raised by the  first  appellant  since  her
             father left the family home in 2009.  According to  the  first
             appellant, the second appellant and her father have only  seen
             each other 4-5 times in the intervening 5 years.  He is not in
             contact, cannot be contacted by the first appellant, does  not
             know of the hearing today and is not  supportive.   The  first
             appellant says that he came to see  the  second  appellant  in
             April 2014.  According to the letter from the school  at  page
             12 of the appellant's bundle the visit was in March  2014  and
             the father is now the second emergency contact for the  child.
             If that is the case how did the school get  that  information?
             Was it supplied to the school  by  the  father  or  the  first
             appellant?  If it was by the father and this letter  is  dated
             May 8th 2014, why has the first appellant not  approached  the
             school to see if they will pass  a  message  onto  the  father
             about these proceedings?  As it stands today there has been no
             contact with the father since March, there is nothing from him
             to say that he is supporting their  application,  no  evidence
             that he is a British citizen and nothing to say that he is  in
             the slightest bit bothered about the appellants and  the  fact
             that they will gave to go back to Ghana


         26.  Given that the second appellant has been raised by her mother,
             has had little contact with  her  father,  is  not  a  British
             citizen and has only been in the UK  education  system  for  3
             years and according to Azimi Moayed [2013] UKYT 197  (IAC)  is
             not even half way through the time period  considered  by  the
             Tribunal to be more significant to a child (seven  years  from
             the age of 4 rather tan the first 7  years  of  life).   I  am
             satisfied that it is reasonable to expect the second appellant
             to leave the UK, with her mother where she will be able,  with
             the help of the first appellant to  develop  social,  cultural
             and educational ties to her  home  country.   I  therefore  am
             satisfied  that  both  appellants  have  not   met   all   the
             requirements of Appendix FM in relation to their family life.


         27.  As far  as  their  private  lives  are  concerned,  the  first
             appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE
             because she has not been here long enough to meet any  of  the
             time limits imposed by that paragraph and I am  not  satisfied
             that she has lost all social, family or cultural ties  to  her
             home country because she has admitted to be  involved  in  the
             church with other Ghanaians and to listen to the radio to keep
             herself up to date with what is going on in her home  country,
             in which she spent the first  21  yeas  of  her  life.   I  am
             further  satisfied,  in  light  of  the  new  requirements  of
             paragraph  276ADE(vi)  that  there  are  no  very  significant
             obstacles to her integration into the  country  to  which  she
             would have to go if she had to leave the UK.


         28.  As far as the second appellant is concerned,  it  is  accepted
             that she is a minor who has lived here for at  least  7  years
             but as for EX.1, the question is whether it is  reasonable  to
             expect her to leave the UK and,  as  in  paragraph  26,  I  am
             satisfied that it is.  She has been cared  for  by  the  first
             appellant alone since 2009, has had sporadic contact with  her
             father who is not supportive of this application and  will  be
             returned to Ghana with the first appellant, with whom it is in
             her best  interests  to  stay.   I  therefore  find  that  the
             appellants have not met  all  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE either.  In the  circumstances  the  decisions  of  the
             respondent appealed against are in accordance with the law and
             the applicable Immigration Rules.


         31.  There have been no reasons given  as  to  why  the  appellants
             should be allowed to stay in the UK apart from the  fact  that
             life in Ghana will be harder financially - the first appellant
             does not expect to receive any support from her church if  she
             leave the UK on the basis of 'out of sight out of  mind';  the
             education system is not of the same standard as  that  in  the
             UK, disease and poverty are rife and they have  established  a
             life here.  None of those are good grounds for granting  leave
             to remain outside the rules.  The first  appellant  came  here
             for economic reasons as admitted in cross  examination  today.
             She entered illegally, worked illegally, brought her  daughter
             in to the world when she knew she had no right to  be  in  the
             UK, given her daughter false expectation  that  she  would  be
             allowed to stay here by enrolling her in  school  and  forming
             friendships here and has continued to stay here even after her
             application was refused in 2012 and  she  was  served  with  a
             notice warning her that she would be removed in 2012.


         32.  There are no good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
             the rules and there are no compelling  circumstances  in  this
             case which have not been recognised by those  rules.   I  find
             therefore  that  the  decisions  of  the  respondent  appealed
             against will not place the UK in  breach  of  its  obligations
             under the 1950 Human Rights Convention."


10.  In reaching her decision the judge applied the  case  law  in  Shahzad,
    Gulshan and Nagre.

11.  Counsel submitted that  the  First-tier  judge  erred  in  law  in  not
    considering the  child's  relationship  with  her  father.   There  was
    evidence in the appellant's bundle which was before the  judge  in  the
    form of a letter from the school dated 8  May  2014  that  the  child's
    father went to see her at school. His interest in  the  child  was  not
    considered by the First-tier Judge.  If the child is removed  she  will
    be denied the chance to get to know her father.

12.  Counsel submitted that the child's father was born in the UK.   He  was
    named on the birth certificate as was his nationality, British, also on
    the birth  certificate.   Therefore  he  must  be  British.   Therefore
    removing the second  appellant  would  be  equivalent  to  deporting  a
    British national child.

13.  Counsel submitted that the Secretary of State was under  an  obligation
    to  investigate  information  about   the   child's   father   in   her
    consideration of Section 55.  The Secretary of State did not  do  this.
    I rejected Counsel's submission as the obligation on the  Secretary  of
    State under section 55 is to have regard for the need to safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of the child in her consideration of Article 8.   I
    find that the Secretary of State carried out her duty in her letter  of
    20 March 2014.

14.  Having heard from Mr Kandola, I agreed entirely with  his  submissions.
    The judge at paragraph 25 analysed the father's relationship  with  the
    second appellant.  The judge considered paragraph EX.1 of Appendix A as
    to how a child who has been in the UK for seven years may succeed under
    Appendix FM.  It was in that context  that  the  judge  considered  the
    father's relationship with the second appellant.

15.  In that same paragraph the judge found that there was nothing from  the
    child's father to say that he was supporting their application  and  no
    evidence that he is a British citizen and nothing from him to say  that
    he is in the slightest bit bothered about the appellants and  the  fact
    that they will have to go back to Ghana. I find that  the  judge  based
    her findings on the first appellant's evidence at paragraph  17  as  to
    when she last had  contact  with  the  child's  father.   I  accept  Mr
    Kandola's submission that he has not sought custody or frequent contact
    or access to the child.  All we have is the  school  letter  indicating
    his first and only visit to the child at the school.

16.  Mr Kandola said that it has been said that  the  child's  father  is  a
    British citizen but it has still not been proved that he  is  indeed  a
    British citizen.

17.  I find that the judge gave consideration to the best interests  of  the
    child at paragraph 26.  The judge considered the case of  Azimi  Moayed
    and was satisfied on the evidence that it is reasonable to  expect  the
    second appellant to leave the UK with her mother.

18.  I find that the judge considered all the matters  before  her  and  the
    matters relied on by Counsel in her arguments before me.  I  find  that
    the judge did not err in law.

19.  The judge's decision dismissing the appeals  of  the  appellants  shall
    stand.



Signed        Date 22 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

