
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR IMRAN SHAHZAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms R Head of Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen  of  Pakistan.  On
23 April 2015 the appellant (hereafter Secretary of State or  SSHD)  refused
his application for a residence card on the basis of a durable  relationship
with an EEA national, a Miss L Pavlejuova who is a Czech  national.  In  the
grounds of appeal the claimant  raised  several  grounds,  including  asylum
grounds. On 20 October 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  dismissed
the appeal on all grounds save for the EEA ground.  His  decision  to  allow
the appeal on EEA grounds was stated as being that "I allow  the  appeal  in
relation to regulation 8(5) of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006".
That decision flowed from his finding at [46] of the determination that  the
couple had satisfied him that they were in an ongoing relationship  and  had
given credible evidence of having begun a relationship in December 2013  and
continued it through cohabitation.

2.   The SSHD's ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal was confined  to  one
point: that the judge had erred in allowing the  appeal  outright  as  there
had been no exercise by the SSHD  of  the  discretion  afforded  to  her  by
regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations and it was not open  to  the  judge
to exercise it for himself.

3.   Miss Head sought to argue that the failure of the SSHD to exercise  her
discretion under regulation 17(4) did not  matter  in  the  claimant's  case
because there had been no issue taken with  the  fact  that  the  claimant's
partner had been in the UK exercising Treaty rights.

4.   Despite Miss Head's submissions,  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the
judge materially erred in law and that his decision is to be set aside.  The
situation in the appeal before the judge was entirely  straightforward:  the
SSHD in her decision letter had not given any  consideration  to  regulation
17(4) because it was her position at that stage that the  claimant  had  not
shown he fell within the material scope of regulation 8, because he had  not
established that the couple were in a durable relationship.  The  Presenting
Officer  had  made  no  concession  regarding  regulation  17(4).   In  that
situation, it was simply not open to the  judge  to  seek  to  exercise  the
discretion afforded to the SSHD by regulation 17.  In  the  absence  of  any
decision under regulation 17 there was no decision capable of being made  as
to whether the claimant was entitled to a residence  card.  The  appeal  was
wholly governed by the head note in Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]
UKUT 00340.

5.   In light of the above, the decision I re-make is to  allow  the  appeal
insofar as it remains outstanding before the Secretary of State for  her  to
consider whether to issue a residence card under  regulation  17(4)  on  the
basis that "... in all the circumstances it  appears  [to  her]  appropriate
..."

6.   For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision is set aside.

The decision I re-make is to allow the appeal on EEA grounds insofar  as  it
remains outstanding for the Secretary of State as  to  whether  to  issue  a
residence card under regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.




                               Signed
                                    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 18 January 2016


