
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16978/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                 |On 23rd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            MR SYED INFAL BUKHARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  15th
    July 1987.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision
    of the Respondent dated 20th April 2015 to refuse leave  to  remain  to
    the Appellant in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's  application  was
    on the basis that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    his partner, Shirley Conway.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  at
    Hatton Cross.  At paragraph 28 of his determination, the  judge  stated
    that:

         "The only reason given by the Respondent in the reasons for refusal
         letter for refusing the application under paragraph  E-LTRP.1.7  is
         because the Appellant and partner were not living  together.   Both
         of them have given evidence on this issue.  The Appellant states in
         his witness statement that they applied for leave to remain on  the
         same basis with no change in circumstances and that the reason  why
         they live at separate addresses is that on work days it would  take
         him longer to get to work from his partner's address.  It can  take
         him up to one and a half hours to two hours to commute every day on
         public transport and that the days he is off work he is at times in
         regular contact with his  partner  and  Rachel  [the  latter  being
         Shirley Conway's daughter)]."

 3. The Respondent Secretary of State challenged the decision of Judge Adio
    on the basis that the Appellant needed to show  that  EX.1  applied  in
    addition to satisfying the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2  -  1.12  and  E-
    LTRP.2.1.  This is because having found that E.LTRP.1.7  was  satisfied
    it was incumbent upon Judge Adio  to  determine  whether  EX.1  applied
    before he could allow the appeal under the Rules.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on 8th August 2016 by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. At the hearing before me on 4th November 2016, Mr Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf  of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  stated   that   the
    application for permission to appeal by  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State had been misconceived and he would ask the Tribunal to dismiss it
    today.  This is because  the  Appellant  had  previously  been  granted
    leave.  It was not necessary to consider whether EX.1  applied  because
    the Appellant was a person with valid leave and because the Sponsor was
    a carer for her daughter, Rachel.   The  only  issue  was  whether  the
    relationship was subsisting.  The judge  did  consider  this  issue  at
    paragraph 28 of the determination and found that the  relationship  was
    genuine and subsisting and proceeded to allow the appeal on that basis.
      The  grounds  of  application  to  the  Upper   Tribunal   had   been
    misconceived.

 6. For his part Mr Howard, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, submitted
    that the Appellant already had discretionary leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of the relationship with his family.  So there  was  no  need  to
    satisfy the financial  requirement  test.   The  appeal  was  correctly
    allowed by Judge Adio.  Mr Howard asked that  his  costs  be  paid  for
    today because if the Respondent Secretary of State was to concede  that
    the grounds of application had been misconceived  it  would  have  been
    possible to do so prior to  this  hearing  and  thus  to  have  avoided
    attendance  at  the  Tribunal  of  both  parties.    The   costs   were
    unnecessarily incurred and were thrown away.

 7. Mr Mills did not resist the application.

No Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    those given by Mr Mills in his fair and proper analysis  of  the  legal
    situation.  The issue for the Tribunal was whether the relationship was
    genuine and subsisting (see paragraph 30 of the determination) and  the
    judge properly addressed this in the light of the evidence,  which  was
    uncontested, and proceeded to allow the appeal.   Since  Mr  Mills  has
    quite properly asked me to dismiss the  application,  it  follows  that
    costs must be awarded to the Appellant,  for  unnecessarily  having  to
    attend court, when matters could have been earlier disposed of  through
    consent of the parties.  Accordingly,  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    costs.



Notice of Decision

There  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  original  judge's   decision.    The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd November 2016
