
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/16889/2015
                                                               IA/16896/2015
                                                               Ia/16901/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard  at  Field   House                                      Decision   and
Reasons Promulgated
On 4 September 2017                                    On 14 September 2017


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                 SUMBAL [K]
                                    [Z K]
                                    [H K]
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the appellant: Mr, legal Representative
For the respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant in this appeal is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department and the respondents are citizens of Pakistan born  on  5  July
   1971, [ ] 2003 and [ ]  2009  respectively.  However,  for  the  sake  of
   convenience, I shall continue to  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
   referred to, at the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellants are mother and her son and daughter. They appealed to  the
   First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 20 April
   2015 refusing to grant them leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  under
   paragraph R- LTR PT.  1.  1  (d)  (i)  and  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights. First Tier Tribunal Judge Stewart allowed the
   appellants' appeals in a decision dated 9 January 2017.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers
   on 12 July 2017 stating that it is arguable that the Judge may  not  have
   adequately explained his reasoning as regards paragraph 276  ADE  of  the
   immigration rules and he may not have sufficiently factored in the public
   interest, in amongst other things, immigration control as per Part  5  of
   the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It is arguable that  the
   Judge failed to give adequate reasons for some of the findings  made.  He
   referred to paragraph 9 of R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.  The  Judge
   referred to the cases of Zoumbas [2013] UKUT 0074 and MA Pakistan  [2016]
   EWCA Civ 705.


    First-tier Tribunal's findings


4. The Judge made the following findings in his decision  which  in  summary
   are the following.


I. The respondent's position is that she did not  find  it  unreasonable  to
   expect the first appellant and her children to return to Pakistan as part
   of a family unit. The fact that the second appellant had spent the  first
   four years of his life  in  Pakistan  and  the  fact  that  he  would  be
   returning with the first appellant made it wholly  reasonable  to  expect
   him to readjust to life in that country. While the  third  appellant  has
   spent all her life in the United Kingdom, it  was  considered  reasonable
   due to a young age  to  expect  her  to  adjust  to  life  in  the  first
   appellant's home country as well. The fact that the first  appellant  had
   spent most of her life in Pakistan and speaks little English and Urdu  as
   a primary language will no doubt have already begun to expose the  second
   and third appellants to both the language of the home country as well  as
   its social and cultural norms.


II. The Judge stated that she  is  under  a  duty  imposed  by  s55  of  the
   Boarders Citizenship and Immigration Act 22009 in respect of the  welfare
   of the children appellants. She must safeguard and promote the welfare of
   children who are in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  guidance  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Azimi Moyed and others (decisions affecting children;  onward
   appeals) [2013] UKUT197 (IAC) is of  considerable  help.  With  the  sole
   parent being removed, the best interests of the children are to  go  with
   her unless there are reasons to  the  contrary.  But  here  we  have  two
   children who effectively have only known the United Kingdom - the  second
   appellant from the age of 4 to his present age of  13,  attained  at  the
   date of the hearing of this appeal in the third appellant  who  has  been
   living in the United Kingdom for the whole of his life which now  exceeds
   seven years.


III. The guidance is that it is generally in the interests  of  children  to
   have both stability and continuity of social and  educational  provisions
   and the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms  of  the  society  to
   which they belong. The society that these children have grown  up  is  in
   the society in the United Kingdom. The second  appellant's  residence  in
   the United Kingdom, which is not his State  of  origin,  he  has  without
   doubt development social, cultural and  educational  ties.  It  would  be
   inappropriate to disrupt these ties in the absence of compelling  reasons
   to the contrary. If the period of seven years has been  identified  as  a
   lengthy residence, then a period of nine years has added significance.


IV. It is always a  balancing  exercise  but  in  this  case  the  balancing
   exercise produces the  clear  result  that  the  welfare  of  the  second
   appellant is best  safeguarded  and  promoted  by  him  staying  in  this
   country. The welfare of the third appellant is also best safeguarded  and
   promoted by her also staying in this country, although  the  evidence  in
   respect of her it is less compelling than that for her brother. Under the
   immigration rules, the second appellant has  been  in  this  country  for
   seven years but only meets the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE,  if  it
   would not be reasonable to expect him to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  It
   would not be reasonable and therefore he meets the  requirements  of  (1)
   (iv) of the immigration rules.


V. The second appellant  result  dictates  the  result  for  the  other  two
   appellants. I cannot agree with the view of the Secretary of  State  that
   it should not be considered unreasonable to expect all the appellants  to
   go to Pakistan as a family unit. The First  appellant  comes  within  the
   exception of paragraph EX1.


VI. If it is wrong to allow these appeals within the immigration  rules,  it
   is made clear that the proposed removal of the second appellant as  being
   an interference with his private and family life that has consequences of
   such gravity as to engage Article 88 of the European Convention on  Human
   Rights.


VII. The Judge allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.




    Grounds of appeal


5. The respondent in her grounds of appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The appellant's application was refused on 20 April  2015  and
   therefore enjoyed a limited  right  of  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
   decision was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act pursuant to s5A of
   the 2002 Act. At paragraph 26 the Judge finds that second appellant meets
   paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the  immigration  rules  and  on  human  rights
   grounds. It was not open to the Tribunal to allow the  appeal  under  the
   immigration rules given this limited statutory right of appeal. The First-
   tier  Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning  in  respect  of  276  ADE  is  wholly
   inadequate whilst at paragraph 25 the Judge recognises that the balancing
   exercise exist yet fails to identify the public interest completely.  The
   Judge should appropriately have conducted the reasonableness  test  under
   section 117B (6) weighing the best  interests  of  the  second  appellant
   against the countervailing public interest as in MA  Pakistan  which  was
   not done. There is also no reference to the mandatory consideration under
   117B.

         Decision on error of law

6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's appeals  under  the
   immigration rules and Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights. She found that the second appellant who has been  in  the  United
   Kingdom for seven years after he had spent the first four  years  of  his
   life in Pakistan and therefore it would be wholly unreasonable to  expect
   him to readjust to  life  in  Pakistan.  Judge  stated  that  the  second
   appellant who was born in this country  and  has  lived  here  for  seven
   years, which is all her life. Having found that  both  appellant's  meets
   the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv), she found that  it  would
   be not the reasonable to expect both, especially the second appellant, to
   leave the United Kingdom and return to Pakistan with their mother.


7. The Judge in the entirety of the decision did not take into  account  the
   public interest which it was incumbent upon him to do. That is a material
   error of law. If the  Judge  had  conducted  the  balancing  exercise  as
   required and considered, the respondent's interests this might  have  led
   to a different decision.


8. The Judge also failed to give adequate reasons for why it  would  not  be
   reasonable to expect  the  second  and  third  appellants  to  return  to
   Pakistan which is the country  of  their  nationality.  The  only  reason
   appears to be that the second and third appellant's  have  been  in  this
   country for seven years and above, as if  that  is  the  trump  card  and
   precludes consideration of all the other circumstances, such as the First
   appellant's immigration history which is that  she  is  a  failed  asylum
   seeker who has remained in this country unlawfully.


9. That is not to say that the mother's  conduct  should  involve  punishing
   the second and third appellants for their mother's actions  but  all  the
   circumstances of this family must be considered even when determining the
   best interests of the children.


10. The upshot is that the decision of the Judge  is  affected  by  material
   error as the Judge failed to properly assess all  the  evidence  in  this
   appeal  including  the  respondent's  interest  in  order  to   reach   a
   sustainable conclusion.


11. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety  and
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  decision  to  be  made
   considering all the evidence as of that date.


Conclusion and decision

12. I therefore find that the respondent's appeal  succeeds  to  the  extent
   that the file be placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
   decision to be made.


I make no anonymity orders

Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms S Chana                                                Dated 12th day  of
    September 2017







