

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16652/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 August 2016                       |On 4 August 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                              MR D S KATHIRIYA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: Mr H Patel, Counsel, instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors
For the respondent: Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                             DECISION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant is a citizen of India who applied for leave to remain as
   a Tier 4 l (General) Student on June 2014, was given 60 days  to  find  a
   new sponsor on 30 December 2014 but then did not receive  back  from  the
   respondent a copy of passport endorsed with a UKBA Certified Copy  stamp,
   despite the appellant writing within this time period requesting  her  to
   do so. Without such a certified copy the appellant could not enrol  as  a
   student with another college. At the outset of the  hearing  Ms  Fijiwala
   for the respondent conceded that thereby the respondent had not  followed
   the "Patel guidance" in force at the time and that accordingly she  could
   not resist the appellant's grounds of appeal.


   2. In light of this concession, which in my view accurately reflects what
   is shown by the file, the appellant's appeal must succeed  on  the  basis
   that:




    a) Although the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  (Judge  James)  cannot  be
    faulted for not noting the above failure, because the  matter  had  not
    been raised in the grounds of appeal, it  remains  that  there  was  an
    error of process (amounting to an error of  law)  which  has  now  been
    demonstrated to have existed prior to  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision under challenge.


    b) The decision made by the respondent on  17  April  2015  refusing  to
    grant the appellant leave to  remain  and  to  remove  him  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. The appellant's application remains outstanding
    before the Secretary of State.


                               :
3. For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and her decision is set aside.

The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal to the extent
that the decision appealed against was not in accordance with the law and
so the matter remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.


                               Signed




                               [pic]
                                Dr H H Storey
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 3 August 2016
