

IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16412/2014
                                                               IA/16448/2014
                                                               IA/16456/2014
                                                               ia/16477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                   (1)  AH
                                   (2)  fJ
                                   (3)  AJ
                                   (4) AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold (Counsel instructed by Daniel Aramide
solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood (Home Office presenting officer)


                             DECISION & REASONS



1.   The parties are as described in the First-tier  Tribunal  although  the
    respondent pursues the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  This is a hearing
    de novo.

2.   The decision and reasons in the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shamash)
    promulgated on 19 March 2015 has been set aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    before (Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black) found material errors of
    law for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 17 September 2015.
     On that date the Upper Tribunal directed  that  the  appeal  be  heard
    afresh to include properly reasoned findings to be made in relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and under Article 8.

Proceedings

3.   This  matter  was  listed  before  me  for  a  hearing  de  novo.   The
    Appellants Mrs AH and her husband Mr FJ gave evidence  before  me,  the
    details of which are set out in the Record of Proceedings and has  been
    taken into account by me in reaching my  decision.   The  parties  each
    relied on a bundle of evidence produced  for  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and there was no additional evidence adduced.

Evidence of AH

4.   The witness relied  on  her  statement  dated  6  November  2014.   She
    confirmed she was expecting another baby due in April  2016.   She  and
    the family were living in her uncle's house where they  contributed  to
    bills.  She was not presently  employed  but  was  doing  cleaning  and
    childcare work for which she  was  paid  in  cash.   Their  income  was
    variable.  Her husband was similarly employed on an ad hoc basis  as  a
    handyman and together they were able to pay for the bills and food  and
    cover the costs of the children.  The children were now in school;  one
    child was in year 3, doing well at school,  integrated  into  UK  life.
    She does not understand Nigerian and will not eat Nigerian  food.   The
    youngest is in nursery.  The appellant has parents in Nigeria but  they
    are on poor  terms  because  they  disapproved  of  her  husband.   She
    described  considerable  difficulties  in   surviving   and   obtaining
    employment on her own in Nigeria.  Her husband  was  helped  to  go  to
    France and then onto the UK.  There are no family  members  in  Nigeria
    willing to provide them with help.  They still owe money to people  who
    lent them funds that they used to pay for agents who assisted in  their
    departure from Nigeria.  They would not be  able  to  ask  for  further
    support from those people.  Employment in Nigeria was not available and
    it was difficult to obtain casual work in Nigeria.   They would not  be
    able to find the same work in Nigeria.

5.   In cross-examination it was put to the witness that in evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal she had  confirmed  that  both  children  spoke
    Yoruba, ate Nigerian food and attended a Nigerian church.  The  witness
    confirmed that she spoke Yoroba to her daughter but she would not speak
    it in reply and she refused to eat Nigerian food.  She  confirmed  that
    she attended the mosque and would take the  children  along  with  her.
    She confirmed that the main reason for wishing to stay in  the  UK  was
    because of her children and the fact that in the UK there  were  people
    they could rely on and ask for help.  She confirmed that they  had  not
    paid for the children's education, NHS treatment and that she  had  not
    got permission to work in the UK.  Her husband had paid for his studies
    but had not yet completed his qualification under the  Open  University
    scheme.  The witness confirmed that she had  not  made  any  claim  for
    asylum and she accepted the family were in the UK illegally. They  were
    desperate at the time and moving to the UK was the only option open  to
    them.  The witness further confirmed that she did not have  a  national
    insurance number but had been provided one by  a  person  she  knew  in
    order to allow her to work.  She had since ceased to be in  employment.
    She confirmed that her uncle was aware of their situation  and  he  had
    responded by offering the family a place to stay in the UK.  He had not
    returned to Nigeria and had no ties there.  She confirmed that  members
    of her prayer group at the mosque  were  Nigerian  and  that  they  had
    provided her with  contacts  to  enable  her  to  obtain  cleaning  and
    childcare work.  She stated that those same people would not be able to
    assist her on return to Nigeria.

6.   She was asked about the reference  on  the  birth  certificate  to  her
    husband's occupation as being a security officer.  She stated that this
    had been put down in error and that he had not  worked  as  a  security
    officer whilst in the UK.

7.   She would not be able to resolve the family difficulties on  return  to
    Nigeria.  Her father was  in  a  polygamous  marriage  arrangement  and
    although there were siblings they were not related  to  her  biological
    mother.

8.   In answer to a question from the Tribunal the  witness  confirmed  that
    she had not made inquiries about schools in Nigeria.  She accepted that
    English was spoken and  was  the  general  language  in  Nigeria.   She
    confirmed that she had HND qualifications and her husband has a BSc  in
    Political Science from Nigeria.

Evidence of FJ

9.   The witness  relied  on  his  statement.   He  confirmed  that  he  had
    graduated some twelve years ago, had not been able to obtain employment
    in Nigeria and would not be able to survive there.   He  was  currently
    able to make a living as a "multipurpose operator" in the UK doing  all
    forms of menial work.  There would not be  similar  jobs  available  in
    Nigeria.  He described how the children had no  real  understanding  of
    Nigeria and for that reason they would not be able to survive  in  that
    society.  He stated that as he had no job, no home and no resources  he
    would not be able to start a new life in Nigeria and the children would
    not be able to go to school.  He had  made  an  attempt  to  regularise
    their stay in the UK.  He had consulted a lawyer but he had been  duped
    by the lawyer who had  taken  their  money.   Since  then  they  wanted
    nothing further to do with legal representatives.

10.  The witness confirmed that he had no parents or  siblings  in  Nigeria.
    He had some contact with people in Nigeria through the internet but  he
    would not be able to approach them for help with his children.  He  had
    a BSc in Political Science obtained  in  Nigeria  and  in  the  UK  was
    studying development management. He had completed two modules and still
    had two modules to go prior to obtaining  an  MSc  in  Management.   He
    stated that there were no similar courses  available  in  Nigeria.   He
    stated that the family would be destitute if they  were  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  The children spoke mainly in English but had picked  up  some
    of the Nigerian dialect as he would tell them off using Nigerian words.



Submissions

11.  The Home Office relied on the reasons for refusal.  She submitted  that
    the parties had been contradictory evidence  in  particular  concerning
    whether or not the  children  spoke  Yoroba  and  participated  in  the
    Nigerian prayer group at the mosque.  The two witnesses had also  given
    contradictory evidence about their  lives  in  the  UK  concerning  the
    children and their level of integration.

12.  It was submitted that none of the family were entitled to be in the  UK
    and they expected to get an education and health  facilities  to  which
    they were not entitled.  Both witnesses had sought employment in the UK
    knowing that they were illegally in the UK.  The family were a unit  in
    the UK and could return to Nigeria as a unit and  rely  on  the  skills
    obtained in the  UK  and  obtain  further  employment.   There  was  no
    evidence of real integration in the UK - no evidence from  their  uncle
    and no evidence from the people who "employ"  them.   The  language  in
    Nigeria is English and the family had associated with  other  Nigerians
    at the prayer group.  There was no reason why the children would not be
    able to extend those ties, given that they had mixed with Nigerians  in
    the UK, on return to Nigeria.

13.  The children failed under the Immigration Rules.

14.  Ms Isherwood submitted that under Article 8 the situation  was  similar
    to Zoumbas at paragraph 24 (but without  any  criminal  element).   The
    family were illegally in the UK and the parents  were  highly  educated
    and the children would have their needs met by their  parents  and  the
    family remaining together.  The eldest child was  only  just  7  years.
    There  was  no  evidence  to  show  any  detriment  to  the  health  or
    educational needs of the children or otherwise.  Reliance was placed on
    EV (Philippines) at paragraph 32 in relation to the  best  interest  of
    the children in which it was submitted that returning to Nigeria  as  a
    family would be in their interests and they could continue  with  their
    education there.  The need for immigration control outweighed the  best
    interest of the children.  As overstayers the public  interest  weighed
    in favour of a fair and consistent immigration system.  The  appellants
    had come to the UK for economic reasons, failed to claim asylum and had
    been willing to lie to the authorities in order  to  get  work.   These
    were factors to be considered.  There were no exceptional circumstances
    or particular factors of a compelling or compassionate  nature  and  it
    was entirely reasonable to expect the children to return to  return  to
    Nigeria with their parents.  No other  evidence  had  been  adduced  in
    support of any private  life  in  the  UK.   The  family  wished  their
    children to  be  educated  in  the  UK.   Reliance  was  placed  on  AM
    (Paragraph 13) where it was held that the mere presence of a  child  in
    education in the UK was  not  a  trump  card.   The  family  still  had
    connections in Nigeria, neither parent has ever had any leave to remain
    and the children do not qualify.

15.  Mr Mold for the appellants submitted that the starting  point  was  the
    third appellant who was 7 years old and  who  was  a  qualifying  child
    under paragraph 276ADE(iv) as she had lived in the UK for seven  years.
    He accepted that it was difficult to argue that the family had no  ties
    in Nigeria.  Through the perspective of the child it was  necessary  to
    consider whether there were significant obstacles to  reintegration  in
    Nigeria.   The  witnesses  had  given  evidence  and  explained   their
    difficulties and circumstances in which they came to the UK and  stated
    that in the event of a return to Nigeria they would be destitute.   The
    evidence was credible.   There  was  no  legal  basis  for  relying  on
    evidence given before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal as regards
    the children and their Nigerian connections.  It was  clear  that  they
    understood Yoroba but did not speak it.  It was accepted that schooling
    would be available to the children in Nigeria but that the  family  had
    no support network or base to start off from in Nigeria;  no  home,  no
    job and no possibility of finding  work.   It  was  argued  that  these
    amounted to very significant obstacles on return and which impacted  on
    the best interest of the children.

16.  Mr Mold submitted that the Bossadi argument was relevant  only  at  the
    second stage and did not consider it relevant  with  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules.

17.  In the event of the Tribunal considering the second stage he  submitted
    that there was no evidence  to  show  that  the  parties  had  received
    government grants, benefits or tax credits.  They had obtained benefits
    via NHS and education but otherwise they had  provided  for  themselves
    and had accepted that they were in the UK illegally.  It was  submitted
    that the appeal be allowed on immigration grounds.

Finding of Fact and Conclusions

18.  At the hearing before me Mr  Mold  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    appeal should succeed under the immigration rules given that the eldest
    child was a "qualifying child" having resided in the UK  for  7  years,
    that it would be in her best interests to remain in education in the UK
    and that there would be very significant obstacles to  her  integration
    in Nigeria as the family would be destitute on return.

19.  I heard evidence from the main appellant  and  her  husband.   I  found
    that there were inconsistencies in their evidence.  In particular I was
    unable to rely on it as to the level of integration in the UK and  ties
    in Nigeria. It is common ground that the family have lived  and  worked
    in the UK illegally and that the children were  born  here  when  their
    parents had no lawful status.  I find no evidence of any  private  life
    for either of the parents save for the length of residence in  the  UK.
    There was no evidence from any of the people that they claimed to  have
    worked for in the UK and no evidence of any other links  or  ties,  for
    example friends, church or school. In any  event  whatever  ties  exist
    were developed in the knowledge that they had no lawful status  in  the
    UK.

20.  I conclude that the main appellants are unable to show  that  they  can
    meet the requirements of the immigration Rules as partners  or  parents
    under Appendix FM and or private life  under  paragraph  276  ADE.  The
    immigration rules dealing with qualifying  children  require  that  the
    child has lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of  7  years.   The
    child only reached 7 years in August of this  year  and  is  only  just
    qualifies under 276ADE(iv) at the date of hearing before me.  There  is
    no basis for any argument that family life  would  be  breached  either
    inside or outside of the Rules as the  family  would  be  returning  to
    Nigeria as a unit and given the ages of the children  it  is  in  their
    best interests to remain with their parents.

21.  I am satisfied that it is  reasonable  for  the  child  and  family  to
    return to Nigeria, and that the second limb of 276ADE(iv) is not met. I
    find that the children are able to  communicate  in  English  which  is
    spoken in Nigeria and also have some  level  of  comprehension  of  the
    Nigerian dialect Yoruba, but am satisfied that they would  be  able  to
    develop their language skills in Nigeria  where  they  could  initially
    communicate in English. I find no evidence to show  that  the  children
    would not be able to get an education in Nigeria and no  evidence  that
    at this stage  of  their  education  there  would  be  any  significant
    disruption such that a move would be contrary to their  interests.  The
    youngest child is in nursery and the oldest in primary school.  I  have
    considered section 55  Borders,  Citizenship  &  Immigration  Act  2009
    including their ages, the stage  of  education  and  their  ability  to
    integrate in Nigeria. Both parents are Nigerian and it  is  clear  that
    the family maintain some cultural links in the family home for  example
    cooking Nigerian food and speaking in Yoruba.  Also the children attend
    the Mosque with their mother  where  again  they  are  associating  and
    socialising with other Nigerians.  It was conceded by Mr Mold  that  it
    could not be argued that the family had no ties in Nigeria and I agree.

22.  Mr Mold submitted that the family would  effectively  be  destitute  on
    return as they would have no home and no means of  getting  funds  from
    employment.  I fully accept that initially the family would  experience
    difficulties, but I also take into account that when they came  to  the
    UK they had nothing and no  contacts  and  yet  they  have  managed  to
    survive thus far.  There was credible evidence that  Mr  FJ  maintained
    contact on the internet with people in Nigeria and  AH  has  family  in
    Nigeria, albeit relations have  been  strained  in  the  past.  I  find
    therefore that they would be able to make contact with those people and
    seek help for the initial period of return until they were able to make
    more solid links.  I did not accept that it would not be  possible  for
    the family to seek help from the Nigerians that have helped them in the
    UK and some of whom must reasonably have connections  in  Nigeria.  The
    parents are both familiar with  the  country,  language  and  both  are
    educated to degree level. They would be able to reintegrate without too
    much difficulty. I do not accept that casual work is not  available  in
    Nigeria.

23.  I find no evidence  of any compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances
    for either the  parents  or  the  children  in  relation  to  health  ,
    education or otherwise and there is  no  justification  or  basis  upon
    which I can consider the appeal outside of the rules.  If I am wrong  I
    am satisfied that Article 8 family life  is  not  engaged  because  the
    family will be returning as a unit.  I find no evidence of any  private
    life for any of the appellants in  the  UK,  save  for  the  length  of
    residence for FK who entered in 2004 and  AH  in  2007.  There  was  no
    evidence of any relevance from the children to establish  private  life
    was  engaged  aside  from  attending  school,  which  is   not   itself
    sufficient.  However, even if the length  of  residence  is  enough  to
    engage Article 8 I find that any interference cannot  be  proportionate
    having regard to the  weight  that  must  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest in immigration control  given  that  the  residence  has  been
    unlawful  thorough  out.   There   in   nothing   disproportionate   or
    unreasonable about the children moving to Nigeria  with  their  parents
    which would involve changing school and education. I am satisfied  that
    they are young enough to be able  to  settle  in  Nigeria  and  in  the
    circumstances this would be reasonable. There would be  no  significant
    obstacles to  their  integration.   Although  presenting  some  initial
    difficulties I  find  that  they  would  not  be  destitute  given  the
    connections that  their  parents  have  in  Nigeria.   In  reaching  my
    decision  I  have  taken  into  account  the  following   caselaw:   EV
    (Phillipines)[2014] EWCA CIV 874, AM (S117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260
    (IAC)   and   Zoumbas    2013    UKSC    74    and    Bossadi(paragraph
    276ADE;suitability;ties)[2015] 00042 (IAC). I have also had  regard  to
    the factors in section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended), in  particular
    I rely on section s117B(1)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on Immigration grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.  There  are
children in the proceedings which justifies anonymity.


Signed   Date 9.11.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 9.11.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

