
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16418/2015
                                                IA/16434/2015; ia/16443/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TAMARA [S]
                                   [T A S]
                                  [T A F S]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bond, Counsel, instructed by the Irving & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (Appellant) against Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  R  Callender
         Smith's  promulgated  decision  of  12  July  2016   allowing   the
         Respondents' appeals against  the  Appellant's  refusal,  dated  14
         April 2015, of their human rights claim.

Background

      2. The 1st Respondent is a  national  of  Jamaica,  date  of  birth  8
         January 1976. The 2nd Respondent and the  3rd  Respondent  are  the
         daughters of the 1st Respondent. Their dates of birth are 26  April
         2008 and 5 September 2013. Both were born in the UK and have  lived
         in the UK since their birth. The 1st Respondent arrived in  the  UK
         on 18 October 2002. She overstayed. She made  several  applications
         for leave to remain but these were all rejected.

      3. On 30 January 2015 she made a  human  rights  claim  for  leave  to
         remain on the basis that she had established a family  and  private
         life in the UK. This  application,  upon  which  the  2nd  and  3rd
         Respondent were dependent, was refused by the  Appellant.  The  1st
         Respondent did not meet the requirements for leave to remain  under
         Appendix FM as she had no partner and her children had not lived in
         the UK for 7 years prior  to  the  date  of  the  application.  The
         Appellant was not satisfied that there would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the 1st Respondent's integration  in  Jamaica  as  she
         resided in that country for the majority of her life and would have
         knowledge of the culture, history and language of the country.  The
         Appellant  then   considered   whether   there   were   exceptional
         circumstances which, consistent  with  the  right  to  respect  for
         private and family life, might warrant consideration of a grant  of
         leave outside of the immigration rules.  The  Appellant  considered
         that the Respondents could continue their relationships with family
         and friends in the UK through modern forms  of  communication.  The
         Appellant  noted  that  Jamaica  offered   educational   facilities
         suitable for the 2nd and 3rd Respondents.  The  Appellant  accepted
         that returning to Jamaica may be  disruptive  for  the  family  but
         considered that the children were of an age enabling them to  adapt
         to changes to  their  surroundings  with  minimal  disruption.  The
         Appellant considered that any private life acquired by the children
         would be limited due to their age. The Respondents  had  no  lawful
         basis to remain in the UK and  the  life  established  by  the  1st
         Respondent was done in the full knowledge that she  had  no  lawful
         basis to remain. In reaching her  conclusion  the  Appellants  took
         into account section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
         Act 2009.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

      4. The judge considered evidence adduced by  the  1st  Respondent  and
         heard oral evidence from  her.  The  1st  Respondent  regarded  her
         church as her family and did not want to be separated from  any  of
         the church members. She did not believe it would be  fair  for  her
         children to relocate to Jamaica. They knew no  one  there  and  all
         their friends  and  immediate  family  were  in  the  UK.  The  2nd
         Respondent had been living in the UK for 8 years and 2  months  and
         was settled at her school where she was doing  well.  She  had  not
         settled in previous schools and, to  move  the  family  to  Jamaica
         where the lifestyle would be very poor, would  be  unreasonable  as
         the children would not be able to adjust to such a dramatic change.
         The 1st Respondent, who had suffered abuse from  an  ex-partner  in
         the past, would not be able to support the children in  Jamaica  as
         she had no qualifications and it would be difficult for her to find
         a job. Although she had a mother living in Kingston her mother  was
         elderly, in bad health  and  was  in  a  weak  financial  position.
         Furthermore she lived in a volatile environment. The 1st Respondent
         also had an aunt who was currently suffering  from  extreme  health
         conditions and was unable to support the 1st Respondent.

      5. The judge concluded that the 1st Respondent would be able to return
         to Jamaica despite the difficulties that she may  encounter.  There
         were said to be no  exceptional  circumstances  that  would  breach
         Article 8. The judge noticed that, although the family  members  in
         Jamaica may be elderly and in ill health, that did  not  mean  that
         they were unavailable as a background  resource  for  more  general
         help in re-establishing the 1st Respondent in Jamaica.

      6. The judge then considered a letter, dated 21 January 2016 from  the
         Lambeth Children social Care No Recourse Team, which indicated that
         the 1st Respondent had fled from domestic abuse from her ex-partner
         at the time of her resettlement by Lambeth, and a letter  from  the
         Crescent primary school dated 28 January 2016, relating to the  2nd
         Respondents circumstances in school and the 1st Respondents anxiety
         concerning the outcome of her court proceedings. Based on  the  1st
         Respondent's oral evidence and this documentary evidence the  judge
         believe that the 2nd Respondent's position was  a  fragile  one  in
         terms of her schooling. The judge noted  that  the  2nd  Respondent
         had,  "just  properly  established  herself  within  this  academic
         setting and a move at this stage, given her current age of 8  years
         and  2  months,  is  likely  to  have  negative   and   deleterious
         consequences."

      7. The judge concluded that the 2nd Respondent's length  of  residence
         the UK was significant and that the 2nd Respondent was clearly  not
         responsible for the fact of her overstaying. The 2nd Respondent was
         said to be a young person who had clearly began to  settle  into  a
         pattern of stable education that would be interrupted  if  she  was
         removed with her mother and other sibling  to  Jamaica.  The  judge
         concluded that the 2nd Respondent met the requirements  of  section
         117B (6). The judge proceeded to adopt  a  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
         analysis and concluded, in respect of the  proportionality  of  the
         proposed removal, that the public interest did not require the  2nd
         Respondents removal. At [52] the judge stated, "given her length of
         residence, the letter from her school showing the fragility of  the
         skills and integration to the school (she  is  in  an  intervention
         group in relation to mathematics), the impact of her being uprooted
         and taken to a country she has  never  seen  or  been  to  and  the
         reality of the difficult and  precarious  situation  she  would  be
         living in with her mother struggling -certainly at  the  start  -to
         look after  them  financially  and  practically  and  in  terms  of
         appropriate accommodation, I find it would be disproportionate  and
         not in  the  public  interest  to  send  the  [2nd  Respondent]  to
         Jamaica." The judge consequently allowed the appeal on human rights
         grounds.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

      8. The Appellant noted that the Respondents had agreed that they could
         not succeed in the immigration rules and submitted that it had been
         implicitly accepted that the conditions of paragraph 276  ADE  were
         not met including the reasonableness of the children  returning  to
         Jamaica. It is said that the Tribunal had no regard to this  point.
         The Tribunal had regard to  the  2nd  Respondent's  performance  at
         school, the length of time she had resided in the UK and  that  she
         faced the prospect of being  separated  from  her  mother  who  the
         Tribunal found should, on the face of it, return  to  Jamaica  with
         the youngest child. It was submitted that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
         considering such a narrow range of evidence as MA (Pakistan) & Ors,
         R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
         Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 required consideration of  much
         wider range of evidence such as the family's long-term and  certain
         immigration status, the mother status as an overstayer, the absence
         of health difficulties, the  awareness  of  Jamaican  culture,  the
         extended family network in Jamaica, the fact that  the  Respondents
         could all return as a single family unit and the  nationalities  of
         the family. It was argued that, on a simple quantitative scale,  it
         was clear that there were  more  factors  indicating  removal  than
         factors against. On a quantitative assessment it was, according  to
         the Appellant, simply the amount of time that  the  2nd  Respondent
         had spent in the UK and her  attendance  at  school  that  made  it
         unreasonable to return her to her home country. There were  however
         schools available in Jamaica so the only relevant  factor  was  the
         amount of time the 2nd Respondent spent in the UK.

      9. The First-tier Tribunal, in granting permission to  appeal,  stated
         that, "... in an otherwise  careful  decision  and  reasons  it  is
         nonetheless arguable that the judge failed to  adequately  consider
         the Jamaica nationality of all the [Respondents],  the  absence  of
         health  difficulties,  the  awareness  of  Jamaican  culture,   the
         extended family network in Jamaica, and the fact that  this  family
         unit could return together to Jamaica. It is arguably an  error  of
         law for the  judge  to  have  failed  to  consider  those  arguably
         important factors".

Submissions from the representatives

     10. At the outset of the hearing I raised with  Mr  Walker  my  concern
         that the grounds, to the extent that they  suggested  it  had  been
         implicitly accepted by the Respondent's representative at the First-
         tier Tribunal hearing that  the  2nd  Respondent  could  reasonably
         return to Jamaica, were  either  inaccurate  or  disingenuous.  The
         appeal before the first-tier  Tribunal  could  not  have  succeeded
         under paragraph 276 ADE, in relation to the children, because  they
         were under the age of 7 when the human rights claim  was  made.  It
         was for this reason that the representative before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal accepted that the requirements of Appendix FM in paragraph
         276 ADE could not be met. Mr Walker agreed that this concession had
         been made only as a result of the 2nd Respondent not being over the
         age of 7 when the application was made.

     11. Thereafter Mr Walker relied on the remaining grounds of appeal  and
         submitted that the judge had, in effect, allowed the appeal on  the
         basis of the 2nd Respondent's length of residence in the  UK  only.
         Having drawn Mr Walker's attention  to  the  judge's  reasoning  at
         [52], where he considered that the  2nd  Respondent  would  face  a
         "difficult  and  precarious  situation"  in  Jamaica,   Mr   Walker
         indicated that he did not seek to take the grounds much further.

     12. Miss Bond submitted that the judge looked at the range  of  factors
         in reaching his decision under section 117B (6) of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that he had weighed in the limited
         support that could be provided by the 1st Respondent's  mother  and
         aunt, and that the "fragile position" of the 2nd Respondent had  to
         be considered with respect to the local authority  report  as  well
         which indicated that the 2nd  Respondent  was  vulnerable  and  was
         being housed in  temporary  accommodation.  She  had  to  flee  her
         previous home and school, leading to  significant  upheaval,  as  a
         result of the domestic abuse faced by her mother. It was  submitted
         that the judge's conclusion was one who was rationally entitled  to
         reach.

Discussion

     13. The 1st point in the grounds of appeal contended that the judge had
         no regard to the implicit acceptance at the First-tier hearing that
         it was reasonable for the  children  to  return  to  Jamaica  under
         paragraph 276 ADE. This is a wholly inaccurate assertion. There was
         no acceptance, implicit or otherwise, by the Respondents  or  their
         representatives, that it was reasonable, under  paragraph  276  ADE
         (1)(iv), for the 2nd and 3rd Respondent to return to  Jamaica.  The
         clear and, with respect, obvious reason why it  was  conceded  that
         the 2nd and 3rd Respondent  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276 ADE was because neither of them was over the age of 7
         when their human rights  applications  were  made.  This  much  was
         accepted by Mr Walker at the Upper Tribunal hearing.

     14. The remaining grounds contend that the Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
         relying on a narrow range  of  evidence  in  relation  to  the  2nd
         Respondent and failing to  take  into  account  a  wider  range  of
         evidence as required by MA (Pakistan).

     15. Following MA (Pakistan) and MM (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450, in determining whether  it
         was  reasonable  under  section  117B  (6)   of  the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for the 2nd Respondent to return to
         Jamaica the judge was required to take  into  account  the  general
         spectrum of public interest factors. The grounds submitted that the
         judge failed to take into account  these  general  public  interest
         factors and that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  other
         relevant matters such as the unlawful status of the family  in  the
         UK, the mothers overstaying, their cultural  heritage,  the  family
         support in Jamaica, and the nationalities of the Respondents.

     16. Having holistic regard to the judge's decision I am satisfied  that
         the judge did  take  into  account  all  relevant  public  interest
         factors and other material matters in determining  whether  it  was
         reasonable for the 2nd Respondent to be removed to  Jamaica.  There
         is no basis for stating  that  the  judge  was  not  aware  of  the
         nationalities of the Respondents or that the Respondents had family
         residing in Jamaica (see [21], [22], [34], and [52]). Although  the
         judge found that the 1st Respondent's mother and aunt were able  to
         provide  some  general  help  as  background   resources,   it   is
         irresistibly clear from the judges conclusions at [52] that he  was
         not   satisfied   they   could   provide   financial   support   or
         accommodation. The  judge  did  not  reject  the  1st  Respondent's
         evidence that her mother was living in a volatile and violent inner
         city environment and had no access to basic amenities  such  as  an
         indoor bathroom or regular running water.  The  judge  was  clearly
         aware that the 1st Respondent  was  a  significant  overstayer  but
         additionally noted that, in respect  of  the  2nd  Respondent,  she
         could not be hold responsible for her unlawful presence in  the  UK
         as she had no control over her immigration status [47].  The  Judge
         was demonstrably aware that the 2nd Respondent  would  be  able  to
         access schooling in Jamaica. There is nothing in  the  decision  to
         suggest the judge was unaware that the Appellant proposed to remove
         the family as a single unit, and any suggestion to the contrary  is
         frankly ludicrous.

     17. When determining the reasonableness of the 2nd Respondent's removal
         to  Jamaica  the  judge  considered   the   evidence   before   him
         holistically including that relating to the highly  unsettled  life
         experienced by her as  a  result  of  her  mother  having  to  flee
         domestic  abuse  from  her   ex-partner   (who   was   subsequently
         imprisoned). The judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
         fragility  of   the   2nd   Respondent's   schooling,   her   clear
         vulnerability, and the significant disruption that she had  already
         experienced and which would again be occasioned by  her  having  to
         leave everything she had grown accustomed to and familiar with.

     18. The judge was additionally entitled to take account  the  difficult
         and precarious position  in  which  the  2nd  Respondent  (and  her
         sister) would be  living  if  removed  to  Jamaica.  There  was  no
         criticism of the judge's factual findings and the 1st  Respondent's
         credibility was not in dispute. The judge referred  to  the  letter
         from Lambeth Children Social Care No Recourse Team which  indicated
         that the family had been destitute and were unable  to  meet  their
         day to day basic needs, and that the 1st Respondent had had to flee
         domestic abuse. It additionally noted that the 1st Respondent had a
         history of depression that was being managed  with  medication  and
         counselling. The 1st Respondent's medical notes confirmed that  she
         was suffering from depression and  was  receiving  medication.  The
         judge was rationally entitled to conclude, having regard to the 1st
         Respondent's  lack  of  qualifications  and  the  absence  of   any
         significant support network, and the  fact  that  the  family  were
         destitute in the UK, that they would be living in a  difficult  and
         precarious situation, a highly material factor when  assessing  the
         best  interests  of  the  children  under  s.55  of  the   Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  and  in  the  proportionality
         exercise.

     19. The judge considered the various  public  interest  considerations,
         took into account the full range of evidence  before  him,  applied
         the correct tests and committed no misdirection  of  law.  Although
         the judges  ultimate  evaluation  may  be  considered  by  some  as
         generous it cannot be considered on any view perverse or  one  that
         he was not entitled to reach (consider Dasgupta  (error  of  law  -
         proportionality - correct approach) [2016] UKUT  00028  (IAC)).  In
         the circumstances I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal does not disclose any material error  of  law  and  I
         uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contains no  error  of  law.  The  original
First-tier Tribunal decision allowing the appeal stands.

I make no anonymity order.


[pic]    16 December 2016

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


