

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16865/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon House, Bradford     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3rd March 2015                    |On 10th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 YASIR JAMIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms A Faryl, counsel, instructed by Beachwood
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
       dismissed an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to
       refuse him indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence.



    2. Permission to appeal had been  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had misconstrued the length  of
       time the applicant spent in Pakistan and that this may have  infected
       the First-tier Tribunal judge's findings as to the ties the applicant
       had with Pakistan. The grant of permission included a direction  that
       the appellant would be expected to file and serve a schedule  of  his
       entry and exit to the UK, UAE  and  Pakistan  supported  by  passport
       entries.

    3. In her Rule 24 response the SSHD asserted that it was unarguable that
       the appellant could not meet the Rules and that if there had been  an
       error by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  as  to  the  time  spent  in
       Pakistan in 2010 that was immaterial given that  there  was  adequate
       evidence that regardless of whether he had family in Pakistan, he had
       continuing ties there.

    4. Although there is reference to a discretion this is  discretion  that
       is not in the Rules and not justiciable by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       through a statutory appeal.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal held

           26.    The appellant accepts that he has spent the  majority  of
           his life outside  the  UK.  But  whilst  he  is  a  national  of
           Pakistan, he claims that he has no family or  friends  remaining
           in Pakistan or home to go to. However he returned to Pakistan in
           April 2010, remaining there on his own account until August 2010
           when he went to the UAE. He claims he was not permitted to apply
           for a visa for  the  UK  from  Pakistan  because  he  is  not  a
           permanent resident of Pakistan. Also relevant is his claim  that
           he had to leave the UK because his father had a heart attack  in
           the UAE. He also claims that  his  grandmother  passed  away  in
           Pakistan. However the reason the  appellant  had  to  leave  was
           because his appeal had been dismissed and his appeal rights were
           exhausted. I note that  in  the  correspondence  with  the  Home
           Office the appellant made no mention of his father's illness and
           in fact said that his  departure  was  delayed  because  he  was
           waiting for a refund from his college.

           27.    I have taken account of the appellant's evidence and  the
           witness statement of his brother, to the effect that  they  feel
           that they have adopted the culture and lifestyle of the UK. They
           have completed most of their education in  the  UK  and  have  a
           close circle of friends with whom they study and socialise. They
           say they were schooled in UAE.  The  appellant's  brother  is  a
           British National with a wife and family in the UK.

           28.    However even taking all these factors into account  I  do
           not accept the appellant has no ties to  Pakistan.  His  culture
           and background is Pakistani and he  has  spent  time  living  in
           Pakistan. He returned and lived there for several months on what
           appear to be two occasions in 2010. Even if the appellant has no
           remaining family or friends in Pakistan, I am satisfied that  he
           has not lost all ties to  Pakistan  in  the  sense  intended  by
           paragraph 276ADE. He  is  now  an  adult  with  the  benefit  of
           education in UAE and the UK. He was able to come to the  UK  and
           look after himself for a number of years. There is  no  credible
           reason why he should not go back  to  Pakistan  and  pursue  his
           career and life there, taking advantage of his experience in the
           UK. That he does not have a home to go to  or  that  his  family
           life elsewhere is not a compelling feature. His own  history  is
           that he has been able to move back and  forth  between  UAE  and
           Pakistan even if he may have no right to settle in  UAE,  he  is
           not being denied access to his family and he may apply for short
           visits to visit his family in the UK.

    6. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  has  incorrectly  stated  that  the
       appellant spent between April 2010 and August 2010 in  Pakistan.  The
       evidence before the judge was of short and very occasional visits  to
       Pakistan; the last such visit being in November 2011 for 21  days  in
       order to undertake the necessary rituals following his  grandmother's
       death in Pakistan the previous year. The visit before that was for 16
       days for the funeral of his grandmother. In 2010 he spent 89 days  in
       UAE and in 2011 he spent 43 days there. He was in the UK the rest  of
       the time.

    7. The judge failed to  make  findings  on  whether  the  appellant  had
       relatives in Pakistan and if so how closely related they were; failed
       to make findings on the appellant's father's health in UAE; failed to
       make findings on his and his brother's claims to have  been  educated
       in the UK and UAE; failed to refer to the evidence he relied upon  to
       state that the appellant has  been  "able  to  move  back  and  forth
       between UAE and Pakistan; failed to take account of the fact that  he
       was 6 weeks old when he left Pakistan.

    8. The most glaring errors in the determination  are  to  fail  to  even
       acknowledge that the appellant left Pakistan aged 6 weeks,  has  only
       returned for very short periods of time and erred in finding that  he
       had lived in Pakistan for five months in 2011.

    9. I asked Mr Diwnycz to  identify  the  "adequate  evidence"  that  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal such that the decision was sustainable
       even though there were errors as set out above. He drew my  attention
       to the address given in  the  appellant's  passport  as  a  permanent
       address in Pakistan and that the appellant had  not  spent  half  his
       life here in the UK. Other than this he was unable  to  identify  any
       other evidence.  These  two  matters  come  nowhere  close  to  being
       "adequate evidence".

   10. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  law  in
       failing to make findings on relevant evidence and erred in reaching a
       finding that was not open to him on  the  evidence  before  him.  The
       consequences of such errors are that the  decision  is  fundamentally
       flawed and I set it aside to be remade.

   11. I heard brief oral evidence, in English, from the appellant  and  his
       brother.

        a. The appellant said that  the  address  in  the  passport  was  a
           guesthouse. The passport was issued in the UAE and the  passport
           officer said that he had to put a Pakistani address otherwise he
           could not have a passport. The officer knew it was a  guesthouse
           but said it didn't matter.

        b. The appellant's brother said that he no longer had  a  Pakistani
           passport and obtained a visa on the very few occasions  when  he
           travelled to Pakistan; when he did have a Pakistani passport  he
           also used the same guesthouse address.

        c. The whole family, including the grandmother had travelled to and
           lived in the UAE.

        d. The appellant speaks Arabic and English; he can understand  Urdu
           but cannot write it.

        e. The appellant's mother and father, a sister and a  brother  live
           in UAE. He has a brother in the UK. His mother has a brother  in
           the USA. His father was ill n the  UAE  and  received  treatment
           there.

        f. The appellant has no cousins,  nephews,  nieces  or  other  more
           distant relatives in Pakistan; the family owns no property there
           and whenever they went for holidays they stayed in guesthouses.

        g. The appellant has been educated in UAE and the UK;  he  has  not
           been educated in Pakistan.

        h. The appellant's brother's wife's family live in London;  he  and
           his wife have a five-month-old baby.

        i. The visit in 2008 was a family  visit  because  the  grandmother
           wanted to visit her husband's grave

        j. The visit in 2006 was a holiday.

        k. There had been no other visits to Pakistan between 1999 and 2006

        l. If the grandmother had  died  in  UAE,  the  visit  in  2011  to
           Pakistan would not have taken place; the necessary rituals would
           have been done in UAE.

   12. The  appellant  and  his  brother  are  credible  witnesses  and  the
       documentary evidence before me supports  their  evidence  as  to  the
       number of visits. Mr Diwnycz did  not  challenge  their  evidence.  I
       accept the evidence as set out in paragraph 11 above.

   13. The only matters upon which  Mr  Diwnycz  relied  to  show  that  the
       appellant retained cultural and social ties with Pakistan  were  that
       he  was  a  Pakistani  national,  that  he   spoke   Urdu   (although
       acknowledging that he could not write Urdu and that he  spoke  fluent
       English), that he had cultural ties in Pakistan until his grandmother
       died (although it is not clear on what basis that  was  argued  given
       the grandmother was only visiting when she went to Pakistan and  died
       there) and finally that there was a "permanent address"  recorded  in
       his passport.

   14. I accept the appellant's explanation for the insertion of the address
       in the passport. I do not accept that being a Pakistani national with
       the characteristics set out in paragraph 11 amounts to  cultural  and
       social ties with Pakistan without more. This young  man  has  plainly
       done little more than visit Pakistan for occasional  trips  with  his
       family who themselves only travelled very infrequently.

   15. It was accepted by Mr Diwnycz that if the appellant could  adequately
       prove a lack  of  social  and  cultural  ties  with  his  country  of
       nationality, then he met the requirement of paragraph 276ADE  of  the
       Immigration Rules. I am completely satisfied that this appellant  has
       no cultural and social ties with Pakistan other than  that  he  is  a
       national of that country. That is plainly not a cultural  and  social
       tie.

   16. I allow the appeal under the Rules. It follows  that  the  appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds must also succeed.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  I  was
    not asked to make one and I see no reason to.



         Date 10th March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
