
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/16668/2015
                                                               IA/16718/2015
                                                               IA/16740/2015
                                                               IA/16748/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2016                |On 14 November 2016                  |
|                                  |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ABDUL [B]
                                  REENA [B]
                                    [F A]
                                    [T Z]
                       (Anonymity Direction Not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim (counsel), instructed by Liberty Legal,
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hosie, promulgated  on  2  June  2016,
which allowed the Appellants' appeals on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The second appellant is the first appellant's wife. The third and  fourth
appellants are the children of the first and second  appellants.  The  first
appellant was born on 30 June 1974. The  second  appellant  was  born  on  2
August 1983. The third appellant was born on 23 February  2004.  The  fourth
appellant was born on 15 September 2011. All four appellants  are  nationals
of Bangladesh.

4. The first appellant entered the UK on 14 July  2007  as  a  student  with
entry clearance until 31 October 2009. He was then granted leave  to  remain
as a student until 30 April 2011 after  which  he  was  granted  Tier  1post
study leave until 10 December 2012. He made an unsuccessful application  for
leave to remain as a tier 1 entrepreneur on 28  November  2012.  His  appeal
against that refusal was unsuccessful and his appeal rights  were  exhausted
on 24 March 2014. On 17 April 2014 he applied for leave to remain as a  tier
4 student. Leave was  granted  until  29th  February  2016.  The  respondent
curtailed that grant of leave to 7th February 2015.

5. The second appellant entered  the  UK  on  12  June  2008  as  the  first
appellant's dependent spouse with leave valid until  31  October  2009.  She
was then granted limited leave to remain in line with the  grants  of  leave
to the first appellant.

6. The third appellant entered the UK on 12 June 2008 with  his  mother.  He
was granted leave to remain  in  line  with  the  grants  of  leave  to  his
parents.

7. The fourth appellant was born in the UK and has  been  granted  leave  to
remain in line with the grants of leave to his parents.

8. On 19 January 2015 the appellants applied for leave to remain in  the  UK
on article 8 ECHR grounds. The respondent refused  the  applications  on  16
April 2015.

The Judge's Decision

9. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hosie ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.


10. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7  October  2016  Designated  Judge
Garratt gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. Whilst the decision is comprehensive the Judge arguably  fails,  in
      paragraph 22, to set out  a  reasoned  decision  in  relation  to  the
      "reasonableness" test set out in paragraph 276 ADE of the  immigration
      rules.  She  appears   to   consider,   erroneously,   that,   because
      consideration of article 8  outside  the  immigration  rules  required
      circumstances which were exceptional, it was  appropriate  to  proceed
      without more. The judge appears to have relied solely on the fact that
      the third appellant was a child who had been in the United Kingdom for
      more than seven years as an exceptional circumstance. It  is  arguable
      that, just because the third named appellant had been  in  the  United
      Kingdom  for  seven  years  at  the  date  of  hearing  (rather   than
      application), this identified exceptional  circumstances  particularly
      when it is clear that all appellants were  a  family  unit  and  could
      return to Bangladesh together.

The Hearing

11. (a) Mr Jarvis, for the respondent, moved the grounds of appeal. He  told
me that the Judge had placed undue emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the  third
appellant has been present in the UK for more than seven years. He  told  me
that the Judge's consideration of  section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  was
incorrect,  and  that  what  is  required  is  a  holistic   proportionality
assessment weighing all of the specific facts and circumstances.

(b) He took me to [32] of the decision where, he told  me  that,  the  Judge
confused  the  concepts  of  lawful  residence  and  precarious  immigration
status. He told me that, there, the Judge manifestly applies the wrong  part
of section 117B of the 2002 Act. He told me that the final sentence of  [32]
is an assumption made by the Judge rather than an evidence-based finding  of
fact. He placed reliance on AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  260  (IAC),  and
told me that because the appellants  have  never  had  anything  other  than
limited leave to remain, any private life that they may  have  developed  in
the UK is precarious.

(c) He took me to [37] of the decision,  where  the  Judge  focuses  on  the
impact of removal on the third appellant, and told me that there  the  Judge
finds that this case is finely balanced. He told me that section  117B(6)(b)
of the 2002 Act indicates that the child's best interests are not  the  sole
relevant consideration. He reminded me that this is a case which has  always
proceeded on an argument  that  article  8  ECHR  is  engaged  out-with  the
immigration  rules,  and  that  none  of  the  appellants  can  fulfil   the
requirements of the immigration rules.

(d) Mr Jarvis urged me to allow the appeal  and  set  the  Judge's  decision
aside.

12. (a) For the appellants Mr Karim argued that the grant of  permission  to
appeal had been made on the basis that the Judge's error lay  in  conducting
a two-stage article 8 assessment. He argued that  the  submissions  from  Mr
Jarvis amounted to a concession that that ground of appeal  was  not  to  be
argued. In any event, he told me that the  decision  does  not  contain  any
errors material or otherwise

(b) Mr Karim told me that the grounds of appeal amount to  no  more  than  a
disagreement with the Judge's findings and an attempt  to  re-litigate  this
appeal, failing which he argued that the respondent is raising a  perversity
challenge. He took me to [25] of the decision  where,  he  said,  the  Judge
specifically refers to section 117 of the 2002 Act and focuses on the  third
appellant's circumstances. He told me that [25] indicates that the  relevant
considerations were at the forefront of the Judge's mind.

(c) Mr Karim took me to [32] of the decision where, he told  me,  the  Judge
deals with both the lawful nature of the appellant's immigration status  and
submissions which were made on whether or not  the  immigration  status  was
precarious. He told me that at [30], [31] and [35] the Judge  takes  correct
guidance in law before commencing a reasonableness assessment  between  [36]
and [38]. He then took me to various passages from R (on the application  of
MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper Tribunal (IAC)  and  Another  [2016]  EWCA
Civ. He emphasised that the appellants' immigration status might  have  been
precarious, but it was lawful throughout.

(d) Mr  Karim  told  me  that  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  are  beyond
criticism; that the  Judge  correctly  directed  herself  in  law  and  then
reached  conclusions  which  were  well  within  the  range  of  conclusions
reasonably available to her. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and to  allow
the Judge's decision to stand.

(e) Mr Karim told me that there had been a  change  in  circumstances  since
the  date  of  decision.  Since  the  decision  was  promulgated  the  first
appellant has had a  heart  attack  and  the  second  appellant  has  safely
delivered their third child. He told me that, if I find a material error  of
law, further fact finding is now necessary and urged me to remit  this  case
to the First-tier to be heard of new if I find against the appellants.

Analysis

13. At [25]  the  Judge  draws  a  clear  focus  on  the  argument  for  the
appellants when she says

      The appellants base their article 8 claims on the now almost  8  years
      residence in the UK of the  third  appellant  and  the  disruption  to
      family life which would be caused by his removal. They also  claim  it
      would not be proportionate to remove the rest of his immediate  family
      in the circumstances.

14. At [30] and [31] the Judge takes guidance from Azimi-Moayed  and  others
(decisions affecting children; onward appeals),  [2013]  UKUT 00197,  PD  &
Others (Article 8:conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  108(IAC)
and ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4. The Judge refers to section 117B of
the 2002 Act at [25], and at [31] and [32]  considers  the  appellants  case
against section 117B. In the final sentence of [31] the Judge makes a  clear
finding that the appellants' leave has always been precarious.

15. Although the Judge finds that the  appellant's  leave  has  always  been
precarious she does not go on to explain whether she applies  little  weight
to  the  private  life  established  whilst  immigration  status  has   been
precarious

16. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a  person  who  is
under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has lived  in
the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or  more.   If  a
child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B  of  the  2002
Act as amended, the issue will generally be whether it  is  not  reasonable
for that child to return. Although R(on the application of Osanwemwenze)  v
SSHD 2014 EWHC 1563 was not specifically concerned with section 117B it has
some relevance in terms of the reasonableness of a child leaving the UK. In
that case, the claimant's 14-year-old stepson from Nigeria had been in  the
United Kingdom for more than 7 years and had leave to  remain  in  his  own
right. It was held that  this  was  an  important  but  not  an  overriding
consideration and  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant's  family
including the stepson to relocate to Nigeria. The parents  had  experienced
life there into adulthood and would be able to provide for the children and
help them to reintegrate.

17. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that when
the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed  in  relation  to
children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must be posed and answered  in  the
proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the child  to  follow
its parents to their country of origin. It is not however a  question  that
needs to be posed and answered in relation to each child more than once.

18.   In R (on  the  application  of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper
Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
it was held (notwithstanding reservations) that when considering whether  it
was reasonable to remove a child from the UK  under  rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  of
the Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002, a court or tribunal should  not  simply  focus  on  the
child but should have regard to the wider  public  interest  considerations,
including the conduct and immigration history of the parents.  It  was  also
confirmed however that if section 117B(6) applies  then  "there  can  be  no
doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained  provision  in
the  sense  that  Parliament  has  stipulated  that  where  the   conditions
specified in the sub-section are satisfied, the  public  interest  will  not
justify removal."

19. At [36] the Judge focuses on the third appellant and  clearly  set  out
there the factors which she finds tip the balance in the third  appellant's
favour. Having found that the third appellant  succeeds,  the  Judge  finds
that the remaining appellants must succeed because the family  life  within
the meaning of article 8 ECHR is established and that to find in favour  of
the third appellant only would create separation for this family.

20. The decision contains a material error of law because the  decision  for
all four appellants proceeds on the facts and circumstances relating to  the
third appellant only. The Judge placed the focus on one appellant  only  and
did not consider the facts and circumstances  pertaining  to  the  remaining
three appellants. A proportionality exercise has only  really  been  carried
out in relation to the third appellant.

21. As the decision contains a material error of law, I must set  it  aside.
Notwithstanding Mr Karim's submission, there is sufficient  material  before
me to enable me to substitute my own decision.

22. The determinative facts of  this  case  are  that  the  appellants  have
always had leave to remain in  the  UK,  but  that  leave  has  always  been
limited. The third appellant has now lived in the UK for 8 years  (or  more)
and is a "qualifying child". The third and fourth  appellants  are  immersed
in UK society, culture and traditions and are in Education in  the  UK.  The
third and fourth appellants also speak Bengali and are equally  immersed  in
Bengali custom and tradition.

23. The focus in this case is on sub-section  (6)  of  Section  117B.  What
counts against three of the Appellants is that the maintenance of effective
immigration control is in the public  interest  (Section  117B  sub-section
(1)). In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that an
appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from
either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,  or
the  strength  of  his  financial   resources.   In   Forman   (ss   117A-C
considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  public
interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by  the  consideration
that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no time  been  a
financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is likely to  remain
so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where they  are
not present the public interest is fortified.

24.   Section 117B(6)  is  in  two  parts  which  are  conjunctive.  Section
117B(6)(a) weighs in favour of the first two Appellants because  it  is  not
disputed that they have a genuine and subsisting paternal relationship  with
a qualifying child. It is Section 117B(6)(b) which is determinative of  this
case.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  third  appellant  to  return  to
Bangladesh?


25.   The weight of reliable evidence in this case indicates that return  to
Bangladesh would form  a  period  of  upheaval  for  this  family  but  that
upheaval is outweighed when balanced against the public  interests  and  the
Respondent's  interests  in  maintaining  fair  and  effective   immigration
control and keeping a watchful eye on the fragile economy of the UK.

26. I am mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4. In Zoumbas  v
SSHD 2013 UKSC 74 the court held that a decision  maker  must  evaluate  the
child's best interests and in some cases these may point only marginally  in
one, rather than another, direction.




27.  I remind myself of the cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW  [2015]  CSIH
36.  It is the intention of the respondent to  ensure  that  the  Appellants
remain together.  The Respondent's decision  maintains  the  unity  of  this
family and does not separate the children from their parents. The  interests
of the children are served because the integrity of the family unit  is  not
challenged.

28.   The effect of the Respondent's decision does not cause separation  for
this family. The family will remain together. In ZS(Jamaica) and  Another  v
SSHD 2012 EWCA Civ 1639 the Court of Appeal reiterated that  ZH(Tanzania)  v
SSHD 2011 UKSC 4 made it clear that the correct approach is  to  treat  best
interests of the child as a starting point and then go on to assess  whether
those interests were outweighed by the strength of other considerations.

29.   The impact of the SSHD's decision is that  all  four  Appellants  will
return to Bangladesh where they have extended family members. The impact  on
the third and fourth appellants is that their education and  any  help  they
are receiving from health services in the UK all come to an end  -  but  the
background materials indicate that education  and  healthcare  is  available
(albeit at a lower level) in Bangladesh. There is  nothing  before  me  from
which I can draw the conclusion that return to Bangladesh  would  result  in
neglect or destitution for either  of  the  children.  Housing,  healthcare,
education and family support  are  all  available  to  them  in  Bangladesh.
Furthermore, it is well settled that the  "better  v  worse"  prism  is  the
wrong approach in law.

30.   New routines might have to be established for all of  the  appellants.
It may take the third and fourth  appellants  some  time  to  adapt  to  new
routines and a change of environment  but  there  is  no  reliable  evidence
placed before me to indicate that any of the appellants cannot adapt; it  is
a fact of life that changes occur and individuals have  to  adapt  to  those
changes.

31. The period of upheaval that this family might face does  not  mean  that
it is not reasonable for the third appellant to  return  to  Bangladesh.  On
return he will have the unerring support of his  parents  and  siblings.  He
will have access to education, healthcare, and housing.  He  will  have  new
experiences and make new friends. I therefore conclude  the  SSHD'  decision
is not a disproportionate breach  of  the  Article  8  rights  of  the  four
Appellants.

Decision

The Judge's decision promulgated on 2 June 2016 is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. I therefore set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appeals are dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed:

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
                                                      Date:  9 November 2016

