
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16093/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 April 2017                      |On 8 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                                UMAIR RAFIQUE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin, solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Walker)  dismissing  his  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision made on 13 April 2015  refusing  his  application
    for a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK  as
    an extended family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  17  August  1989.  He
    entered the UK on 6 October 2012 with  entry  clearance  as  a  student
    valid until 13 September 2016. However, on 2 June 2013  his  leave  was
    curtailed to expire on 2 July 2013. On 16 December 2014 he applied  for
    a residence card as an extended family member but his  application  was
    refused on 13 April 2015 as the respondent was not  satisfied  that  he
    was related to his sponsor as claimed or that he had been dependent  on
    him either before or since entering the UK.

3.   The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by the First- tier Tribunal on 26 July 2016. In a decision issued on  8
    August 2016 the judge found that the appellant had failed to show  that
    he and his EEA sponsor were cousins as claimed, that he  was  dependent
    on the sponsor or that they had been members of the same household.  As
    he could not meet the requirements of reg. 8 of the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations  2006 ("the Regulations"), his appeal was dismissed.

4.    He applied for permission to appeal from the First-tier  Tribunal  but
    this was refused on the basis that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to
    deal with the matter and the application was therefore not admitted.


5.    The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and granted for  the
    following reasons:


        "The  appellant  is  appealing  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Walker to dismiss his appeal against the decision  by
        the respondent to refuse to issue him with a residence card  as  the
        extended family member of an EEA national.


        The appellant's ground submit that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        misdirected himself or failed to consider relevant evidence.


        However, in the light of Sala (EFMs, Rights of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
        00411 (IAC) the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to
        hear the appellant's appeal.


        As a consequence, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Walker's  decision  did
        contain an arguable error of law and permission is granted  to  this
        limited extent."


Submissions

6.   At the hearing before me, Mr Uddin pointed out  that  this  appeal  had
    been dismissed in a decision issued on 8 August 2016 before  the  issue
    of the Upper Tribunal decision in Sala on 19 August 2016. He  submitted
    that the decision in Sala should not  be  applied  retrospectively  and
    that, accordingly, when the appeal was heard, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did have jurisdiction. Mr Clarke, however, submitted that the  decision
    did have retrospective effect and had made a clear finding  that  there
    was no statutory right  of  appeal  under  the  Regulations  against  a
    decision not to grant a residence card to any person claiming to be  an
    extended family member.

The Error of Law

7.    I am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  substance  in  Mr  Uddin's
    submission. The decision in Sala does have a  retrospective  effect.  A
    decision by a superior court declares what the law is and has been  and
    does not simply have prospective effect.  It  follows  that  the  judge
    erred in law by proceeding on the basis that he had  jurisdiction  when
    there was no right of appeal for the reasons given in Sala. Whilst  the
    judge cannot be faulted in any way  as  his  decision  pre-dated  Sala,
    nonetheless, he erred in law. There was, however, jurisdiction to grant
    permission to appeal as a court or tribunal always has jurisdiction  to
    consider the issue of jurisdiction.

8.   As the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal,  the
    decision must be set aside and replaced by a finding that there was  no
    valid appeal.

Decision

9.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  There  was  no
    valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 7 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter








