
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16436/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr. modou lamin mboob
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. Y. Darboe of Queen's Park Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen promulgated on 5 May 2015 in  which  he
    allowed Mr. Mboob's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to
    refuse to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of his  right
    to reside as the husband of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the
    "Regulations").

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to Mr. Mboob  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it appeared from the
    bundle and from the note of the HOPO that the judge had placed reliance
    upon a document that had not been translated.

Submissions

 4. Mr. Kandola relied on the grounds of appeal. It had been accepted  that
    the Lithuanian document had not been translated.  In  relation  to  the
    Lithuanian legal advice, it was submitted that nowhere in the  body  of
    the report did the lawyer engage with the Lithuanian Civil Code  (pages
    11-12).  The appeal had been allowed by virtue of a document which said
    that the marriage had been registered, which document was untranslated.
     It was submitted that the lawyer's opinion was a vague  opinion  which
    did not engage with the Civil Code and did not explain whether  or  not
    the marriage was registered.

 5. I was referred to article 1.26 of the Lithuanian Civil Code (page  17).
    It was  submitted  that  this  did  not  address  the  issue  of  proxy
    marriages, and that  the  Civil  Code  did  not  assist  regarding  the
    recognition of proxy marriages.

 6. Mr. Kandola accepted that there was no challenge to  the  finding  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were in  a  durable  relationship  [26].   He
    therefore submitted that if the appeal were to be allowed on the  basis
    that the Appellant met the requirements  regulation  8(5)  rather  than
    regulation 7, the appeal should be remitted to the Respondent in  order
    that she could exercise her discretion under regulation 17(4).

 7. Mr. Darboe submitted that there was no error of law but, even if  there
    was, it was not material.  I was referred to CB (Validity of  marriage:
    proxy marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080.  It was submitted that  the
    Lithuanian law treated marriages abroad in the same way as English law.
     It was submitted that the  Lithuanian  legal  opinion  stated  on  the
    second page that the Lithuanian lawyer had been authorised to  register
    the marriage in Lithuania.  He would not have been able  to  accept  an
    instruction to register the marriage if it were not valid in Lithuanian
    law.  The opinion stated that he  had  submitted  the  request  to  the
    Foreign Ministry.

 8. The Appellant had provided a document from the Embassy of the  Republic
    of the Gambia certifying that the Attestation Certificate issued in the
    Gambia indicating that the Appellant was duly married was authentic and
    genuine (page 28).  It was submitted that  the  Lithuanian  authorities
    had been to the same Embassy.

 9. In relation to the Lithuanian registration certificate, this  had  been
    received by the Appellant on the same day as the hearing in the  First-
    tier Tribunal, 15 April 2015.  The judge had seen this certificate.  It
    would not have been possible to register the marriage if  the  marriage
    had not been recognised in  Lithuanian  law.   He  submitted  that  the
    marriage was valid under Gambian  law.   The  judge  had  confir1mation
    before him that it was valid under  Lithuanian  law  according  to  the
    Lithuanian Civil Code.

10. In relation to the legal opinion, I was referred to the case of  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  It  was  submitted
    that the lawyer had explained how the law applied.  He was aware of the
    Civil Code as illustrated by reference to it on the first page  of  the
    opinion.

11. It was submitted that the marriage  was  recognised  in  Lithuania  and
    evidence had been provided to the judge to this effect.  There  was  no
    suggestion that the Lithuanian lawyer was not legitimate  and  even  in
    the absence of the translated version of the document,  the  judge  had
    sufficient evidence before  him  to  conclude  that  the  marriage  was
    recognised in Lithuania.

12. In relation to regulation 8(5), the judge had made a finding  that  the
    Appellant was in a durable relationship which had not been  challenged.
    The findings of the judge ought to stand  and  there  was  no  material
    error of law.

Error of law decision

13. In paragraph [14] of the decision the judge states:
         "I have evidence from  the  Gambian  Embassy  in  London  that  the
         marriage is  considered  to  be  effective.   I  additionally  have
         evidence from a Latvian (sic) lawyer confirming that  the  marriage
         would be considered legal in that country."

    (It was not submitted that the use of the word  Latvian  was  any  more
    than an error and I find that the judge had before him evidence from  a
    Lithuanian lawyer, and was well aware that the Sponsor was Lithuanian.)

14. In paragraph [15] the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    satisfy the appropriate requirements in respect of proxy  marriages  in
    Gambia, and that the marriage is valid under Gambian law.

15. In paragraph [16] he states:
         "The above finding is  further  supported  by  the  fact  that  the
         Gambian Embassy in the UK has had sight of the marriage certificate
         and certification of the same and duly confirmed  the  validity  of
         the marriage."

16. Paragraph 17 states:
         "In the light of the above factors and noting current Gambian  law,
         I find that the parties have contracted a valid marriage and  I  am
         therefore satisfied that the appellant is a family  member  of  the
         sponsor and therefore that she meets the  appropriate  requirements
         of the Regulations.  I find that the appellant's appeal  under  the
         Regulations is bound to succeed.  I  allow  the  appeal  under  the
         Regulations."

17. I find that the  judge  has  made  no  reference  to  any  untranslated
    Lithuanian document, let alone place reliance on any such document.   I
    find that he has relied on evidence of the  validity  of  the  marriage
    under Gambian law from the  Gambian  Embassy,  and  evidence  from  the
    Lithuanian lawyer.  He has found that the  Lithuanian  lawyer's  report
    confirms that the marriage would be considered legal in Lithuania [14].
     In paragraph [8] he refers to the Lithuanian legal report  "confirming
    that the marriage would be considered legal in that country".  He  also
    refers to the letter from the Gambian Embassy in London which  confirms
    that the marriage was "authentic and genuine" [8].

18. Following the case of Kareem, it was necessary  for  the  judge  to  be
    satisfied that the marriage would be recognised as a valid marriage  in
    Lithuania.  Paragraph (g) of the headnote states:
         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof."

19. I find that the judge had evidence before him which satisfied him  that
    the marriage would be recognised in Lithuania in the form  of  a  legal
    opinion from a Lithuanian lawyer.  I find that there is no merit in the
    Respondent's objections to this legal opinion.  No objection was raised
    at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  to  this  document.   It  is
    clear that the lawyer is aware of the Lithuanian Civil Code (page  11).
    I find the judge was entitled to place reliance on this as  independent
    evidence of the recognition of the marriage under Lithuanian law.

20. On the second page of the opinion the lawyer states that  he  has  been
    authorised by the Sponsor to register the marriage.   The  lawyer  sets
    out what documents are necessary (page 11-12) and then  sets  out  that
    these documents have been provided by the Sponsor (page  12).   He  has
    therefore submitted the request to register the marriage.  I find  that
    this is something that he would not be able to do were the marriage not
    validly recognised by the Lithuanian authorities.

21. The judge was satisfied that he had  evidence  that  the  marriage  was
    recognised under Gambian law, [15].   He  was  satisfied  that  he  had
    independent and reliable evidence  that  the  marriage  was  recognised
    under Lithuanian law [14].  He did not rely on an untranslated document
    in order to make this finding.

22. I find that the judge was entitled to find that sufficient evidence had
    been provided by the Appellant to discharge the burden  of  proof  that
    the  marriage  was  recognised  under  the  laws  of  both  Gambia  and
    Lithuania.

23. As accepted by Mr. Kandola, there was in any event no challenge to  the
    finding in paragraph [26].

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and I do not set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 19 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
