
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16903/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Tower, Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 30th June 2015                |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J PERKINS
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL C J HANSON
               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL R F MCGINTY


                                  Between:
                           HIRABEN HASMUKH VADHER
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hasmukh Vadher (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Background

     1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  India  who  was  born  on  the  12th
        September 1955. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 27th
        November 2011 with leave to  enter  as  the  spouse  of  Mr  Hasmukh
        Vardon. She applied on form FLR (M) for an extension of her stay  in
        the UK as the partner of a person present and settled in the  UK  on
        the 21st January 2014, before  expiry  of  her  leave  on  the  24th
        January  2014.  However,  her  application  was  rejected   by   the
        Respondent as being invalid,  due  to  the  Appellant's  failure  to
        complete the payment page and the Appellant was told that she  would
        have to resubmit her application, ensuring that the payment page was
        completed. The Appellant, through her  then  representatives  Messrs
        Rakkani Solicitors, resubmitted  the  application  together  with  a
        cheque for the requisite fee on the 11th February  2014,  after  the
        Appellant's leave to remain had expired on the  24th  January  2014.
        The Respondent issued a Notice of Decision refusing to  grant  leave
        to  remain  under  paragraph  286  of  the  Immigration  Rules  with
        reference to paragraph 284 (iv) and under paragraph D-LTRP 1.3  with
        reference to paragraph R-LTRP 1.1 (d) and under  paragraph  276  ADE
        (iii)-(vi) on the 29th March 2014.

     2. She purported to appeal to the First Tier Tribunal against what  was
        considered by the First Tier Tribunal to be an Immigration  Decision
        refusing her application. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Crawford,  in  a
        determination promulgated on  the  18th  July  2014,  dismissed  her
        appeal on the basis that he found that the Appellant did not have an
        English  language  test   certificate   that   complied   with   the
        requirements of paragraph 284 (viii) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
        that she had not produced any medical evidence to show that she  was
        incapable of taking the relevant English language test.  He  further
        found that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  stopping  the
        Appellant and her husband could  not  settle  in  India.  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Crawford went on to consider the appeal under Article
        8 outside of the Immigration Rules and applied the five stage Razgar
        test, but concluded that to remove the  Appellant  to  India  was  a
        proportionate response by the United Kingdom commensurate  with  the
        U.K.'s right to control immigration and would not amount to a breach
        of the Appellant's or her husband's Article 8 rights.  He  therefore
        dismissed the appeal under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
        Article 8 of the ECHR.

     3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First Tier
        Tribunal Judge Page on the 12th September 2014, on the basis that:

        "The Grounds of Appeal contend that the Judge was wrong to find that
        it was proportionate to remove the Appellant to India so  she  could
        obtain the pre-requisite English language certificate  to  meet  the
        Respondent's requirements. At paragraph 18 of the determination  the
        Judge noted that the Appellant would be removed from the UK possibly
        seven weeks later, if the appeal was dismissed. The Judge  said  she
        had time to study for the relevant English language test before  she
        was removed and could, if necessary, study for the  test  in  India.
        The Grounds of Appeal referred to  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's
        doctor  which  the  Judge  did  consider  at  paragraph  9  of   the
        determination. The letter from the Appellant's doctor said that  the
        Appellant was not able to sit the examination but did not  give  any
        health grounds as to why. The Grounds  of  Appeal  argued  that  the
        Judge should have considered  allowing  the  appeal  to  enable  the
        Appellant to have sufficient time  to  pass  the  test  rather  than
        assume she would be able to pass the test in the seven weeks  before
        she was due to be removed. This point appears arguable so permission
        to appeal is granted".

     4. Prior to the commencement of the appeal hearing we were handed a fax
        from the Appellant including a letter from her dated the  25th  June
        2015, but received by  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  4:47  p.m.  on  the
        afternoon of the 29th June 2015, indicating that she  had  withdrawn
        her instructions from her representatives Messrs Rakkani Solicitors.
        In that fax it was argued that before the previous appeal  heard  by
        First-Tier Tribunal Judge Crawford, she had submitted a letter  from
        her doctor to confirm that she was not in a position to  secure  the
        English language certificate and that she had in  fact  secured  the
        English-language certificate on the 3rd October 2014  and  submitted
        the same to the Respondent on the 18th November  2014,  asking  that
        she be granted further Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom. It was
        said that the Appellant did not receive any response to that letter,
        but it was submitted that she had now  passed  the  English-language
        test. It was argued that such new evidence should be admitted  under
        section 85 (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
        It is argued that the requirement of an English  language  test  was
        unreasonable and  unlawful  as  at  the  point  of  entry  clearance
        application she did not have to meet any English-language  test.  It
        was further submitted that the proportionality test was not properly
        carried out by First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Crawford  and  that  her
        husband has been working for over 32 years in the UK   and  they  do
        not have any house or source of income in India.

   Submissions

     5. At the start of the appeal hearing we ensured that the Appellant Mrs
        Vadher was able to understand us fully in English and she  confirmed
        that this was the case. She asked for permission for her husband and
        her sponsor Mr Hasmukh Vadher to represent  her.  No  objection  was
        raised to this by Mr Smart on behalf of the Respondent, and  so,  in
        the interest of  justice,  we  gave  permission  for  Mr  Vadher  to
        represent the Appellant.

     6. Given that the Appellant was not legally represented at  the  appeal
        hearing before us, in the interests of justice we asked Mr Smart  to
        outline the circumstances of the appeal and his  submissions  before
        hearing from the Appellant. The Appellant and her husband were happy
        for us to take this course.

     7. Mr Smart submitted that there was in fact no right of appeal to  the
        First-tier Tribunal in this  case.  He  submitted  that  within  the
        letter of refusal, the contents of which were repeated by First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Crawford at paragraph 2 of his determination, it  was
        stated that "Your application for Leave to Remain in the UK has been
        refused and you no longer have any known basis of stay  here.  There
        is no right of appeal against this refusal." He submitted  that  the
        First-Tier Tribunal Judge was therefore wrong to go on  to  consider
        the appeal at all and that as there was  no  right  of  appeal,  the
        decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Crawford is void for  want  of
        jurisdiction. He submitted that there was  no  removal  decision  in
        this case and that the Appellant's valid application  for  leave  to
        enter was made on the 11th February 2014 after her leave had expired
        on the 24th January 2014 and that she did not have leave to enter or
        remain at the  time  of  her  application.  He  submitted  that  the
        Appellant would now be in a position to make  a  fresh  application,
        now that she had secured her English-language certificate  and  that
        it was only if a removal decision was made that this would give rise
        to an appealable decision for the purposes  of  Section  82  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     8. Mr Vadher referred us to the letter that had  been  written  by  the
        Appellant dated the 25th June 2015, and argued that his wife had now
        passed the English-language  test  and  that  she  had  brought  the
        original certificate to court.

     9. We reserved our decision.

   Error of Law

    10. In the case of Kaur (Entry Clearance - date of  application)  [2013]
        UKUT 00381 (IAC) was held that an application  for  entry  clearance
        that does not comply with the requirement in Regulation  37  of  the
        Immigration  and  Nationality  (Fees)  Regulations  2011  of   being
        accompanied by payment  of  a  fee  is  a  nullity  and  is  not  an
        application for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  any
        statutory provision, and that the application is only  made  on  the
        date on  which  payment  of  the  relevant  fee  is  made.  In  such
        circumstances, although the Appellant initially sought to  make  her
        application on the 21st January 2014, before the expiry of her Leave
        to Remain on the 24th January 2014,  that  application  having  been
        rejected by the Respondent because of the failure  to  complete  the
        payment page and pay the requisite fee, we find  that  the  original
        application was invalid and a nullity.  We  find  that  it  was  not
        therefore until the properly completed application together with the
        requisite fee was submitted on the  11th  February  2014,  that  the
        application was in fact validly made. The Respondent  was  therefore
        correct within the Notice of Decision to state  that  the  Appellant
        did not have valid leave to enter or remain, as at the date  of  her
        application.

    11. As a valid application was not submitted prior to the expiry of  her
        leave, the Appellant's leave would not have been extended by  virtue
        of Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971. This was therefore not  a
        case in which the refusal to vary  a  person's  leave  to  enter  or
        remain in the United Kingdom resulted in a person having no leave to
        enter or remain, for the purposes of  Section  82  (2)  (d)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  the  Appellant  no
        longer had valid leave to remain as at the date of her  application.
        It is also significant in this case that no removal directions  have
        been issued in respect of the Appellant, whether  under  Section  10
        (1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  or  otherwise.  In  such
        circumstances, we find that no immigration decision has been made in
        respect of the Appellant, which she  would  have  been  entitled  to
        appeal  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  under  Section  82  of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    12. We have borne in mind that the Court of Appeal in the case of Rashid
        Anwar and Prosper Adejo v Secretary of State for the Home Department
        [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1275  held  that  in  respect  of  questions   of
        constitutive jurisdiction, as to whether or not  the  Appellant  had
        any right of appeal at all under Section 82 (1) of the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that if  there  was  no  appealable
        immigration decision, as in Mr Adejo's case, then the question as to
        want of jurisdiction could be raised in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  even
        though the point was not taken on appeal at the First Tier Tribunal.

    13. We further bear in mind that it would not have been open  to  either
        the Duty Judge  or  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Crawford,  to  have
        granted a right of appeal,  if  there  was  in  fact  no  appealable
        decision, as this was not a matter of discretion, it is a matter  of
        jurisdiction. The fact that the case proceeded to an appeal  hearing
        before First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford did  not  in  fact  confer
        jurisdiction on him to hear it.

    14. In such circumstances the  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Crawford in this case was erroneous in purporting to  determine  the
        appeal when there was no jurisdiction to do so. This  amounts  to  a
        material error of law. Accordingly, the decision of the  First  Tier
        Tribunal must be set aside. Having set the decision  of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal aside, there is no  appeal  before  us  that  we  have
        jurisdiction to determine.



Signed

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty   Dated 1st July 2015
