
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17748/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2016                   |On 6 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                  Shafi [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Unigwe, Counsel instructed by Primarc
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 18 July  2016  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet which refused an appeal  for  leave  to
    remain as a partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The ground put forward for the appellant was relatively narrow. In  the
    refusal letter dated 27 April 2015 the respondent found that  a  number
    of answers given in the marriage interviews conducted on 2  April  2015
    did not "demonstrate the level of familiarity of mutual awareness  that
    we would expect from a genuinely married couple."

 3. That was the respondent's case before the First-tier  Tribunal  at  the
    hearing on 18 July 2016 and  so  the  case  which  the  appellant  came
    prepared to argue. He maintained in his grounds that  the  respondent's
    conclusion was incorrect and provided statements from himself  and  his
    partner, cohabitation documents and other documents in support  of  his
    case; see [4] and [8].

 4. The appellant attended the hearing but his  partner  did  not.  As  the
    determination shows at [9] he explained that she was taking  her  three
    children to school. When asked in cross-examination about  the  partner
    not attending he had not thought it was important for her to attend and
    school was important; see [11]. Counsel for the appellant indicated  as
    part of his submission that it was not a requirement for  the  wife  to
    attend; see [16].

 5. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not accept the respondent's  view  of
    the responses provided in the marriage interivew, finding at [19] that:



         "I accept the submissions put forward on behalf  of  the  appellant
         that the alleged discrepancies referred to in  the  refusal  letter
         are not material discrepancies. For example, it  is  understandable
         that the appellant would not know the mortgage  payments  that  his
         spouse is paying (question 20), nor do I consider that the  replies
         as to how the engagement took  place  (question  4)  and  who  were
         present  at  the  wedding  (question  6)   show   any   significant
         discrepancies. As the respondent did not provide the full interview
         record, which the appellant estimated lasted for about  two  hours,
         it is possible that the seven questions  to  which  the  respondent
         referred are small in number compared  to  the  overall  number  of
         questions put at interivew. I do not think that the replies  listed
         by the respondent show that there were discrepancies which would go
         to the genuineness of the relationship."

 6. The respondent's prima facie case was rejected,  therefore.  As  above,
    the First-tier Tribunal judge had other evidence before him by  way  of
    the  written  statements  attesting  to  the  genuine  nature  of   the
    relationship, oral evidence of the appellant and documents showing  the
    couple living at the same address from 2014 onwards  and  having  joint
    names on  utility  bills.  No  adverse  findings  were  made  on  those
    documents. The First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  appeared  to  find  the
    marriage interviews supported  the  appellant's  case  of  being  in  a
    genuine relationship  and  does  not  indicate  that  anything  in  the
    documentary evidence indicated otherwise.

 7. However, at [19], the non-appearance of the spouse was found  to  be  a
    sole and sufficient to show the  relationship  was  not  genuine.  That
    finding does not indicate that the weight to be attributed to the  non-
    appearance  was  assessed  against  the  otherwise  entirely   positive
    evidence on the relationship. It does not indicate what the  First-tier
    Tribunal made of the reason given for the partner not appearing, taking
    the children to school. It does not indicate what the judge made of the
    appellant stating that he did  not  think  it  was  important  and  his
    representative stating that her appearance was not  a  requirement.  It
    does not appear that any consideration was given  to  adjourning  until
    later in the day or another day for the partner  to  attend  where  the
    judge found that this issue arising only on the day of the hearing  was
    a matter such materiality  that  it  was  capable  of  outweighing  the
    otherwise positive evidence.

 8. In my judgement, the approach taken to  issue  of  the  partner's  non-
    attendance was  not  correct.  The  finding  was  reached  without  any
    assessment against  the  otherwise  entirely  positive  evidence  which
    undermines its rationality. Also, the First-tier  Tribunal  could  have
    indicated prior to reserving the decision that this was  potentially  a
    sole and sufficient reason for finding  the  relationship  not  genuine
    even though the interview and other evidence supported the  appellant's
    case thus affording the appellant's representative the  opportunity  to
    consider whether to apply for an adjournment for the partner to attend.
    For what it is worth, the partner attended the hearing before me.

 9. For those reasons I found that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error on a point of law and that the  decision  should  be
    set aside to be re-made.

10. It was also my conclusion that this error required  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  positive  findings  on  the
    marriage interviews could not be sustained where the partner's evidence
    might have allowed for  a  different  outcome  and  so  there  were  no
    findings that could be preserved. I therefore concluded  that  the  re-
    making should take place  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  line  with
    paragraph 7 of Part 3 of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    dated 25 September 2012



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal will be re-made de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 5 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



