
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17027/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2015                    |On 25 November 2015                  |
|Oral determination given following   |                                     |
|hearing                              |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S. STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Mayuran Mahalingam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P J Lewis, Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of a panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  26  May  2015  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 16 April 2015 in which the panel allowed  Mr
    Mahalingam's appeal against the refusal of the Secretary  of  State  to
    vary his leave to remain on the basis that  his  removal  would  be  in
    breach of his  rights  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   For  ease  of
    reference I shall throughout this determination refer to the  Secretary
    of State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of  State"
    and  to  Mr  Mahalingam,  who  was  the  original  appellant,  as  "the
    claimant".

 2. The immigration history of the claimant can be set out briefly.  He  is
    a national of Sri Lanka who was born on 2 May 1982.   He  is  of  Tamil
    ethnicity and he was from Jaffna in the North of Sri Lanka.  He entered
    this country as a student on 15 August 2011 with valid leave to enter.

 3. On 6 February 2014 he made a combined application to vary his leave  to
    remain as  a  student  and  for  a  biometric  residence  permit  which
    application was refused because he had failed to meet the  requirements
    set out within the Rules; his original grounds of appeal  against  that
    decision  were  made  with  reference  to  paragraph  322(1A)  of   the
    Immigration  Rules.   Pursuant  to  Sections  120  and  82(1)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 his grounds of appeal were
    amended on 23 February 2015 to include a claim that his  removal  would
    be contrary to this country's obligations under the Refugee  Convention
    and accordingly the appeal was on the basis that  he  had  a  right  to
    remain in this country because his refusal would be in breach  of  this
    country's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

 4. The case was then listed for hearing at Taylor House on 16  April  2015
    as I have noted.  That is some two months after notice had  been  given
    to the Secretary of State that the basis of his appeal  would  be  that
    the claimant was entitled to asylum.  In the  context  of  this  appeal
    that is of some relevance.

 5. The claimant's reasons for claiming asylum  were  essentially  that  he
    would be perceived on return to be a current supporter of the LTTE  and
    would be perceived as someone who was a risk to the unitary state  post
    civil war in that country.  As noted by the panel at paragraph 5 of its
    determination "the main thrust of his  appeal  was  his  refugee  claim
    based on an imputed and/or political opinion, in that he was  suspected
    by the Sri Lankan authorities of being a member of the LTTE working  to
    regroup and revive the LTTE in Sri Lanka".

 6. The hearing of this appeal, we were told by Mr Lewis  representing  the
    claimant today, had originally been listed for 10am although it was put
    back until 2pm.  At 2.05pm, that is at that  hearing  itself,  for  the
    very first time the advocate  representing  the  Home  Office  at  that
    hearing sought permission to adduce evidence of what was said to  be  a
    "watch list" which was in the public domain and  which  listed  various
    organisations and persons said to be of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

 7. Counsel then representing the claimant, Ms Rothwell, had in  fact  been
    at Taylor House since before 10am and it has not been explained  as  to
    why this evidence had not at the very least been given  to  her  before
    the start of the proceedings at 2pm and nor was any explanation offered
    as to why in any event this evidence  if  and  to  the  extent  it  was
    relevant had not been produced  earlier.   There  was  apparently  some
    discussion as to the relevance of this evidence to which I  will  refer
    below but the panel having  heard  the  submissions  relating  to  this
    evidence refused to allow it to be adduced in the  following  terms  at
    paragraph 12 of its determination:

         "12. The respondent sought to produce as part  of  their  case  the
             Gazette of the Democratic Socialist  Republic  of  Sri  Lanka.
             The relevance of this document was that it contained a current
             list of the names of those persons who were on the watch list.
              This was at 2.05pm the case having been  listed  for  2.00pm.
             He stated that there  had  been  operational  difficulties  in
             serving the document earlier and it was in the public  domain.
             The appellant objected to this  document  being  submitted  at
             such short notice.  His Counsel submitted that she had been in
             the building  all  day  and  had  not  been  served  with  the
             document, the content of which she was not familiar with.  She
             added the document appeared to relate to LTTE members who were
             living overseas at the time of the war and some names were not
             on the list.  The application by the respondent to adduce this
             evidence was refused  and  the  document  was  excluded.   The
             respondent had been aware of the amended grounds of appeal and
             could have served the document prior to the  hearing.   Taking
             into account the vulnerable condition of  the  appellant,  and
             considering  the  interests  of  fairness,  we  determine  the
             application by the respondent to adduce this evidence so  late
             was refused and the document was excluded".

 8. The panel then went on to  consider  the  claimant's  appeal  first  by
    making findings with regard to his evidence which was accepted as being
    truthful and then in the context of these findings considering  whether
    he would be at risk in light of the guidance given by this Tribunal  in
    the country guidance case of GJ and others (post-civil war:  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  On the basis of its  findings  and  in
    light of the country guidance the panel allowed the claimant's  appeal,
    considering that he would be at risk of persecution on return.

 9. The respondent now appeals against this  decision  on  essentially  two
    grounds.  The first is that the panel ought properly  to  have  allowed
    the respondent the opportunity to adduce "highly relevant evidence" and
    it was noted that "any unfairness to  the  appellant  could  have  been
    remedied by adjourning the proceedings for a  short  period"  and  that
    "the judge's stance led to unfairness to the respondent"  (paragraph  1
    of the grounds).

10. The next ground on which the Secretary of State  sought  permission  to
    appeal was that the determination was said to be inadequately reasoned.
     It is said at paragraph 2 of the  grounds  that  although  "the  judge
    records [31] that the appellant 'was an active member of  the  LTTE  in
    Sri Lanka between June 2004 and June  2009  and  was  detained  by  the
    Terrorist Investigation Department from 3.7.2009 for a period of twenty
    months', this is not sufficient to bring the appellant within the  risk
    categories identified in GJ".

11. These grounds were relied upon  by  Mr  Kandola,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State before us today, and we made a careful note  of  his
    submissions which I will refer to below only where this  is  necessary.
    We have, however, had regard to everything which was said on behalf  of
    both parties as well as to all the documents contained within the  file
    whether or not the same is specifically referred to below.

12. We deal first with the issue of whether or not the panel  was  entitled
    to exclude the evidence which the Secretary of State wished  to  adduce
    at the hearing and in any event whether or not if  this  was  an  error
    this could have made a material difference to the outcome.   We  accept
    that even if the representative of the Secretary of State ought to have
    given this material to Ms Rothwell earlier in  the  day  and  that  his
    failure to do so might give rise  to  questions  of  retraining  (about
    which we cannot fairly form any definitive conclusions) this would  not
    in itself be a reason for dismissing this appeal  and  this  would  not
    have been a reason justifying the panel in excluding  the  evidence  on
    its own.

13. Even if the Secretary of State's representative's conduct  is  open  to
    criticism the grant of refugee status should  not  be  made  merely  to
    punish the Secretary of State by failures by her  representatives.   If
    an applicant's representative had made a  late  application  to  adduce
    evidence which might have had a material bearing as to whether  or  not
    he would be at risk on return it is highly unlikely that that  evidence
    would have been excluded merely  because  his  representative  had  not
    submitted it earlier if indeed any prejudice to the Secretary of  State
    in those circumstances could have been dealt with by an adjournment.

14. Similarly in this case,  if  this  evidence  was  or  might  have  been
    material to the outcome of the proceedings there would  have  to  be  a
    good reason why that  evidence  should  have  been  excluded.   In  our
    judgment that was a decision for the panel  to  take  and  although  it
    would have been preferable if its reasons had been  set  out  in  terms
    within the determination it is clear from the Rule 24 response made  on
    behalf of the applicant that  there  had  been  discussion  as  to  the
    relevance of this  material  and  indeed  we  have  had  the  advantage
    ourselves of having heard submissions as to whether this material could
    have been relevant.

15. We are entirely satisfied that even if the  evidence  might  have  been
    admitted it would not have made a material difference to the outcome of
    the appeal, and for this reason we consider that the panel was entirely
    justified in refusing to admit this evidence albeit that any  prejudice
    to the claimant other than the  prejudice  which  would  ordinarily  be
    suffered by a vulnerable person who had to  endure  yet  further  delay
    could have been alleviated by an adjournment.

16. Our reasons for so finding are as follows.  In the first place there is
    nothing stated within the document as to precisely what it is.  It  may
    or may not have been what is referred to as a  "watch  list"  which  is
    what the Secretary of State asserts that this document, which is in the
    public domain, actually is.  However, it is  apparent  that  there  are
    many names that are not on this list including the name of  the  person
    referred to in the country guidance case as "GJ" who would  clearly  be
    of interest to the authorities.

17. Moreover, the fact that this claimant's name is not on a  "watch  list"
    would not be determinative of his case and what is more would not  even
    harm his case.  The reason that we so  find  is  because  the  guidance
    given in GJ is that persons whose names are on a  watch  list  will  be
    monitored on return to Sri Lanka  but  will  not  be  detained  at  the
    airport.  It is only those persons who are on a "stop list"  who  would
    be detained at the airport and  for  the  most  part  these  lists  are
    mutually exclusive.

18. The fact that somebody's name is on a watch list  rather  than  a  stop
    list would tend to indicate that that person was not to be detained  on
    his return which would be contrary to the case which the  claimant  was
    putting forward.  It is notable that in GJ the Tribunal found that  the
    mere fact that one is on a watch list  was  not  in  itself  sufficient
    evidence to show that an applicant would be at risk on return.  That is
    not to say that the fact that one is on a watch list would be in itself
    totally irrelevant because if somebody was on the watch list and  while
    being monitored in Sri Lanka carried out activities which  were  deemed
    to be against the interests of the state he or she  might  then  be  at
    risk but as this is not the basis upon which this claimant's  case  was
    put it was entirely open to the panel to find that in the circumstances
    of this case and taking all the factors into consideration it  was  not
    right to adjourn this case any further to allow evidence to be  adduced
    which did not have any real relevance.

19. We turn now to consider whether or not the determination can be said to
    contain any other errors of law and in our judgment it cannot.  It  was
    argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that the claimant could  not
    be on a "stop list" because he had not produced an arrest warrant  but,
    as Mr Lewis representing the claimant rightly pointed out to us, arrest
    warrants are not regularly handed to the subjects  of  those  warrants.
    The arrest warrants would be retained by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka
    in normal circumstances until they are executed and so  the  fact  that
    the claimant was not in possession of such a warrant could not be  said
    to damage his credibility nor could the fact  that  he  was  unable  to
    produce any stop list with his name on it because these lists were  not
    a matter of public record and it was not suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that they were.

20. The panel's finding that the claimant was a credible witness  was  open
    to it.  The panel considered his evidence very  carefully  indeed.  The
    panel accepted that he had  not  fabricated  evidence  as  to  how  his
    injuries occurred and it is notable that he had  been  in  custody  for
    some considerable period after the ending of the civil  war.   What  is
    particularly relevant in this case is that, as the panel accepted,  the
    claimant's father had been arrested and  was  still  reporting  to  the
    authorities, which on the claimant's  case,  which  was  accepted,  was
    solely because of the authorities' interest in the claimant.

21. All of these findings were open to the panel and this Tribunal can only
    interfere with such findings if they are inadequately  reasoned  or  if
    the panel asked itself the wrong questions.  The panel asked itself the
    right questions, the findings were adequately reasoned and  accordingly
    it follows that there is no arguable basis  upon  which  this  Tribunal
    could find an error of law in the  panel's  determination  such  as  to
    justify its decision being set aside.

22. It follows that this appeal by the Secretary of State must be dismissed
    and we will so find.



    Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  the  panel  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of
State's decision to  remove  him,  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
grounds, is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  is
affirmed.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig 16 November 2015

