

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia/17019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision signed: 06.05.2015          |
|on 20.04.2015                        |sent out: 13.05.2015                 |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                                  ji Weiguo
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Ronan Toal  (counsel instructed by Clarke Willmott,
Bristol)
For the respondent: Mr Sebastian Kandola


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pathma Lingam), sitting at Taylor House on 11  November
    2014, to  on Article 8 and  other  grounds  a  husband's  appeal  by  a
    citizen of China, born 1 November  1963.  The  appellant's  wife  is  a
    British citizen, though she gave her evidence in Mandarin,  and  has  a
    son of 22.

 2. The appellant was refused leave to remain as a husband

         under the 'transitional Rules'

          a. paragraph 284 because  he  had  produced  an  English-language
             certificate from the Academy of Oriental  Cuisine,  which  was
             not on the list of approved providers;

         under the 'ten-year route' because

          b. (EX.1 (a)) he had no children of his own in this country; and

          c. (EX.1 (b)) there were no insurmountable obstacles to  him  and
             his wife carrying on their family life elsewhere.

 3. The appellant did not challenge the paragraph 284 decision: although he
    later produced another English-language test certificate, that was  not
    as required by the Rules either. His counsel before the judge  (not  Mr
    Toal) conceded that he could only succeed under Article 8, and accepted
    that the EX.1 (a) decision was inevitable; but the  judge  allowed  his
    appeal under the Rules on  EX.1  (b),  and  in  the  alternative  under
    Article 8. She referred to paragraph 116  of  the  Home  Office  policy
    guidance at the time ('Statement  of  Intent:  Family  Migration'  June
    2012), which provides that someone who:

         "... fails only the knowledge  of  language  and  life  in  the  UK
         requirement at the indefinite leave to remain stage,  ...  will  be
         granted leave of 30 months to give  them  more  time  to  meet  the
         requirement ..."

 4. The appellant's solicitors in their covering letter to his  application
    of 12 December 2013 made it quite clear that his current  inability  to
    satisfy the English-language requirement made it impossible for him  to
    get the indefinite leave to remain to which  he  would  otherwise  have
    been entitled. So they asked for him to have leave to remain "... for a
    further period during which time he  hopes  to  sit  and  complete  the
    test". While it might have been more helpful to the  decision-maker  if
    they had expressly referred to paragraph 116 of the policy,  they  were
    certainly asking for something it entitled the appellant to have, since
    the lack of a valid test certificate formed the only basis for  refusal
    under paragraph 284.

 5. Permission was given mainly on the basis that the  judge  had  taken  a
    wrong approach to s. 117B (6) of the Immigration Act 2014:

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child,

             (b)    and it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

    By s. 117D (1),

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
         who-

               a) is a British citizen, or

               b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
                  seven years or more;

 6. Mr Kandola's argument on this point was effectively on the  basis  that
    expressio unius, exclusio alterius: the sponsor's son was  clearly  too
    old to be a 'qualifying child', and there was no  provision  equivalent
    to s. 117B (6) for a 'qualifying partner'. In fact  s.117B  is  neutral
    about 'qualifying partners' in the case of an applicant  with  existing
    leave, and only provides at (4) that

         Little weight should be given to-

             ...

             (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

 7. In my view the reason for s. 117B (6) appearing in the form it does  is
    that it is designed to allow someone here without leave to benefit from
    a relationship with a 'qualifying child', where little  weight  may  be
    given to one with a partner. Clearly  the  reason  is  that  the  child
    cannot be held responsible for the relationship having grown  up  while
    the applicant is here without leave. So there was no error  of  law  on
    the part of the judge on the basis of s. 117B, as referred  to  in  the
    grant of permission.

 8. The judge's use of EX.1 (b) is another matter: this applies where

         ... the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen ... and there are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    The judge considered that provision in the light of what  had  by  then
    appeared as EX.2, not dealt with in the Home Office grounds  or  by  Mr
    Kandola.  She  set  out   the   relevant   parts   at   paragraph   42:
    'insurmountable  obstacles'  are  defined  as   including   "...   very
    significant difficulties ... which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

 9. However, even on that basis I consider, in  view  of  the  age  of  the
    sponsor's son, her clear continuing links with China (see  the  judge's
    paragraph 11) and her preference for giving her evidence  in  Mandarin,
    that Mr Kandola was entitled to describe  the  result  reached  by  the
    judge on 'insurmountable obstacles' as perverse. That means of  course,
    in the legal sense, not one she could reasonably have  reached  on  the
    evidence before her.

10. On the other hand, I have no doubt that, in dealing with the refusal in
    hand, the judge did not need  to  resort  to  Article  8  at  all.  The
    appellant had asked for something to  which  he  was  clearly  entitled
    under the policy in force, and at the date of the decision under appeal
    should have been given what I am about to direct. He should  take  care
    to pass an approved English-language test before he  next  applies,  as
    the policy may change from time to time.

Home Office appeal : first-tier decision set aside

Decision re-made: appeal allowed; direction for appellant  to  be  given  30
months' leave to remain from 27 March 2014






                               [pic]
                               (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


