
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA 17038 2013
                                                               IA 17041 2013
                                                               IA 17046 2013
                                                               IA 17053 2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2013                            |On 30 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Nabeel Sabir
                                Nadia Nabeel
                                Moazan Nabeel
                                Asif Munawar
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  by  four  people  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse them leave to remain in the
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur category of the Immigration Rules.  The  respondents
    are all citizens of Pakistan.  The four respondents are made up  of  two
    potential entrepreneurs and their immediately dependent relatives.

 2. These are cases which clearly concerned the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    and they concern me. It is clear from the  evidence  that  both  of  the
    attempted entrepreneurs have gone  to  considerable  trouble  to  extend
    their stay in the United Kingdom as business people. They arrived in the
    United Kingdom lawfully as students and they  have  been  successful  in
    their studies.

 3. There are many  requirements  in  the  Rules  relating  to  entering  or
    remaining as entrepreneurs.  They are confusing and, as Mr  Iqbal  said,
    very easy to get wrong.  These appellants satisfied the  Rules  in  most
    respects including what might be thought the most stringent requirement;
    they had access to very substantial sums of  capital  to  finance  their
    proposed business.

 4. However there was something they got very badly  wrong.   They  did  not
    comply with the requirements of the Rules relating to the production  of
    an advertisement of the services of the proposed business.   There  were
    other things that concerned the Secretary of State when  she  considered
    the application but the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  resolved  those  in
    favour of the respondents to this appeal and no one has  suggested  that
    she was wrong to do that.

 5. The real problem, which  was  identified  correctly  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge, is that the  present  respondents  did  not  provide  an
    advertisement in the Yellow Pages showing their names.  This was not  in
    itself suspicious.  They said, possibly with considerable justification,
    that they did not see the Yellow Pages as being an important  source  of
    their  business,  but  it  was  a  requirement  of  the  Rules  that  an
    advertisement was produced and no advertisement was  produced.   It  was
    not produced with the application as required because it could  not  be,
    because no such advertisement existed when the application was made.

 6. Passing reference is made in the  grounds  to  the  so-called  "fairness
    principle" but this is nothing to do with the  "fairness"  cases.   They
    sometimes apply where, for example, the Secretary of  State  refuses  an
    application when there is good reason to think  the  person  making  the
    application had complied with  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  but  a
    document had gone astray for some reason.  These cases are not  remotely
    like that.  The fact is the applications in these cases did not meet the
    requirements of the Rules.  If the respondents had organised  themselves
    differently then perhaps they could have done but they did not.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal judge was so concerned about the consequences to
    the present respondents of the appeals being dismissed that she  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds.  She refers  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Whilst I have more than  a  degree
    of sympathy for  the  approach,  and  notwithstanding  Mr  Iqbal's  best
    efforts, I am quite satisfied that she was wrong in law.

 8. Mr Iqbal made reference to the so-called "de  minimis"  principle,  but,
    with great respect, that is nothing to  do  with  this  case.  Mr  Iqbal
    properly drew my attention to the judgment of  Stanley  Burton  L.J.  in
    Miah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  261
    where the learned Lord Justice made the  point  that  if  it  was  a  de
    minimis case it would be allowed under the Rules.  It is not, and should
    not have been and was not.  The doctrine of de minimis is a red  herring
    so far as this appeal is concerned.

 9. There is no doubt that the requirements of the Rules were not  met  and,
    in my judgment, it was wholly inappropriate to allow these appeals under
    human rights grounds.  It really is a misapplication of the law  because
    it is using human rights provision to enable a "near miss"  to  succeed.
    The European Convention on Human Rights is intended to underpin all  law
    and one of its functions is to stand in the way  of  arbitrary  decision
    making or unjustified interference on the parts of  governments  in  the
    lives of citizens.  It is really  very  hard  to  imagine  circumstances
    where an application that fails under the Rules  should  be  allowed  on
    human rights grounds purely because the failure to comply with the Rules
    was very slight.  I will not make myself a hostage to fortune by  saying
    that such a situation could never occur but, if it can, this is not such
    a case.  This is clearly a case of applying wrongly the  so-called  near
    miss arguments and wrongly allowing the appeal.  The  judge  should  not
    have done that.  She erred in law and I set aside the decision.

10. I now have to decide what to do.  The  sole  reason  advanced  on  human
    rights grounds was the interference in not allowing them to  remain  was
    disproportionate to any proper purpose.

11. These are not a cases, for example, of appellants with a United  Kingdom
    citizen wife or husband or children who are  British  nationals  or  who
    have long residence in the United Kingdom being upset by  the  decision.
    These are cases  of  people  who  have  stayed  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully, who want to stay longer and cannot because they do not satisfy
    the requirements of the  Rules.   Certainly  there  is  nothing  in  the
    Immigration Rules which would lead to  their  appeal  being  allowed  on
    human rights grounds and I cannot see any way in  which  they  could  be
    allowed properly under general human rights law principles.

12. No doubt declining to give them  what  they  require  will  lead  to  an
    interference  with  the  private  and  family  lives  of  each  of   the
    respondents but it will  be  lawful  because  that  is  what  the  Rules
    require. I find that it is proportionate, because the Rules are there to
    be followed, they have not been followed and the consequence of them not
    being  followed  usually  is  the  person  who  does  not  satisfy   the
    requirements  of  the  Rules  has  to  go.  There  are   no   extraneous
    circumstances that would point to a different result.

13. I do not know why  the  Secretary  of  State  has  implemented  such  an
    inflexible policy but the policy, embodied in the  rules,  is  perfectly
    plain and I cannot see any basis for deciding that  it  is  unlawful  or
    contrary to the human  rights  of  the  people  concerned  to  make  the
    decision.   The  rules  in  cases  such  as  entrepreneurs  will  almost
    inevitably have an arbitrary element. That is how rules work. Maybe  the
    appellants will want to seek remedy outside the Rules; maybe  they  will
    campaign to change in the Rules. Such things are not matters for me.

14. I cannot uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  plainly
    wrong, and for the same reasons that I find it plainly wrong I  have  to
    go ahead to substitute a decision dismissing the appeals of the original
    applicants.

15. I have to apply the Rule.  I have given my reasons.  If the decision  is
    wrong in law they will no doubt be given proper advice about what to  do
    with it, but I cannot change it because I feel sorry for them.

16. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the respondents' appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.


    |Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 December 2013               |


