
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               Mr Jamal Mathor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Paraskos, Counsel instructed by Kamberley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 26 March 2014 refusing to  issue  a  permanent
    residence card pursuant to the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

2.   On 2 October  2008  when  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  a
    Residence Card, he produced as evidence that he was the  spouse  of  an
    EEA national, an Islamic marriage certificate which  stated  that  they
    were married on 30 August 2008 in Sheffield.  As the  Islamic  marriage
    was not considered to be a valid marriage, his application was assessed
    on his durable relationship as stipulated in Regulation 7(3).   He  was
    consequently issued with a residence card  on  2  August  2010  as  the
    unmarried partner of Tatjana Vorubjova. He was thus an extended  family
    member of Tatjana Vorubjova.  He was informed that he would not qualify
    for permanent residence until five years from  the  date,  that  is,  2
    August 2015, which was the date the respondent recognised  him  as  the
    durable partner/family member of Tatjana Vorubjova.

3.   On 27 January 2014 the appellant's solicitors  applied  on  his  behalf
    for a permanent residence card as a confirmation of a right  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom.  The application was considered under Regulation
    15(1)(b) which states that a family member of an EEA  national  who  is
    not himself an EEA national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom
    with the EEA national in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years shall acquire the right  to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom permanently.

4.   The application was refused because he  was  issued  with  a  residence
    card on 2 August 2010 as the unmarried partner of an EEA  national  and
    therefore would not qualify for permanent residence  until  five  years
    from that date when he was recognised  as  the  durable  partner/family
    member of the EEA national.  It follows from this that the  appellant's
    application made on 27 January 2014 was premature.

5.   The judge in dismissing the appeal held as follows:

         "7.  The appellant having chosen not to have  an  oral  hearing,  I
             have not had the benefit of  hearing  any  evidence  from  the
             appellant or from his  EEA  sponsor.   The  skeleton  argument
             submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  asserts  that   the
             appellant meets all the requirements of EC  Directive  2004/38
             and is entitled to permanent residence, having completed  five
             years of lawful residence in the UK as the family member of an
             EEA worker.  It is claimed that the  appellant  qualified  for
             permanent residence in 2013.

         8.   It is also claimed by the appellant's representatives '... the
             oral evidence as to the facts will not have  much  bearing  on
             the case.'  This is manifestly untrue and there is no  factual
             evidence  of  any  sort  before  me.   There  are  no  witness
             statements (or correspondence) from the appellant or from  his
             EEA sponsor and I have not, of  course,  had  the  benefit  of
             hearing any oral evidence from either of them.  There  is,  in
             fact, a complete dearth of  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
             circumstances and  I  find,  accordingly,  that  he  does  not
             satisfy the requirements  of  Regulation  15(1)(b)  read  with
             Regulation 7(3)."

6.   The grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley stated:

         "3.   It  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may   have
             materially erred in law.  The respondent does  not  appear  to
             contest that the EEA national partner  of  the  appellant  has
             exercised Treaty rights by working for five continuous  years,
             and it is arguable that the respondent accepts  the  appellant
             is currently her durable partner.  It  is  therefore  arguably
             implicit in the respondent's  acceptance  that  he  was  in  a
             durable relationship in 2010 that the respondent had  accepted
             he had in fact cohabited in that relationship for the previous
             two years and thus that in 2013 the  appellant  had  completed
             five years as a durable partner.  This argument has  not  been
             dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal although it was  put  in
             the appellant's skeleton argument which was before them."

7.   Mr Paraskos submitted a brief skeleton argument.

8.   He relied on Regulation 2 which defines residence card  as  meaning  "a
    card issued to a person who is not an EEA national, in accordance  with
    Regulation 17, as proof of the  holder's  right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom as at the date of issue".

9.   Mr Paraskos argued that the appellant met the requirements of having  a
    durable relationship and was accordingly granted a residence card as  a
    family member of an EEA national  in  accordance  with  EEA  Regulation
    8(5).   At  that  stage  the  respondent  recognised  that   they   had
    demonstrated to have been in a durable relationship for  two  years  at
    the date of the application although the two year requirement itself is
    not part of the Directive 2004/83 nor  the  EEA  Regulations.   In  any
    event the date for the recognition that the appellant was in a  durable
    relationship should be from the date of  his  Islamic  marriage  on  30
    August 2008 as at that point he had been recognised  as  residing  with
    his EEA national partner/sponsor.  Therefore the five  year  period  to
    achieve permanent residence should have been taken from 30 August  2008
    and not 2 August 2010 when the respondent accepted that  he  was  in  a
    durable relationship with  his  EEA  partner  and  issued  him  with  a
    residence card.

10.  I rely on Samsam (EEA: revocation and  retained  rights)  Syria  [2011]
    UKUT 00165 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal held at [21] that one of  the
    functions a residence card performs is that it  is  evidence  that  the
    Secretary of State was satisfied at the time it  was  issued  that  the
    holder had rights of residence under EU law.  It follows therefore that
    when the appellant was granted a residence card on 2 August  2010,  the
    respondent was satisfied at the time that he fulfilled the requirements
    as the extended family member of an EEA national under Regulation  7(3)
    which states:

         '... a person who is an extended family member and has been  issued
         with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a  registration  certificate  or  a
         residence card shall  be  treated  as  the  family  member  of  the
         relevant EEA national for as a long as he continues to satisfy  the
         conditions regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that EEA
         national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased  to  be
         valid or been revoked.'

11.  At [22]  of  Samsam,  the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  that  the  Citizens
    Directive Article 11 contemplates that a residence card  is  valid  for
    five years.  Indeed the appellant was granted a residence  card  for  a
    period of 5 years.  I find that the  appellant  is  still  required  to
    prove  that  in  those  five  years,  he  has  been  in  a   continuous
    relationship with the EEA spouse.  It cannot be assumed that because he
    was granted a residence card for 5 years the  respondent  had  accepted
    that he satisfied the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) at  the  time
    he applied for permanent residence.

12.  The appellant submitted evidence to the  respondent  to  establish  the
    EEA spouse was employed over a period of 5 years  from  2008  to  2013.
    There was no evidence before the FtTJ that he had continued  to  reside
    with her in accordance with the regulations for the 5 year period  from
    2008 to 2013, which was the period he was relying on.  In any event the
    application he made in January 2014 was premature because it was  short
    of the 5 year period from the date he was granted the residence card.

13.  I find that the judge did not err in law in her decision.

Notice of Decision

The judge's decision shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
