
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17018/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2015                           |On 19th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               mohammed imran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Ahmed of Trinity Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mill, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Jones made
    following a hearing at Bradford  on  15th  August  2014  at  which  the
    Appellant did not appear and was not represented

Background

 2. The Appellant entered the UK on 14th October 2011 with leave to  remain
    until 14th December 2013.  He applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    but was refused on 25th March 2014 on a number  of  different  grounds.
    By the time of the hearing before Judge Jones only one ground was being
    pursued, namely whether the Appellant could establish a sufficiency  of
    maintenance under paragraph 287 of the old Immigration Rule.

 3. The Presenting Officer before Mr Jones conceded that the P60 which  had
    been produced was genuine, but based his submissions upon doubts  about
    the recent increase in the  Appellant's  wages,  and  argued  that  the
    claimed income had  merely  been  increased  for  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing.

 4. In the Appellant's  absence,  the  judge  agreed  with  the  Presenting
    Officer and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the ground that he had not
    received notification of hearing. Permission to appeal was  granted  on
    that basis by Judge Ransley on 15th October 2014.

The Hearing

 6. Mr Mills said that he was content to accept that the Appellant had  not
    received the notice of hearing.  He had attended a previous hearing and
    there would have been no good reason for him not to attend the  hearing
    before Judge Jones had he been aware of it.

 7. The judge made a procedural error, albeit through no fault of his  own,
    in proceeding in the absence of the Appellant and his decision  is  set
    aside.

 8. The Appellant's employer attended court and explained  in  his  witness
    statement that Mr Imran was initially employed as  a  garage  assistant
    until his promotion to  assistant  mechanic  on  1st  April  2014.   He
    confirmed that he had issued two employer letters as requested and that
    the signatures on both were his.

 9. Mr Mills,  on  that  basis,  conceded  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules and conceded that  the  appeal  ought  to  be
    allowed.

Decision

10. The original judge erred in law.   The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
