
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17961/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                 ISAAC ANNAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel instructed by Morgan Hall
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

There was no application for anonymity in this case.

The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 11 November  1974.  This  matter
came before me on 10 August 2015 when I set aside  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell allowing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
decision of the Respondent made on 19 March 2014 to refuse to grant  an  EEA
Residence Card. The refusal was  on  the  basis  that  the  requirements  of
Regulations  7  and  8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
Regulations 2006('The Regulations') were not met in so far as  the  decision
related to the validity of the Appellant's marriage to Christiana Serwaa  an
Austrian citizen under Austrian law. I also indicated that if  the  marriage
was not valid under Austr4ina law I would go  on  to  consider  whether  the
Appellant and his wife were in a durable relationship  for  the  purpose  of
regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations as  no  findings  had  been  made  in
relation to that. I preserved the finding that the marriage  was  recognised
under Ghanaian law.

Application for an Adjournment

At the start of the hearing, the Appellant's Representative Mr Khan  applied
for an adjournment on the ground that there was no evidence to  address  the
issue of whether the marriage was valid under Austrian law. He  stated  that
the Appellant's wife had travelled to Vienna last week  and  had  been  told
that they would make enquiries of the Ghanaian authorities and come back  to
her. He had no documentary evidence of  this  either  in  the  form  of  any
correspondence to or from the Austrian authorities or from  his  instructing
solicitors indicating to her what was required.

 I asked Mr Khan both why  instructing  Solicitors  had  not  provided  this
evidence 7 days before the date of hearing as they had been directed  to  do
after the hearing on the 10th August 2015 and why  they  did  not  make  the
enquiries themselves so  there  would  have  been  a  paper  trail.  I  also
indicated that of course the evidence should have  been  provided  with  the
original application or with the grounds of appeal, or before the  Judge  of
the First-tier, or before me on 10 August 2015. I also indicated that  there
were also no witness statements and no further evidence  of  the  durability
of the relationship.

Mr Whitwell objected to the application for an adjournment. He  argued  that
the issues in the case had always been clear.  Much  of  the  evidence  that
would normally be produced in order to establish  that  parties  were  in  a
durable relationship was available in the United Kingdom and had never  been
produced. He  produced  an  email  dated  28  October  2015  sent  to  those
representing the Appellant reminding them  that  the  required  evidence  in
relation to the validity of the marriage in Austria  or  the  durability  of
the relationship had not been produced and requesting a bundle prior to  the
court hearing. There was no response to that  email  or  to  the  follow  up
phone calls that he made.

Pursuant to the overriding objective and the  Procedure  Rules  I  must  not
adjourn a hearing of  an  appeal  on  the  application  of  a  party  unless
satisfied that the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined. It  is  for
the party applying for an adjournment to produce evidence  of  any  fact  or
matter relied upon in support of the application and to show good cause  why
an adjournment is necessary.  That  has  not  been  shown  and  I  therefore
refused  the  application.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  his
representatives had been given ample opportunity to  prepare  the  case  and
produce the required evidence not  all  of  which  was  even  required  from
abroad.

Late Evidence

At the start of the hearing there was an application on  behalf  of  the  Mr
Khan to admit  late  evidence,  which  was  not  filed  in  accordance  with
directions - specifically internet extracts in relation  to  Austrian  legal
requirements for valid marriages. I indicated to Mr Khan  that  one  of  the
extracts related to Australian law so was irrelevant. The other  related  to
the position of Austrians who married Australians and was  dated  2013.  The
Appellant is not an Australian. I  also  indicated  that  even  where  I  to
consider it the extract indicated that there was 'usually' a requirement  of
a 'certificate of no impediment' to marriage for a  valid  marriage  outside
Austria and there was no evidence before me that  this  was  a  case  either
where one had been obtained or was not required.

The Law

The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant to establish any  EEA
right of admission or residence and  the  standard  of  proof  is  upon  the
balance of probability.

In relation to the relevant date I have considered Boodhoo and another  (EEA
Regs: relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC) where it was held  that  in
an EEA appeal, a tribunal has  power  to  consider  any  evidence  which  it
thinks relevant to the substance of the decision, including  evidence  which
concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.

In relation to proxy marriages generally I have taken into account the  most
recent authority Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  24(IAC)
where it was held in so far as it is relevant to this case that

      i) A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who  is  a  qualified
         person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement and
         residence if proof of the marital relationship is provided;

     ii) The production of a marriage  certificate  issued  by  a  competent
         authority (that is, issued according to the  registration  laws  of
         the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
         sufficient. If not in English (or Welsh in relation to  proceedings
         in Wales), a certified translation of the marriage certificate will
         be required;

    iii) A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not raise
         a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless  it  has
         been issued by an authority with legal power to create  or  confirm
         the facts it attests:

     iv) In appeals where there is no such  marriage  certificate  or  where
         there is doubt that a marriage certificate has  been  issued  by  a
         competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
         other evidence. This will require the Tribunal to determine whether
         a marriage was contracted;

      v) In such an appeal, the starting point will be to decide  whether  a
         marriage was contracted between the  appellant  and  the  qualified
         person according to the national law of  the  EEA  country  of  the
         qualified person's nationality;

     vi) In all such situations, when resolving issues that arise because of
         conflicts of law, proper respect must be  given  to  the  qualified
         person's rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the
         right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence;

    vii) It  should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of  proof.  Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will,  for
         similar reasons, carry no weight; (my bold)

   viii) These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person is a
         spouse for the purposes of EU law. It  does  not  relate  to  other
         relationships that might be regarded as similar to  marriage,  such
         as civil partnerships or durable relationships.

Evidence

On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason  for
refusal letter. The Appellant  put  in  an  appeal  and  following  that  no
further  evidence  was  provided  to  the  Tribunal.  I  gave  Mr  Khan  the
opportunity  to  take  witness  statements  from  both  the  Appellant   and
Christiana Serwaa and adjourned for an hour to allow him to do so.

I heard evidence from the Appellant and Ms Serwaa. There is a full  note  of
that evidence in the record of proceedings.

Mr Whitwell and Mr  Khan  made  final  submissions  and  I  took  them  into
account.

Findings

On balance and taking the evidence as a whole, I have reached the  following
findings

The Appellant is a 40  year  old  citizen  of  Ghana  who  has  applied  for
Residence Card as the spouse of a European Economic  Area  national  who  is
exercising rights of free movement under the Treaty of Rome  in  the  United
Kingdom.

I preserved a  finding  that  the  proxy  marriage  contracted  between  the
Appellant and Ms Serwaa who is an Austrian citizen was valid  in  Ghana.  In
relation to whether the marriage is valid in Austria  I  am  satisfied  that
the Appellant has not met the evidential burden  of  establishing  that  the
marriage is valid under Austrian law. Even had I been prepared  to  consider
the internet evidence produced by Mr Khan it fell far  short  of  being  the
persuasive and authoritative evidence as set out in Kareem. Discounting  the
extract that referred  solely  to  the  situation  in  Australia  the  other
extract was from the Austrian Embassy in Canberra and  appeared  to  address
the  situation  of  Australians  marrying  Austrians  not  British  citizens
marrying Austrians and set out a number of other requirements that were  not
addressed or discounted in the evidence before me.

In relation to whether  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Serwaa  are  in  a  durable
relationship for the purpose of the EEA Regulations I note  that  given  the
claim that they have been together since  2009  there  was  no  up  to  date
documentary evidence produced to me to show that they are  in  a  continuing
and durable relationship and that the Appellant is still living at a  common
address with Ms Serwaa and sharing a common life together.

In assessing the credibility of the claim that the Appellant and  Ms  Serwaa
are in a durable  relationship  I  have  had  to  assess  their  credibility
generally as to whether they  do  more  than  share  a  common  address  but
actually have a substantive relationship, a shared life and I found both  to
be unreliable witnesses given that there were significant  discrepancies  in
their evidence and concluded that  they  were  not  in  fact  in  a  durable
relationship but were attempting simply to secure residence rights  for  the
Appellant . Mr Khan urged me to consider that Ms Serwaa was hesitant  giving
evidence because she was nervous and while I accept  that  she  was  nervous
the simple issues where the inconsistencies arose were matters  that  should
have been capable of being answered by  both  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
consistently if they were telling the truth. Thus for example:

When asked whether Ms Serwaa had  any  children  and  where  they  lived  he
stated that there were 3 girls: Levin aged 10, Meyfre aged 24,  and  Nichola
aged 11 and they all lived with him and Ms Serwaa,  By  contrast  Ms  Serwaa
said the children were called Nichola aged 11, Francesca aged 10 and  Meyfre
aged 24 and that Meyfre lived in  Leeds.  Had  they  genuinely  been  living
together as a couple I would expect  that  the  Appellant  would  know  that
Meyfre did not live with Ms Serwaa.

I also noted that when the Appellant was asked whether  Ms  Serwaa  had  met
his parents in Ghana he was very  hesitant  and  evasive  in  answering  the
question finally stating they met in 2014 and 2012. Ms  Serwaa  by  contrast
said 2014 and 2002 and indeed Mr Whitwell wrote 2002 on a piece of paper  to
ensure there was no confusion in the date.

I have considered the issue of anonymity in the  present  instance.  Neither
party has  sought  a  direction.  The  Appellant  is  an  adult  and  not  a
vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.

Conclusion

I find that the Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof on  him  to
show that the terms regulation 7 and 8 of the Regulations are met.

I therefore find that the decision of the Respondent appealed against is  in
accordance with the law and the applicable Regulations.

 No order for anonymity is made.

 DECISION

The appeal in respect of the EEA Regulations is dismissed.


Signed   Date 2.11.2015

D Birrell
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 2.11.2015

Debra Birrell
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
