
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17276/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 10 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MARIE WENDY JESSICA MOOROOGEN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team.
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright of Counsel instructed by Shahnaz &
                    Partners, Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Applicant, is a citizen of
    Mauritius born on 24 July 1984.  She is married and  with  her  husband
    has a child born in 2007.  On 8 December 2005 she arrived and was given
    leave to enter as a visitor.  Before  expiry  of  her  visit  visa  she
    applied for further leave as a  student  which  on  3  April  2006  was
    refused with no in-country right of appeal.

 2. On 7 June 2006, immediately prior to expiry of her visit visa, she made
    a further application for further leave as a student which on 3  August
    2006 was also refused with no in-country right of appeal.

 3. The Applicant next applied on 13  June  2011  for  discretionary  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules (the Rules)  based  on  her  private  and
    family life which on 10 August 2011  was  refused  with  no  in-country
    right of appeal.  Subsequent to further representations made on 6 March
    2014, the Appellant (the SSHD) made a further decision on 27 March 2014
    refusing her claim by way of  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and on the basis that the SSHD  did  not  accept  the
    Applicant "enjoys a family life in the UK or that her private  life  is
    sufficiently compelling to warrant allowing her to  remain  here".  The
    SSHD rejected her claim on human rights grounds and made  decisions  to
    remove the Applicant, her husband and child under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The Decision

 4. By a letter of 27 March 2014 (the reasons letter)  the  SSHD  explained
    why the Applicant had  been  refused  further  leave.   She  noted  the
    Applicant and her husband did not meet the appropriate requirements  of
    the Rules for further leave and in particular Appendix FM.   Her  child
    born in 2007 at the date of the decision had spent all of the six years
    of his life in the United Kingdom but could return  to  Mauritius  with
    the parents as a family unit.  Such a return would not breach the  duty
    of the State to have regard to the welfare  of  the  child  imposed  by
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 5. The Applicant and indeed her husband and  child  had  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom beyond the expiry of her leave to enter.  It was in  the
    best interests of her child to remain with the parents and  the  family
    unit could return to Mauritius where the  parents  had  spent  most  of
    their life and been educated.  They could easily re-adapt to life there
    with the child.

 6. The Applicant did not meet  the  requirements  as  to  length  of  stay
    imposed by paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and there  was  no  compelling
    evidence to show the Applicant's private life could  not  be  continued
    and maintained in or from Mauritius.  Any inconvenience caused by their
    return would not amount to an interference  of  sufficient  gravity  to
    engage the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8.

 7. On 9 April 2014 the Applicant, but not her  husband  or  child,  lodged
    notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are lengthy and
    in summary assert the SSHD failed to take into account  all  the  facts
    and circumstances of her case.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 8. By a decision promulgated on 14 November 2014, Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal S Aziz dismissed the Applicant's appeal under  the  Rules  but
    allowed it under Article 8 of the European Convention.

 9. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    failed properly and lawfully to balance  the  interests  of  the  child
    against the countervailing public interest factors.  The best interests
    of the child were a, but not the, primary consideration.  Further,  the
    Judge had concluded that because the child had started education in the
    United Kingdom the child would endure undue difficulty in relocating to
    Mauritius which was an error in the light of what the Supreme Court had
    said in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.  Further, the Judge had erred in
    separating the public interest  considerations  identified  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act  from  his  consideration  in  the  round  of  the
    Applicant's claim under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  and
    consequently the Judge's assessment was flawed.

10. On 6 January 2014 Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Zucker
    granted the SSHD permission  to  appeal,  principally  because  it  was
    arguable the Judge had erred in law in his understanding of the  effect
    of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

The Upper Tribunal Error of Law Hearing

11. The Appellant and her husband were present.  Mr  Tarlow  for  the  SSHD
    relied on the grounds for permission to appeal which he submitted  were
    well-composed.  The Applicant's child was not a British citizen and had
    not resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years.   The  Judge's
    treatment of the considerations identified in Section 117B of the  2002
    Act was in error and his finding at paragraph 59 of his  decision  that
    the child was 7 at the date of the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    was wrong.  I noted that in fact the child was under 7 at the  date  of
    the application and at the date of the decision but by the time of  the
    hearing the child was 7 years old.

12. For the Applicant Mr Plowright submitted that there was  nothing  wrong
    with the legal approach which the Judge had taken and  so  he  had  not
    made an error of law.

13. He had noted at paragraph 11 of his decision the parties agreed the key
    issue was whether the Applicant fell within the provisions  of  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act which at paragraph 52 he had set out in full.

14. The Applicant had made her application before 9 July 2012  and  so  was
    entitled to the benefit of the transitional provisions.  There had been
    an earlier decision on 27 March  2011  but  the  SSHD  had  not  issued
    removal directions and so there had been no appeal.  He did not address
    the point that the Applicant had had no right to an in-country appeal.

15. I enquired if the real issue was whether it would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom and relocate in  Mauritius
    as had been identified at paragraph 66 of  the  Judge's  decision.   Mr
    Plowright submitted it would be unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave.  He accepted some Judges might have considered it would  not  be
    unreasonable but Judge Aziz in  this  case  had  decided  it  would  be
    unreasonable for which he had given adequate reasoning and consequently
    the SSHD's application for permission to appeal  amounted  to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the Judge.

16. In response Mr Tarlow submitted  the  key  issue  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave having  regard  to  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of proper immigration  control.   The  SSHD
    had  clearly  identified  this  at  paragraph  4  of  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal.  The Judge had failed  to  take  account  of  the
    totality of the public interest and this was a material error of law.

Error of Law Decision

17. I took time to consider whether there was a material error  of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal determination.  I accepted the submission  that
    Section 117B(6) required various factors had to be taken  into  account
    or that in respect of certain factors less or little weight  should  be
    given to them.  I rejected the submission made for the  Applicant  that
    the legislation provided that the public interest required a  child  to
    stay unless the various circumstances or requirements of  Section  117B
    were satisfied.  Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act set out considerations
    which needed to be taken into account by a Judge when assessing whether
    a decision rejecting a claim under Article 8 of the European Convention
    was proportionate to any of the legitimate public objectives identified
    in Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

18. At paragraph 65 of his decision the Judge had failed adequately to take
    into account the considerations referred to in Section 117.   The  only
    evidence of private and family life  before  the  Judge  had  been  the
    assertion that the Applicant, her husband  and  their  child  formed  a
    family unit and documentary evidence relating to the child's schooling.
     The Judge had  not  made  any  positive  findings  in  favour  of  the
    Applicant in respect of her private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Judge had not considered whether it would be in the  best
    interests of the child to return to Mauritius with both the parents  as
    part of a family unit, even if the facilities for health and  education
    in Mauritius may not be of the same quality  as  those  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

19. The Judge had erred at paragraph 68 of his decision in stating that the
    main focus was on the child.  The best interests of the  child  were  a
    primary interest but not the main focus.  Although at the date  of  the
    hearing before the Judge it was the case the child  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for just over seven years, the Judge had failed to  take
    account of the fact that the seven years  included  the  years  between
    birth and starting school so that the number of  years  the  child  had
    been in education and engaging with the wider world outside his  family
    was limited.

20. Taking  these  matters  into  account  I  found  the  Judge's  decision
    contained a material error of law such that its conclusions  should  be
    set aside.  Both representatives stated they were ready to proceed to a
    substantive re-consideration of the case because  the  re-consideration
    would consist only of submissions.

The Substantive Re-Consideration

21. For the Applicant  Mr  Plowright  conceded  she  and  her  husband  had
    overstayed as visitors and had worked in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    permission.  These aspects of the Applicant's immigration history  were
    points properly taken by the SSHD but did not amount to what  had  been
    described as "an appalling immigration history".

22. There had been no challenge to the parental  relationship  between  the
    Applicant and her husband and their child.  The  Judge  had  identified
    the  relevant  aspects  at  paragraphs  24-31  of  his  decision.   The
    Applicant and her family had not  relied  on  public  funds  and  these
    matters must be weighed against the adverse factors  to  which  he  had
    already referred.

23. The child would be 8 within a few months and it was not his fault  that
    he did not have lawful leave to remain.  He had spent all of  his  life
    in the United Kingdom and the majority of the time he  had  spent  here
    could be considered to have been formative years.  Taking these matters
    into account, the removal of the Applicant and her family would  amount
    to an interference with their family life disproportionate to the  need
    to maintain proper immigration control.

24. For the SSHD Mr Tarlow relied on the reasons letter of 27  March  2014.
    The Applicant and her family had continued to remain unlawfully in  the
    United Kingdom, their child was only just at the age of 7 entering what
    could be termed "the formative years" in that it was only now he  would
    be moving out of the home circle and beginning to establish himself  at
    school and in the wider world.  The Applicant would be removed with her
    husband and her child as a family unit.  It was in the  best  interests
    of the child to remain with the parents and it was reasonable to expect
    the parents to return to Mauritius and for them  to  take  their  child
    with them.  The appeal should be dismissed.

25. Mr Plowright indicated that he had no further submissions to make and I
    reserved my decision.

Findings and Consideration

26. The standard of proof is the civil standard; that is on the balance  of
    probabilities.  The burden of proof is on  the  Applicant  and  matters
    subsequent to the date of the decision may be taken into account.

27. The Applicant married in Mauritius in March  2003.   She  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in December 2005 with her husband and  their  child  was
    born in 2007.  I attach no weight to the claim made in paragraph  8  of
    the husband's statement about the difficulties experienced in Mauritius
    because he is Hindu and she is a  Christian.   They  met,  married  and
    spent a further two and three quarter years in Mauritius before  coming
    as visitors to the United Kingdom.  There  was  no  other  evidence  of
    difficulties they had experienced because  theirs  was  a  mixed  faith
    marriage.

28. The Applicant and her husband have had no right to remain in the United
    Kingdom since the decision of 3 August 2006.   It  was  almost  another
    five years before they made the application which led to a  refusal  in
    respect of which their further representations initiated  the  decision
    under appeal.  There was no evidence of their private and  family  life
    beyond the fact that she is in a family unit with her husband and child
    and that the child is now attending school.  There was no evidence that
    it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  the  Applicant  and  her
    family to relocate back to Mauritius.

29. Adopting the approach to appeals on grounds of Article 8 summarised  at
    paragraphs 7-12 of EB (Kosovo) v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41,  I  find  the
    Applicant has established a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her proposed removal with her husband and her child would  be
    an interference with that private and  family  life  but  not  of  such
    gravity as to engage the State's obligations under  Article  8.   There
    was no suggestion that any interference  would  be  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with the law and  for  the  legitimate  public  end  of  the
    economic well-being of the United Kingdom  and  the  need  to  maintain
    proper immigration control.

30. There  remains  the  assessment  whether  the  decision  to  remove  is
    proportionate to the  need  to  maintain  proper  immigration  control.
    Given the findings of fact already made I do not conclude that  removal
    would be disproportionate.  Accordingly, the substantive  appeal  falls
    to  be  dismissed.  If  I  am  wrong  and  the  interference  would  be
    sufficiently great to engage the State's obligations then I find  that,
    having regard to what the Court of Appeal said at paragraphs 60 and  61
    of EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ.874  and  all  the  evidence
    before me which was quite limited, it would not be disproportionate  to
    the need to maintain proper immigration control to return the Applicant
    with her husband and child as a family unit to Mauritius.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law such that its conclusions are  set  aside.   No  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules was prosecuted.

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 09. iii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE SSHD:
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed so no fee award may be made.

Signed/Official Crest  Date 09. iii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

