
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17730/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2015                                |On 26 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                IRFAN HAIDER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      None
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant entered the UK as a student  on  26  September  2012.
         This leave expired on 30 January 2014 and he made an application to
         extend his leave on 28 January 2014.  In a decision dated 31  March
         2014 the SSHD  refused  to  vary  the  appellant's  leave  and  the
         appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Procedural history

      2. This is a matter that has previously been considered by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Smith having heard from the appellant at  a  hearing
         on 23 September 2014.  The Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
         under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

      3. Permission to appeal against this decision  was  granted  by  Judge
         Scott Baker on 20 March 2015 on the basis that the  Judge  arguably
         failed to engage with available evidence  from  the  appellant  and
         Nottingham Business School

      4. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
         law.

Hearing

      5. The appellant did not attend the hearing and was  not  represented.
         Mr McVeety asked me to dismiss the appeal.

      6. Judge Smith clearly describes the appellant as having confirmed  at
         the hearing that he has  completed  all  the  requirements  of  the
         course and has qualified and the only basis for his application  to
         remain is in order to attend the graduation [10].  I  have  checked
         the record of proceedings.  This is entirely  consistent  with  the
         decision in that it appears that the appellant's only  concern  was
         to be able to attend his graduation.

      7. The 2014 documentation  referred  to  by  Judge  Scott  Baker  when
         granting permission relate  to  outdated  matters.   The  appellant
         clearly confirmed the only reason for requesting  an  extension  of
         his stay was to attend his graduation. The Judge  was  entitled  to
         consider the issue relied upon by the appellant at the  hearing  as
         the basis for his argument that he should be permitted to remain in
         the UK under Article 8.  It is very clear that whilst the appellant
         relied upon other matters in  the  past  relevant  to  illness  and
         needing further time to pass his course, these had  been  resolved.
         Indeed the Judge was aware of these  other  matters  and  confirmed
         that the appellant now 'simply  wishes  to  attend  his  graduation
         ceremony' [9].

      8. The Judge was entitled to address this issue only and to find  that
         the decision not to vary leave did not constitute a breach  of  the
         Immigration Rules or Article 8.  Any error in the Judge's  approach
         to Article  8  is  not  a  material  one.   On  the  most  generous
         application of Article 8 to  this  appellant's  circumstances,  the
         appeal was bound to fail.

Decision

      9. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law.

     10. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 15 May 2015

