
[pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17045/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th November 2014                         |14th November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
             DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

                               MR MAXWELL SONU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath ( Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Beyebenwo (Legal representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Wilsher) determined on the papers and promulgated  on  4th  July
    2014.  The appellant in this matter is the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department. For ease of reference we shall refer to the  appellant
    as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr Sonu as "the claimant".



Background

 2. The claimant was born on 15th February 1983 and is a citizen of Ghana.

 3. The Secretary of State refused his application  for  a  residence  card
    under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006   by   reference   to
    Regulations 7 and 8.  The reasons given for the refusal were  that  the
    claimant failed to provide evidence to show that his proxy marriage  in
    Ghana to a French national was lawful according to Ghanaian law (as the
    parties needed to show that they were of Ghanaian  descent);  that  the
    statutory declaration was defective; and that the guidelines in  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages- EU law)[2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) were  not  met.  There
    was also said to be insufficient evidence of cohabitation to  show,  in
    the alternative, that the parties were in a durable relationship.

 4. In a determination made in the context of those reasons for refusal the
    Tribunal observed that no issue was taken by  the  Secretary  of  State
    with regard to the failure to comply  with  French  law  showing  legal
    recognition of the marriage in France: paragraph 2.

 5. The Tribunal  found  that  the  evidence  established  that  the  proxy
    marriage was lawfully conducted and registered. It further  found  that
    there was some  evidence  of  cohabitation  and  that  the  spouse  was
    pregnant: paragraph 6. In conclusion the Tribunal dealt with Kareem  on
    the basis that the Secretary of State had  considered  the  application
    under English law and her failure to refer to the relevant  EU  law  in
    the decision letter amounted  to  a  concession  that  the  spouse  was
    domiciled in the UK: Paragraph 7.

Grounds for permission

 6. The First-tier decision was sent to the wrong address. The Secretary of
    State submitted that the application should be treated as  in  time  or
    that time should be extended  under  Rule  24(4)(Asylum  &  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

 7. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that, following  Kareem,
    the starting point was to consider the validity of the  marriage  under
    the law of France, the relevant EU State. The  Tribunal  was  wrong  to
    infer from the refusal letter that the Secretary of State had  conceded
    that the spouse's domicile  was  now  in  the  UK,  especially  without
    further hearing from the Secretary of State on these issues.

 8. It was also submitted that the Tribunal was wrong to place reliance  on
    two unreported decisions without following  the  Practice  direction  -
    Citation of unreported Determinations (no. 11 of February 2010).

 9. The claimant submitted a Rule 24 response opposing the application.  He
    submitted  that  the  Tribunal  conducted  itself   appropriately   and
    interpreted the case of Kareem correctly.  The claimant also  submitted
    that the application was out of time and should be struck out  on  that
    ground alone.

Permission

10. Permission to appeal was granted by FTJ Hollingsworth on 17th September
    2014 on grounds that the Tribunal failed to consider the position under
    EU law and arguably  erred  by  inferring  that  this  issue  had  been
    conceded by the Secretary of State.

11. Nothing was said in the decision granting permission  to  appeal  about
    the extension of time sought by the Secretary of State. That meant that
    we had to consider for ourselves whether the appeal was out of time and
    if so, whether an extension should be granted.

The hearing

12. We shortly resolved the  issue  of  timeliness  having  calculated  the
    relevant days and concluding that in any event the application  was  in
    fact in time, and was rightly treated as in time by the Judge  granting
    permission.

Submissions

13. Mr Nath argued that the substantive issue was  a  discrete  point;  the
    Tribunal failed to consider the legal recognition of  the  marriage  in
    French law, following Kareem  as specified in the headnote at (g).  The
    bundle for the hearing, amounting to 153 pages, was not served  on  the
    Secretary of State. The Secretary of State had at no time indicated any
    concession as inferred by the Tribunal.

14. Moreover, the claimant relied on two unreported cases, Kumi and Amoako.
    The Tribunal had not adhered to the  relevant  practice  direction.  It
    should have drawn those cases to  the  attention  of  the  parties  and
    invited submissions from  their  representatives  before  reaching  any
    decision based upon them.

15. Mr Beyebenwo submitted that the Tribunal correctly followed Kareem with
    reference to the headnote  at  (d).  He  contended  that  on  the  true
    interpretation of Kareem, and in particular paragraph 68, it  was  only
    necessary to go on to consider the law of the relevant EU state in  the
    event that the marriage was not considered to be lawful. So far as  the
    unreported cases were  concerned,  Mr  Beyebenwo  submitted  that  they
    indicated that under Ghanaian law a Ghanaian customary marriage may  be
    recognized even if one of the parties to it is  not  Ghanaian.  However
    the Tribunal did not rely upon either of those authorities in order  to
    reach its decision. Thus any failure to follow the Practice  Direction,
    whilst regrettable, was not material to the determination. The Tribunal
    addressed the concerns expressed by the  Secretary  of  State  and  its
    conclusion that the marriage was valid under Ghanaian law was one  that
    was open to it on the evidence.

Discussion and conclusions

16. We find that the Tribunal erred in a material  respect  in  failing  to
    follow the guidelines in Kareem which was before the Tribunal and which
    has been clarified in TA & Others [2014] UKT 00316.  The  Tribunal  was
    not entitled to infer that the Secretary of State had made a concession
    as to the sponsor's nationality or domicile.  No  such  concession  had
    been made and no such inference could be drawn from the refusal letter.



17. There was no evidence before  the  Tribunal  to  show  that  the  proxy
    marriage was legally recognised in accordance with  French  law,  which
    had to be the starting point in this case, as in all such  cases,  even
    if the marriage satisfied  all  the  requirements  for  validity  under
    Ghanaian law.  We further find that the Tribunal failed to  follow  the
    terms of the Practice Direction  no  11  in  taking  into  account  two
    unreported  cases  without  forewarning  the  parties.  We  cannot   be
    satisfied that this error was immaterial or that the Tribunal placed no
    reliance upon cases that it expressly cited in the determination.

18. We are satisfied that the Tribunal should have gone on to consider,  in
    the  alternative,  the  application  of  Regulation  8(5)  as  to   the
    durability of the relationship.  It  made  some  positive  comments  at
    paragraph 7 but did not give any proper consideration to  the  evidence
    or issue. We have also taken into account that the Secretary  of  State
    did not have the  opportunity  to  consider  the  153  page  bundle  of
    documents submitted for the hearing.

19. We propose to  set  aside  the  decision  under  Regulation  7  and  to
    substitute a decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  thereunder.   We  issue
    directions for written submissions to be made on the  applicability  of
    Regulation  8(5).   Thereafter  we  will  remake  the  decision   under
    Regulation 8(5) without further hearing.

Notice of Decision

    There is an error of law in the decision.
    We substitute a decision that the appeal is dismissed under  Regulation
    7.
    We direct that within 14 days of receipt of this decision the  claimant
    do serve on the Secretary of State the 153 page bundle  of  documentary
    evidence and evidence relied  on  relevant  to  Regulation  8(5)  in  a
    written submission. Also to be served on the Upper Tribunal.
    The Secretary of State shall within  14  days  thereafter  prepare  and
    serve written submissions on the Claimant and the Upper Tribunal.
    The matter is then to be put before the Tribunal for  consideration  of
    the evidence under Regulation 8(5) on the papers.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 13.11.2014


Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

