
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/17317/2013,
                                                              IA/17324/2013,
                                                              IA/17364/2013,
                                                               IA/17367/2013
                                                               IA/17369/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent                         |
|On 29 April 2014                              |On 2 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               U I, E E, A, B and C (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr T Lay of counsel instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
LLP
For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria and respectively wife, husband
      and their three children. They were born on 20 July 1984, 24 June
      1981, 3 June 2006, 18 October 2008 and 7 February 2013. They have been
      given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier Tribunal
      Judge Wiseman ("the FTTJ") who dismissed their appeals against the
      respondent's decisions of 29 April 2013 to remove them from the UK
      following the refusal of their applications for leave to remain on
      human rights grounds.


   2. The wife claimed to have entered the UK in September 2000 and the
      husband in December 2003. She said that she was brought here with a
      Nigerian family as a housemaid having been homeless in Nigeria. She
      was abused by the father of the family and ran away from them during
      2001. The husband said that he came here to visit his uncle but ran
      away after he had been abused. The couple claimed to have met during
      2004 and to have been together for most of the time since, although
      there had been periods of separation. The husband was arrested for
      affray and, on another occasion, for common assault on his wife but
      charges were not pursued. He has been arrested and convicted for
      shoplifting for which he received a caution and for fraud and related
      offences for which he received a community order. On one occasion he
      attempted to enter the UK, was refused leave to enter and was removed
      to Nigeria. He has attempted to enter the UK using a passport
      belonging to somebody else. He made an application for a visit visa
      which was refused.


   3. The immigration and relationship histories of the husband and wife are
      complicated and recorded in more detail in the determination of the
      FTTJ. He heard the appeals on 3 January 2014. Both parties were
      represented, the appellant by Mr Lay who appeared before me. The FTTJ
      heard evidence from the husband and the wife and submissions from both
      representatives. The appeals were argued on Article 8 human rights
      grounds. The FTTJ concluded that the key relationships were primarily
      within the family unit, that the children could adapt to a new
      lifestyle in Nigeria and that the husband and wife had settled down in
      the UK, increasing their family over the years notwithstanding that
      neither of them had any right to be here. The best argument which
      could be put forward arose because of the best interests of the
      children. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal on Article 8 human rights
      grounds and made no anonymity direction.


   4. The appellants applied for and were refused permission to appeal by a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. However, on renewal to the Upper
      Tribunal, permission to appeal was granted. Whilst permission was
      granted on all grounds there was specific mention of whether the FTTJ
      erred in not considering whether the wife could succeed under
      paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


   5. There is a Rule 24 response from the respondent. Mr Lay submitted a
      copy of his skeleton argument which was before the FTTJ and indicated
      that he would be arguing the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      which were considered by the judge in the First-Tier Tribunal.


   6. Mr Lay relied on these grounds of appeal. It was put to the FTTJ that
      the wife had a strong claim under paragraph 276ADE(vi). He accepted
      her evidence as appeared from paragraph 62. It was not correct to say
      that "the only reason they have any case to put forward at all
      concerns the best interests of the children" (paragraph 66). The FTTJ
      had failed to consider whether the wife had ties in Nigeria and it was
      not open to him to say, in paragraph 67, that she had lost all
      cultural and other ties with her home country. The FTTJ erroneously
      considered the husband and the wife together, without separating out
      their very different circumstances. It appeared that in the mind of
      the FTTJ her position had been adversely affected by his immigration
      and criminal history. This was not a case where husband-and-wife could
      effectively be treated as one because they had always been in a stable
      partnership with an identical or similar immigration history. Under
      paragraph 276 it was necessary for the FTTJ to look at the position at
      the date of the hearing without trying to assess what the future might
      hold. Outside the Immigration Rules it was necessary to try and look
      to the future. There was no mention of the wife's position in Benin
      City before she left Nigeria.


   7. Mr Lay also submitted that the wife's private life was not properly
      considered in the light of the fact that her son had achieved seven
      years continuous residence in this country by the date of the hearing.
      If the wife succeeded on private life grounds under the Immigration
      Rules then this fed into proper consideration of the Article 8 grounds
      outside the Rules. The FTTJ did not properly address the children's
      best interests if they would go to Benin City or anywhere else in
      Nigeria. I was asked to find that there were errors of law, to set
      aside the decision, and to remake it without an adjournment. No
      further evidence was required.


   8. Mr Saunders submitted that there was no clear credibility finding in
      relation to the evidence of the husband all the wife. What was said in
      paragraph 62 did not amount to such findings. The FTTJ had taken the
      evidence of the husband and the wife at its highest and made his
      assessment on that basis. He accepted that the Secretary of State had
      not cross-appealed on the basis that this was an error of law and he
      was not going to argue that it was. The Secretary of State's position
      was that the FTTJ had reached conclusions open to him on all the
      evidence and there was no error of law.


   9. Mr Saunders argued that the final decision in the appeal came down to
      consideration of the family's circumstances on their return to
      Nigeria. It was open to the FTTJ to find, in paragraph 67, that the
      husband and wife had not lost all cultural and other ties with their
      home country. Whilst the FTTJ did not deal with the position of the
      wife separately from that of the family unit there were no clear
      findings which showed that she could succeed on her own. All
      significant Article 8 matters were properly considered and the FTTJ
      was correct to treat the family as a whole. In reply to my question,
      Mr Saunders accepted that the FTTJ should have considered the question
      of paragraph 276ADE in relation to the wife on her own. However, he
      submitted that the question of the family's ties with Nigeria and the
      length of the eldest son's residence in the UK were properly addressed
      in paragraphs 58, 59, 60 and 61. If I was to find that there were
      errors of law he submitted that I should remake the decision without
      hearing further evidence.


  10. In his reply Mr Lay accepted that if I came to the conclusion that
      what was said in paragraph 62 did not amount to clear findings of
      credibility and fact in relation to the evidence of the appellant and
      the wife then there would not be findings on which I could remake the
      decision. However, Mr Lay submitted that there were some findings of
      fact in relation to the evidence of the husband in paragraph 64. The
      question of whether the wife could succeed on Article 8 private life
      grounds under the Immigration Rules was a discrete issue which
      required separate consideration and a separate conclusion. The FTTJ's
      conclusion in relation to ties to Nigeria was not properly or
      adequately addressed in paragraph 67.


  11. I asked the representatives to make any further submissions they
      considered necessary as to the course of action I should take if I
      found that there were errors of law and set aside the decision; were
      the findings of credibility and fact sufficiently clear to enable me
      to do so and were there any other factors which they wished me to take
      into account? Mr Lay submitted that, in addition to the matters he had
      already addressed, the appellants were not legally aided, were not
      likely to be able to obtain legal aid and he was appearing pro bono.
      There was a real risk that if there was a full rehearing they would
      not be able to afford or obtain legal assistance. Neither side had
      raised the question of the adequacy of the findings of credibility and
      fact in grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Mr Saunders did not
      make any further submissions.


  12. I reserved my determination.


  13. The proper course would have been for the FTTJ to make clear findings
      of credibility and fact on all the relevant issues, address and reach
      conclusions on the Article 8 grounds under the Immigration Rules and
      then, if it was thought that they might apply, address and reach
      conclusions on the Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules. I
      find that the Article 8 grounds under the Immigration Rules and
      outside the Immigration Rules have not been separated but conflated.
      In some cases the immigration and personal histories of partners or
      husband-and-wife are so similar and closely interrelated that they can
      be considered as one. This is not such a case. Whilst their histories
      intermingle there are important separate and different elements. For
      example the husband has a very poor immigration history including
      removal from this country, the use of a false passport and criminal
      convictions although these have not been particularly serious. None of
      these factors apply to the wife. If her evidence is believed she was
      homeless and destitute in Nigeria, had lost her parents, was brought
      to this country before she became an adult, was under the control of
      others, suffered serious abuse and then became homeless in this
      country.


  14. Had the FTTJ given separate consideration to the question of whether
      the wife could bring herself within the provisions of paragraph
      276ADE(vi) he would have had to consider whether she was aged 18 years
      or above, had lived continuously in the
   UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
   had no ties
   (Including social, cultural or family) with the country to which she
   would have to go if
   required to leave the UK. Her evidence was that she had no remaining ties
   to Nigeria apart from the fact that she had lived there for a number of
   years whilst a child but against that that she had been homeless and
   destitute and both her parents were dead. The FTTJ only considered her
   position together with that of her husband. Had he fully considered her
   position separately from that of her husband and assessed her evidence
   about this it is difficult to see how he could have concluded that she
   had not lost all cultural and other ties to Nigeria unless that is, he
   disbelieved her evidence.


  15. I am not persuaded that the FTTJ failed to give separate consideration
      to the position of the wife under the provisions of Appendix FM
      because her eldest son had been in the UK for more than seven years
      before the date of the application. This is adequately dealt with in
      paragraph 68.


  16. My conclusion that the FTTJ erred in law by not separately and
      consecutively dealing with the Article 8 grounds is brought into
      sharper focus by the question of how, if I set aside the decision, it
      should be remade. One of the first questions which arises is whether
      in those circumstances the FTTJ made sufficiently clear findings of
      credibility and fact upon which I could base my conclusions. The
      closest I can find to findings of credibility and fact are contained
      in paragraph 62 where the FTTJ said; "I do not lose sight of the fact
      that both these parents may well have somewhat troubled history in
      terms of abuse; there is of course no independent evidence to support
      what they say in that connection but it may well have happened. In
      addition I do not lose sight of the fact that the wife was apparently
      very young when she first came to this country and may have had a
      modest amount of control only over her life some time. All these
      factors carry with them an element of appropriate sympathy." I am
      unable to interpret this as a blanket positive credibility finding
      amounting to an acceptance of all the evidence given by both the
      husband and wife. I also find it difficult to accept that "may well"
      amounts to a positive finding to the required standard.


  17. In these circumstances I conclude that there are insufficiently clear
      findings of credibility and fact for me to remake the decision without
      all the evidence being re-heard. I reach this conclusion with regret
      because I am conscious of the consequences for the appellants who may
      not be able to obtain further legal representation unless continuing
      pro bono assistance is available.


  18. I was not asked to make an anonymity direction at the hearing but in
      the light of a subsequent request I am persuaded that it is
      appropriate to do so to protect the interests of the children. I make
      an order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter
      likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant or any
      members of her family.


  19. Having found that there are errors of law I set aside the decision of
      the FTTJ and direct that the appeal be reheard by a judge in the First-
      Tier Tribunal, other than First-Tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman.





Signed:........................................
Date: 30 April 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
