
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17757/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2013                               |On 7 August 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                                GURJIT SINGH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India where he  was  born  on  5  August
    1992.  He has been  granted permission to appeal against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pirotta  who,  for  reasons  given  in  a
    determination dated 11 December 2012, dismissed his  appeal  against  a
    combined decision by  the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  his  Tier  4
    application for further leave to remain and their decision   to  remove
    the appellant.

 2. The judge decided the case without a hearing (at  the  request  of  the
    appellant's representatives) and concluded that the appellant failed to
    meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rule  relevant  to   his
    application (paragraph 245ZX(c)) and furthermore considered  there  was
    no breach of the appellant's rights under Article 8.

 3. The basis on which permission to appeal was granted was confined to the
    single issue whether the decision to remove the appellant  pursuant  to
    s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was  unlawful.
    Although noted in the  determination  by  the  judge  as  a  basis  for
    challenge (see [13(viii)] of the determination), it was not an issue on
    which she reached a decision.

 4. Pursuant to the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, rule 24
    the  Secretary  of  State  indicated  that  she  did  not  oppose   the
    application for permission to  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the  s.47
    decision was unsafe and invited the Tribunal to allow the appeal on the
    papers without any hearing solely on this point.

 5. Despite that indication the case was listed for hearing, there  was  no
    appearance by the appellant. He is no longer represented.  However I am
    satisfied that he ws served in accordance with the Procedure Rules with
    notice of  hearing.

 6. Miss Pal had nothing to add to the respondent's observation in the rule
    24 response.

 7. My conclusions are as follows. The judge failed,  when  dismissing  the
    appeal, to indicate whether this was against the decision  refusing  to
    vary leave or the decision to remove the appellant or both. In Adamally
    and Jaferi (Section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal  Procedures)  [2012]
    UKUT 00414)(IAC)) the Tribunal  held:

         "When a removal directions is purportedly under Section 47  of  the
         Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act  202  is  made  concurrently
         with the decision refusing further leave:

          i) The section 47 decision is unlawful, but

         ii) The decision would be in need for a separate decision, that

        iii) Still requires determination:

         iv) S.85(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
             brings the two decisions into one appeal, but

          v) S.86 of that Act allows  and  requires  the  determination  to
             reflect differences in outcome."

 8. This approach was approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  Ahmadi
    [2013] EWCA Civ 512.

 9. I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to appreciate the need to determine the appeal  insofar  as  it
    related to each decision.  I  therefore  set  aside  her  decision  and
    proceed to remake it.  I allow the appeal insofar as it relates to  the
    decision under s.47.  Having regard to the sustainable reasons given by
    the judge for concluding that  the  appellant  had  not  made  out  his
    grounds under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention, I dismiss the appeal in relation to the  refusal  to
    vary the appellant's leave.

10. The First-tier Tribunal judge made an anonymity  direction.  I  see  no
    reason for this being continued and none is therefore made in the Upper
    Tribunal.







Signed


                                                           Date   6   August
    2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson                      Dated 6 August 2013
