
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/17101/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th June 2016                           |On 27th July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              MRS TAZEEM AKTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Masih (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge I F Taylor, promulgated on 26th October 2015, following a hearing
    at  Nottingham  Justice  Centre  on  14th   October   2015.    In   the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant's Claim

 2. The Appellant's claim is that she married her husband, Mr Ali Shan,  in
    Pakistan on 1st March 2000 and she then applied for a spouse's visa  to
    come to the UK which was issued to her for  the  period  1st  September
    2004 to 1st September 2006, a  period  of  two  years.   The  Appellant
    entered the UK in 2004 in November.  On  22nd  May  2009,  she  made  a
    settlement application as the spouse of a British  citizen.   This  was
    refused on 3rd June 2010.  The Appellant had no valid leave  to  remain
    when she made her application and she  had  no  right  of  appeal.   It
    seemed from the papers that on 13th October 2010, the Appellant made  a
    reconsideration request in respect of the refusal on 3rd June 2010.  On
    9th January 2015, the Appellant was served with removal directions.  On
    6th February 2015, she made a human rights claim for leave to remain in
    the UK.  The Appellant's human rights claim was refused  by  way  of  a
    refusal letter dated 21st April 2015.

 3. The Appellant's claim is that there has been  an  unconscionable  delay
    between the date of reconsideration request of 13th  October  2010  and
    22nd January 2014 when the request was responded to.  She  claims  that
    under Appendix  FM,  in  particular  EX1(b)  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life if she were to go outside the United  Kingdom.
    Under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into  the  country
    to which she would have to go.  In relation to  Article  8  there  were
    compelling circumstances to justify Article 8 consideration outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The judge went on to consider why there had been over a two  year  long
    delay in the Appellant seeking to regularise her immigration status and
    found that it was not credible to suggest that Mr  Shan  simply  forgot
    that the Appellant would need to review her visa before  1st  September
    2006.  The Judge accepted that  the  family  had  suffered  two  family
    bereavements "and I  accept  that  the  consequences  of  this  can  be
    devastating to a family".  The  judge  also  accepted  that  after  the
    bereavement  "the  Appellant's  husband  began  drinking   to   excess"
    (paragraph 17).  The judge did not accept that  neither  the  Appellant
    nor her husband understood what the terms of the Appellant's visa were.
     They failed to regularise the Appellant's stay for a period of no less
    than two and a half years.  The judge held that, "Overall I find  their
    explanations lack all credibility and it may be that their family  life
    was disrupted..." (paragraph 17).

 5. Nevertheless, the judge went on to say that, "Be that as it  may  there
    is no real  evidence  that  the  Appellant  and  her  husband  are  not
    currently at least in a genuine and subsisting relationship.   All  the
    evidence suggests that this is the case"  (paragraph  18).   The  judge
    also accepted that the Appellant's husband was working in the UK  as  a
    takeaway delivery driver, "and most,  if  not  all,  of  his  relatives
    reside in the United Kingdom including his  elderly  mother  with  whom
    both he and the Appellant live" (paragraph 18).

 6. However, since the normal course of action in such a case would be  for
    the Appellant to return back to her country of origin  and  to  make  a
    proper spouse's application, given that she had overstayed for two  and
    a half years, the judge went on to consider the arguments against  this
    and found  that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration into the country  to  which  she  would  have  to  go  (see
    paragraph 21).  She had spent the majority of  her  life  in  Pakistan.
    The judge also held that, "there are no obvious grounds and nothing was
    canvassed in this respect of submissions" (as far as a consideration of
    compelling circumstances was concerned  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules) (paragraph 22).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the appeal of the Appellant for protection outside  the  Rules
    and in particular failed to follow the Razgar five  step  process.   As
    far as Article 8 was concerned this was  addressed  only  very  briefly
    without reasons.

 9. On 20th April 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 25th April 2016, a Rule 24 Response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    and it was observed that the Appellant's representative, Mr  Read,  had
    himself stated that he would have to accept that the case was "not  the
    strongest" under the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 14).  As  far  as
    Article 8 was to be considered this had to be read in  the  context  of
    Section 117 of the NIAA 2001.  It was simply not credible that a  delay
    of two and a half years to regularise one's  stay  could  be  explained
    away on the basis that there had been bereavement in the family.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 8th  June  2016,  Ms  Masih,  appearing  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant,  relied  upon   her   well   compiled   and
    comprehensive skeleton argument.  She said that the judge had  accepted
    in paragraph 17 that the Appellant  and  her  husband  suffered  family
    bereavements and that the Appellant's husband began drinking to excess.
     In these circumstances, the adverse credibility findings were not open
    to the judge.  Moreover, as far as Appendix FM EX1(b) was concerned,  a
    consideration of insurmountable obstacles did not allow for a temporary
    separation of parties such that an application could  be  made  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  What "insurmountable obstacles" amounted to was
    the practical possibilities of relocation and not  to  obstacles  which
    were  impossible  to  surmount  (see  MF  (Nigeria)).   It  had  to  be
    remembered that the parties were in a  subsisting  relationship.   They
    had been so for a substantial period of time (see paragraph  18).   The
    Appellant's husband's relatives all resided in the UK and  his  elderly
    mother lived with them (see paragraph 18).  The  husband  had  suffered
    family bereavement (see paragraph 17).  The Appellant's  husband  drank
    to excess  and  there  was  alcohol  abuse  (see  paragraph  17).   The
    Appellant had not been in receipt of benefits contrary to the terms  of
    her visa (see paragraph 15).

12. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the case of SS (Congo) left  it
    open to the decision-maker to decide which way to strike  the  balance.
    Article 8 was not a backstop.  Two and a half years was  a  substantial
    period of time to overlook the duration of the  visa  in  circumstances
    where the grant had been for only two years.  One was looking here  not
    at a period of overstay of two months but of two and a half years.

13. In reply, Ms Masih submitted that the whole point was  that  the  judge
    did not consider "insurmountable obstacles" as  he  should  have.   The
    judge had made a finding in relation to the mother but  had  failed  to
    factor that into the application of the Rules (see paragraph  18).   Ms
    Masih submitted that she would ask that I make a finding of an error of
    law and remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal because  there
    was now emerging evidence that the  Appellant's  husband  had  been  so
    badly affected by substance abuse that there was also evidence of  drug
    abuse.  This would most certainly have led to the kind  of  delay  that
    one has seen here, namely, a delay of over two and a half  years.   The
    Appellant had herself come over from Pakistan and she was  unversed  in
    the law and in the methods of officialdom  in  this  country,  and  was
    dependent upon her husband, who could  not  take  the  necessary  steps
    because he was undertaking substance abuse.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCE 2007) hence that
    I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a
    case where the judge has analysed the facts  comprehensively,  but  has
    then ended with the statement (at paragraph  22)  that  "There  are  no
    obvious  grounds"   when   considering   the   issue   of   "compelling
    circumstances" under Article 8  of  freestanding  jurisprudence.   That
    conclusion cannot be right given that the judge had accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been living in the UK in circumstances where her  husband
    had suffered two family bereavements and  "began  drinking  to  excess"
    especially where the judge held that, "I accept that  the  consequences
    of this can be devastating to a family" (paragraph 17).

15. The  judge  had  observed  that  this  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship for a lengthy period of  time  and  that  the  Appellant's
    mother-in-law lived with them in the household, as well as  the  family
    relatives all being resident in the UK (see paragraph 18).

16. The judge had also held that, "Clearly, the Appellant's partner who  is
    a British citizen cannot and should  not  be  compelled  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom..." (paragraph 19).

17. In these circumstances, and  particularly  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    Sponsor was "in full-time employment and that  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband owned three properties, two of which they rent out"  (paragraph
    20) the judge should have considered  whether  the  parties  should  be
    required to separate, if only for some months, in  the  application  of
    Appendix FM EX1(b) when applying the test of "insurmountable obstacles"
    which looks at the practical possibilities of relocation rather than an
    obstacle that is impossible to surmount.

18. In the same way, when the judge is considering freestanding  Article  8
    jurisprudence,  it  is  wrong  to  conclude  that  there  was  "nothing
    obvious", given the background to this determination in  terms  of  the
    facts that the judge did find, which were substantially  for  the  most
    part in favour of the Appellant.

19. The error of law having been found, the appropriate course of action is
    now for this matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,  to
    be determined by a judge other than Judge I F Taylor, especially  given
    that Ms Masih submitted  that  there  is  emerging  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's sponsoring husband has been engaging  in  drug  abuse,  and
    were that to be the case, then the delay of two and a half years  would
    be entirely explicable and would go directly to the whole  question  of
    whether there were "very significant obstacles" or whether  there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles" or there "compelling circumstances"  to  the
    determination of this appeal, especially in circumstances  where  there
    was an elderly mother that was living with the appellant.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

21. I remake the decision by remitting this case  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2(b) to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge I F Taylor.

22. I direct that any further evidence that is to be filed by the Appellant
    should be filed two weeks before the hearing.

23. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd July 2016




