
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2015                           |On 1st April 2015             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Sher Amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent to this appeal, Mr Amin, is a national of Pakistan whose
    date of birth is recorded as 2nd June 1973.   He  did  not  attend  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal although his solicitors did file
    a  bundle  of  documents.   On  this  occasion  there   has   been   no
    communication at all, either from Mr Amin or his solicitors  but  I  am
    satisfied from the Upper Tribunal file  that  proper  notice  has  been
    served for the purpose of this  hearing  and  in  those  circumstances,
    having regard to rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 I propose to proceed with the hearing.

 2. On 26th February 2014, Mr Amin made a combined application for leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  He
    had claimed 30 points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules  for  a
    valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  (CAS)  but  no  reference
    number had been provided with the application.  In addition he  claimed
    10 points for maintenance but as he had not provided a  valid  CAS  the
    Secretary of State was unable to accept the application, no points were
    awarded and the application  was  refused  by  reference  to  paragraph
    245ZX(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules with reference  to  paragraph
    115 of Appendix A.

 3. Mr Amin appealed. His appeal was heard on 15th October 2014 by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Iqbal sitting at  Hatton  Cross.   Judge  Iqbal
    came to the view that the single issue in the appeal  was  the  missing
    CAS letter.  He was prepared to accept evidence that as at the date  of
    decision, 1st April 2014, had  the  Secretary  of  State  made  further
    enquiry it would have become evident that there was, at  that  date,  a
    valid CAS.  Judge Iqbal had before him a CAS dated 31st March 2014.  He
    accepted proof of delivery from Sheffield Post Office and accepted that
    the document, in its original form, was with the Secretary of State  on
    3rd April 2014. The Judge allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law because in the judge's view
    the Secretary of State might have taken into consideration that CAS.

 4. Not content with the decision, by notice dated 24th November  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 5. The Secretary of State was granted permission by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cruthers on 6th  January  2015,  thus  the  matter  comes
    before me.

 6. It was observed by the Court of Appeal in the case of EK (Ivory  Coast)
    v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1517
    at paragraph 28 that:

         "The points-based system is intended to simplify the procedure  for
         applying for leave to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         certain classes of case, such as economic  migrants  and  students.
         This is to enable the Secretary of State to process high volumes of
         applications in a fair and reasonably expeditious manner, according
         to clear objective criteria.  This  is  in  the  interests  of  all
         applicants.  It also assists applicants to know what evidence  they
         have to submit in support of an application."

 7. By paragraph 116 of Appendix A, a CAS will only  be  considered  to  be
    valid if (a) it was issued no more than 6 months before the application
    was made. In this case it is common ground, it  would  seem,  that  the
    document was issued on 31 March 2014 ie after the application was made.
    By paragraph 120-SD if  the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    Checking Service is to be used the requisite details are to be supplied
    with the application. There was at one time some debate as  to  whether
    or not there was a concept of a  continuing  application.   That  arose
    because of the judgment of the Upper Tribunal in  the  case  of  Khatel
    [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) but that issue was resolved by the Court of Appeal
    in the case of Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  There is no such  context  of
    this kind of case.  The Rules required the provision of a CAS with  the
    application.  Either the CAS was with the application or  it  was  not.
    In this case it was not and further, the evidence points to  it  coming
    into existence after the application of 26 February 2014, was made.  It
    is not in dispute that the CAS was submitted after the application  was
    made as this is stated in the grounds to the First-tier. The  Secretary
    of State was entitled to deal with the matter in the way in  which  she
    did.

 8.  The  Secretary  of  State  does  have,   in   certain   circumstances,
    flexibility.  I refer to paragraph 245AA, but it is clear that only  in
    certain circumstances will  the  Secretary  of  State  have  regard  to
    evidence which was not served with the application.  This is not a case
    where issues of post-decision evidence arise.  This is a case in  which
    the substantive Rule was not met  and  where  at  paragraph  6  of  the
    grounds the Secretary of State asserts:

         "The First-tier Tribunal should have found that the Rules were  not
         met and dismissed the appeal accordingly".

    That ground forming part of the totality of the grounds is made out.

 9. There is only one proper course in this case and that is having found a
    material error of law to remake the decision such that  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.

10. Mr Amin, has not placed any further matters before me.  The  issues  of
    Article 8 for example are not  raised,  no  human  rights  matters  are
    raised and so I proceed on the basis that they are not pursued in  line
    with the guidance in Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ 195. If I  am  wrong  given
    the limited evidence and the provisions of s117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 I cannot see how  the  Appellant  could
    possibly succeed.

Decision
The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed.  The
Decision of the First-tier Tribunal is seta side and remade  such  that  the
appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 31st March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
