
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17731/2015
                                                               IA/17736/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th December 2016                 |On 16th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                        Masooda [R] (first appellant)
                         {S R A] (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are mother and son and are nationals of Pakistan.   They
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against decisions of the  Secretary
    of State dated 23rd April 2015 to refuse their applications  for  leave
    to remain in the UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Amin  dismissed  the
    appeals and the  Appellants  appeal  with  permission  granted  on  8th
    November 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellants came to the UK  on
    16th May 2014 with entry clearance as the  partner  and  child  of  the
    first Appellant's husband Syed Alam.  They applied for leave to  remain
    and the  Respondent  considered  the  applications  under  Appendix  FM
    provisions in relation to the partner route and in relation  to  family
    life as a  parent  and  concluded  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her  partner
    continuing in Pakistan. The Respondent  considered  that  Ex1  did  not
    apply in relation to the child and the  application  fell  for  refusal
    under the  eligibility  requirements.  The  Respondent  considered  the
    applications under the private life provisions in  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    of the  Immigration  Rules  and  concluded  that  the  removal  of  the
    Appellants would not breach those provisions.

 3. The husband of the first Appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK in February 2015 on the basis of his long residence in
    the UK.  The couple have a second child, a daughter  who  was  born  on
    29th January 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeal
    in terms of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The Grounds of  Appeal  do  not  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  the  relevant  time   for
    consideration of the Rules was at the time  of  the  application.   The
    Grounds of Appeal  challenge  the  decision  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights on the basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to give proper consideration to the fact that the
    Appellant's second child is a British national.

 5. In his submissions Mr Khan accepted that the  judge  acknowledged  that
    the Appellant had a second child [11]  but  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed recognise that the second child is a 'qualifying  child'  within
    Section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    Act.  He submitted that because of this the judge did not look  at  all
    of the factors.  Whilst he acknowledged that British nationality is not
    a trump card he submitted that it is an important factor which must  be
    considered in the context of an Article  8  assessment.   He  submitted
    that the judge had failed to consider the best interests of the British
    national child and whether or not it is reasonable  for  the  child  to
    return with the family to Pakistan.

 6. Ms Isherwood submitted that, in considering Section 117B(6), as well as
    deciding whether there is a qualifying child the judge also had to look
    at whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.   She
    submitted that at paragraph 11 the judge acknowledged that there was  a
    second child.  She submitted that the judge set out factors in relation
    to reasonableness at paragraph 33.  She submitted that  the  judge  had
    considered the circumstances and it was open to her to conclude that it
    was reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  She submitted that
    there were options open to the family including going back to  Pakistan
    together, the mother and the first Appellant going back temporarily  in
    order to apply for entry clearance, or the child remaining  in  the  UK
    with her father.



Error of Law

 7. In my view the judge made  a  material  error  of  law  in  failing  to
    appreciate or acknowledge that the first Appellant's second  child  and
    brother of the second Appellant is a British national.  This inevitably
    affected the judge's assessment of Article 8 outside of the Immigration
    Rules.  For example at paragraph 23 the judge found  that  there  would
    not be any interference with the family life of the  first  and  second
    Appellants on return to Pakistan.  However in appreciation of the  fact
    that the first Appellant's husband has indefinite leave to  remain  and
    the second child is a British  citizen  could  have  impacted  on  that
    assessment.  Further, the judge went on to consider proportionality and
    said at paragraph 27; "The children  are  not  qualifying  children  in
    accordance with Section 117D of the 2002  Act".   This  is  clearly  an
    error as the judge failed to appreciate that the  second  child  is  in
    fact a British national and therefore a qualifying child in  accordance
    with Section 117D.

 8. I am unable to say with confidence  that,  had  the  judge  taken  into
    account the child's British citizenship,  she  would  have  necessarily
    have  reached  the  same  conclusion.   In  these  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that the failure to take into account the fact that the child
    was a British citizen led to a material error of law.  I therefore  set
    aside the judge's assessment and decision in relation to Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  As there was  no  challenge  to  the  assessment  under  the
    Immigration Rules,  and  it  was  accepted  by  the  parties  that  the
    circumstances in relation to the  Rules  were  those  at  the  date  of
    application, that decision still stands.

Remaking the Decision

 9. The parties accepted my decision that I would remake  the  decision  on
    the basis of the evidence before me, this was because there had been no
    application under Rule 15(2A) of the Procedure Rules in accordance with
    the directions served on the parties in advance of the  hearing.  There
    was therefore no new evidence relevant to the assessment under  Article
    8. Further, the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  was  on  4th  April
    2016, which is not very long ago, and there was no evidence  before  me
    as to any change of circumstances since then.  In these circumstances I
    heard submissions from Ms Isherwood and  Mr  Khan  and  I  reserved  my
    decision.

10. Ms Isherwood submitted that I should dismiss the appeal.  She submitted
    that the first Appellant's witness statement tells us nothing about the
    circumstances in the UK or in Pakistan.  She submitted that  there  was
    no evidence as to why it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    stay with her father while the two Appellants return to Pakistan to get
    entry clearance.  She submitted there was no reason put forward  as  to
    why the child could not return to Pakistan on a temporary basis or  why
    the whole family could not go back to  Pakistan.   She  submitted  that
    there are choices for this family.  She referred to the decision in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and, whilst she accepted that the  Court
    says that significant weight should be attached to  a  child's  British
    citizenship, she submitted that it is not a trump card.  She  submitted
    that the second Appellant  is  young  and  that  the  family  have  the
    linguistic ability to manage upon return to  Pakistan.   She  submitted
    that there was no evidence of the family's social  integration  in  the
    UK.  There is no evidence as to whether it would be difficult  for  the
    father to look after the British citizen child without the mother.  She
    referred to paragraph 47 of MA and submitted that the Court  said  that
    it would not follow that leave must be granted where the  child's  best
    interests are in favour of remaining and that, even where  the  child's
    best interests are to stay, it may still not be unreasonable to require
    the child to leave. She submitted that the Court said  that  that  will
    depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in
    the UK and in the country where it is proposed he  should  return.   In
    this case she submitted there is limited evidence in  relation  to  the
    situation in the UK and in  Pakistan  and  that  therefore  the  public
    interest weighs in the favour of the Secretary of State.  She  accepted
    that the British citizen child could not be compelled to leave the UK.

11. Mr Khan submitted that it is clear from the decision  in  MA  that  the
    other factors in Section 117B which weigh in the public  interest  need
    not be taken into account  where  there  is  a  qualifying  child.   He
    submitted that the choices put forward by Ms Isherwood are stark as, if
    the mother and the second Appellant were to return  to  Pakistan,  this
    would lead to separation from the  husband  and  the  British  national
    child.  Whereas if all  of  the  family  go  then  the  child  will  be
    separated from his country of birth.  He relied on the decision  in  ZH
    Tanzania v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  He accepted that British citizenship is
    not a trump card and that the significant  weight  to  be  attached  to
    British citizenship can be outweighed by other  factors.   However,  he
    submitted that in this case there are no adverse factors  in  terms  of
    the immigration history of the Appellants and  no  criminality  on  the
    part of the parents.  He relied on paragraph 49 of  MA.   He  submitted
    that the child's best interest is to remain in the UK as a citizen  and
    there are no powerful reasons to the contrary.

12. In remaking the decision under Article 8 I follow the steps set out  by
    Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.   I  accept  that  Mr  Alam  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  and  the  youngest  child  is  a
    British citizen.  There is no  dispute  that  the  first  Appellant  is
    married to Mr Alam and that the second Appellant is their child.  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellants enjoy family life in the UK with Mr  Alam
    and the British national child.  I therefore accept that returning  the
    first and second Appellants to Pakistan would amount to an interference
    with their family life.  In light of the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to  the  Immigration  Rules  which  has  not  been
    challenged  I  accept  that  the  proposed  interference  would  be  in
    accordance with the law.

13.  In  considering  proportionality  I  begin  by  considering  the  best
    interests of the children in this case.  The second Appellant was  born
    on 15th November 2010 in Pakistan and lived there for  the  first  four
    years of his life.  He came to the UK with his mother in May  2014.   I
    accept that the best interests of the second Appellant must  be  to  be
    with his parents.  The British national child is very  young,  she  was
    born on 29th January 2016.  Her best interests too must be to  be  with
    her parents.  As she is a British national  I  take  into  account  the
    decision in ZH Tanzania.  I take  into  account  that  her  father  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK and I accept that  it  is  in  her
    best interests also to remain in the country of her nationality.

14. In considering proportionality I have taken into  account  the  witness
    statement of the first Appellant.  I note that much of the statement is
    concerned with the process of her and her husband's  applications.  The
    first Appellant says that they are a happy family and that she is under
    stress and facing uncertainty in her life and she referred to the birth
    of their second child.

15. I take into account the other documentary evidence which shows that the
    first Appellant has registered with a doctor.  It also shows  that  the
    second Appellant has been attending primary school since September 2014
    and is also registered with a GP.  The tenancy agreement  for  Mr  Alam
    and the first Appellant has also been submitted along with  details  of
    Mr Alam's employment and the birth certificate of the  couple's  second
    child.

16. There is limited evidence in relation to the family situation in the UK
    or in Pakistan.  I note the oral evidence of Mr  Alam  as  recorded  at
    paragraph 13 of the judge's decision where it says  that  he  confirmed
    that he is working full-time in the UK and the only reason he could not
    return to Pakistan was that he had been here for long  enough  and  was
    supporting his family.  It is not in dispute that Mr Alam  was  granted
    leave to remain on the basis of over ten years' residence  in  the  UK.
    From the pay slips I accept that he is working on a full-time basis  in
    the UK and supporting his family.  This too has not been disputed.

17. Section 117B(1)(6) of the 2002 Act states as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

18. The second Appellant is a qualifying child in that  she  is  a  British
    citizen.  The issue to be determined is whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK.  Ms Isherwood accepted that the child could
    not be compelled to leave the UK.  I accept that her father is employed
    and has been in the UK for over ten years.  I take into account that he
    has been here for a long time and  is  supporting  his  family  and  is
    working full-time in the UK.  I attach significant weight to  the  fact
    that the child is a British citizen.  I  take  into  account  the  best
    interests of the child.

19. On the other hand I take into account that the British  child  is  very
    young, she is not yet one year old. She has not lived elsewhere but her
    mother and brother only came to the UK in 2014. The  child  is  not  in
    education. The second Appellant is in the early stages of his education
    in the UK. There is little evidence as to  links  in  Pakistan  but  it
    appears from the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
    child's parents have families in Pakistan. Both parents spent  most  of
    their  adult  lives  there  and  still  have  cultural  and  linguistic
    connections to Pakistan. There is no evidence of any medical  or  other
    issues which would impede the child's  ability  to  adapt  to  life  in
    Pakistan. There is no evidence of any strong connections to the UK. The
    father has only recently been granted indefinite leave  to  remain.  He
    too has retained his connections with Pakistan and there appears to  be
    no reason why he cannot return there  to  live  with  and  support  his
    family should he wish to do so. On the basis of all of this evidence  I
    accept that it is reasonable to expect the  British  citizen  child  to
    leave the UK.

20. On the basis of my findings I find that it  is  proportionate  for  the
    first and second Appellant to be required to leave the UK.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  Article  8  contains
an error of law and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

