
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17659/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st & 20th September 2016         |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  QAMAR [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Schwenk on 01/09/2016 and Mr G Brown on
                    20/09/2016 (instructed by Equity Law Chambers)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State in relation to  a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge
    Ransley promulgated on 21st December 2015  by  which  she  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I will continue to refer  to  Mr
    [C] as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as  the  Respondent  in
    this decision.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 28th April 1985. He  has
    sought leave to remain on the basis of his family life in the UK.

 4. The Appellant first entered the UK in August 2011 as a visitor and when
    his visa expired in January 2012 he overstayed.

 5. He made an application to remain on Article 2 grounds in March 2013 and
    that application was refused without a right of appeal in May 2013.

 6. In March 2014 the Appellant made an application on  the  basis  of  his
    family and private life. That application was  refused  in  April  2014
    without a right of appeal.

 7. In October 2014 the Appellant applied again for leave to remain on  the
    basis of his family and private life. That was refused in February 2015
    with an out of country right of appeal which he did not exercise.

 8. In March 2015 the Appellant applied once  again  for  leave  to  remain
    based on his private and family  life  and  it  was  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing that application on 24th April 2015 which was
    the decision under appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The Appellant relied upon his relationship with Mrs [S]  with  whom  he
    had entered into an Islamic marriage and with her two children  from  a
    previous marriage.

10. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from  Mrs  [S]  that  her  first
    marriage had been an abusive one and there had been a restraining order
    obtained from the Family Court against her first husband. He has had no
    contact with the children.

11. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence that the Appellant had assumed a
    parental role in relation to his two stepchildren.  He  is  their  main
    carer to enable Mrs [S] to go out to work.

12. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence that Mrs [S] has  suffered  from
    anxiety and depression as a result of her difficult first marriage  and
    relies heavily on the Appellant.

13. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence that Mrs [S] has had no  contact
    with her family since March 2014 because they have excluded  her.  They
    were against her marriage to the Appellant  and  regarded  her  divorce
    from her first husband  (her  cousin)  as  bringing  dishonour  to  the
    family. She could not live in Pakistan because her ex-husband's  family
    are in Pakistan.

14. Mrs [S] told the First-tier Tribunal that if the Appellant is  required
    to leave the UK she would not be able to work full-time because of  the
    children and would probably again suffer from depression. At  the  time
    of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal she was pregnant with the
    Appellant's child.

15. On 1st September 2016 I found that the First-tier Tribunal had made  an
    error of law in its decision  by  giving  inadequate  consideration  to
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  In
    particular the Judge, whilst noting that little weight should be  given
    to a relationship formed with a qualifying partner while the person  is
    in the UK lawfully, went on to say that that was not an exhaustive list
    of factors. I agreed with the Secretary of State's assertion  that  she
    had given inadequate consideration to the public interest.

16. I note that before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  had  raised
    protection grounds. These were dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and no challenge to that finding has been made.

17. Having found that the Judge's consideration of Article 8 was  flawed  I
    set aside the decision in relation to Article 8 and directed it  to  be
    reheard the Upper Tribunal.

18. Mr Schwenk was without papers and not in a position to proceed  on  1st
    September. Additionally, no interpreter had been provided. I  therefore
    indicated that I would hear the case on 20th September, a  date  agreed
    by both representatives.

19. On 20th September Mr Brown represented the Appellant.

20. Since the case was heard by the First-tier Tribunal Mrs [S]  has  given
    birth to the Appellant's child, in July 2016. There are  now  therefore
    two stepchildren aged nine and 11 and the Appellant's own child who  is
    only weeks old.

21. I was told that Mrs [S] will be returning to work imminently  with  the
    Appellant providing child care.

22. It is accepted that all three children are British citizens.

23. The issue before me came down to a simple  one;  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for these British children to  live  in  Pakistan  and  thus
    whether the Appellant can succeed on the basis of either  EX.1  of  the
    Immigration Rules or s.117B(vi) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

24. In that  regard  Mr  Brown  relied  upon  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction, Family Migration: Appendix FM section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10 year Route dated August 2015.
     Mr Bates confirmed that it remains in force. Paragraph 11.2.3 of  that
    guidance states:-

             "save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must
             not take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer
             of a British citizen child  where the effect of that  decision
             would  be  to  force  the  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
             regardless of the age of that child.  This reflects a European
             Court of Justice Judgement in Zambrano."

25. Later the guidance states:-

             "Where a decision to refuse the application  would  require  a
             parent or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,
             it  must always be assessed on the  basis  that  it  would  be
             unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU
             with that parent or primary  carer.  In  such  cases  it  will
             usually be appropriate to grant leave to the parent or primary
             carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with  the  child,
             provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship."

26. In this case there is no dispute that the Appellant has a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship, not only with his own child but  with
    his two stepchildren.

27. The guide goes on  to  give  examples  of  occasions  when  it  may  be
    appropriate to refuse such leave which would include criminality  or  a
    very poor  immigration  history  where  a  person  has  repeatedly  and
    deliberately breached Immigration Rules.

28. In this case there is no element of criminality. Whilst it is true that
    the Appellant became an overstayer when his visitor  visa  expired,  he
    has made repeated attempts to regularise his status based on his family
    and private life. He has not "gone underground" or sought to avoid  the
    authorities.

29. Despite the fact that  recent  case  law,  the  most  recent  being  MA
    (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  has  addressed  the  question   of
    reasonableness  and  the  fact  that  the  various  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and s.117B  indicate  that  even  where  a  child  is
    British, reasonableness must be assessed, the Secretary of State's  own
    instruction is that generally it would not be reasonable  to  remove  a
    British child from the United Kingdom.

30. The Court of Appeal confirmed in MA (Pakistan)  that  s.117B(vi)  is  a
    complete  answer.   If  an  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect that child to leave the UK the public interest does not  require
    removal and there is no other basis on which removal can be  justified.
    S.117B(vi) must be read as a self-contained provision.

31. It does appear extraordinary  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    amended her IDI.  However, she has not and if that is the Secretary  of
    State's policy then I give my Judgment in line with it.

32. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the
    extent that the Article 8 finding is set aside but in redeciding  it  I
    allow the Appellant's original appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision to refuse him leave to remain.

33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and  I  see
    no reason to make one.



    Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed but in
    redeciding the appeal  I  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.


Signed   Date 20th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

