
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17940/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 06 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            DEMETRIO REGASPI PAPA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowersby, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  judge  arguably
    made an error of law by failing to make adequate findings in regard  to
    the evidence which led him to conclude  that  the  sponsor  was  a  job
    seeker .. .. in employment.   The appeal  was  in  fact  based  on  the
    perceived lack of adequate reasons. Reference is made to the case of MK
    (Pakistan) [2013] UKUT 00641.

2.   The operative finding in the determination is paragraph 8 where  it  is
    said that the unchallenged oral and  documentary  evidence  establishes
    the appellant's civil partner  is  now  in  employment  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  this being a case were the appellant applied for a  residence
    card on the basis of his civil partnership with a Belgian national  who
    was said to be exercising his treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

3.   It appears from  the  determination  itself  that  the  respondent  was
    represented by a Home Office Presenting Officer and Miss Isherwood very
    properly presented us with the minute of the Presenting Officer who was
    present at the time.   It is confirmed by Counsel Mr Sowerby that there
    was a Presenting Officer who was a barrister.  We understand ....   ...
    ...  ...... officer of  the  court  he  discussed  the  case  with  the
    barrister concerned and let her see the documents on which she  relied.
    These documents were presented to the Immigration Judge and he accepted
    the evidence, there  being  no  challenge  to  the  documentation,  the
    evidence being accepted in terms by the barrister who appeared for  the
    respondent.

4.   In those circumstances it is hardly  surprising,  we  think,  that  the
    reasoning is, to say the least,  brief.   There  are  circumstances  of
    course where reasons required to be stated in much wider  terms,  where
    there is complex evidence which  is  challenged  for  example.   It  is
    important that judges set out in detail what that evidence is and  what
    the reasoning is for rejecting or indeed accepting particular parts  of
    it.

5.   That is not the situation with which we  are  faced  here  today.  What
    happened was that evidence was  presented.  It  was  unchallenged.  The
    inferences which the appellant sought to draw from that  evidence  were
    unchallenged.  The only audience effectively which was relevant for the
    determination were the parties and they can have been in no doubt  what
    the evidence was on which the Immigration Judge reached the finding  or
    what his reasoning was.

6.   The  respondent  was  represented  by  Counsel  and  Counsel  no  doubt
    presented the  case in an appropriate fashion.  The Presenting  Officer
    before us today, Miss Isherwood, has referred to what appears to us  to
    be a suggestion that there is a paucity of evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant's sponsor was in fact working.

7.   We do not consider that that is a matter that can be raised today.   It
    is not something which appears on the grounds of appeal.   It  was  not
    something was presented to  the  Immigration  Judge.   As  it  happens,
    having looked at the paperwork we are satisfied that the evidence which
    was presented was in fact such as would have allowed him  to  make  the
    determination which he did.  So in any event we would not have been  ..
    in finding in favour of the respondent in that regard.

8.   For all these reasons the respondent's appeal is refused.
                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
