
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17480/2014
                                                               IA/17488/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated     |
|on 25th March 2015                            |on 26th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 E D Omoraro
                                  A O Abara
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellants:    Mr R Molyneux of Global Immigration Solutions,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sangha, promulgated on 23rd July 2014, dismissing the first appellant's
    appeal against refusal of a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  application
    and the second appellant's as a dependant.

 2. The central point raised by the grounds is  that  the  refusal  of  the
    first appellant's application was based largely on an  interview  which
    took place on 14th March 2014, but no copy transcript  of  that  record
    was provided, contrary to directions and to the rules of procedure.

 3. This is not an afterthought by the appellants.  The matter is raised in
    the  papers  they  put  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
    overlooked it.

 4. It emerged during the hearing in the Upper Tribunal that  although  the
    respondent served a bundle as  required  in  the  case  of  the  second
    appellant, there was an omission to do so in the case of the first.

 5. Mr Mullen helpfully supplied from his file a copy of the front page  of
    the bundle which had been part-prepared but not issued.   The  list  of
    documents to be  annexed  includes  item  D,  "copy  of  the  interview
    transcript".  Mr Mullen also supplied the Tribunal and the  appellants'
    representative with a copy of that transcript.

 6. (There was also on the file what appeared to be a copy bundle  provided
    on behalf of the appellants to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Molyneux
    was  not  their  representative  at  that  stage.   Both  parties  were
    permitted access to that bundle to make copies.  It was  then  returned
    to the Tribunal file.)

 7. There have been lapses on the part of the respondent and on the part of
    the First-tier Tribunal such that the appellants have  not  yet  had  a
    fair hearing of their appeals.  That amounts to material error of  law.
    The determination is set aside.   No  findings  are  to  stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  practice  statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for  the  decision
    to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Sangha.

 8. If the appellants now wish an oral hearing, they should  apply  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (and  pay  any  relevant   fee).    Unless   such
    application is made, the FtT will  again  consider  the  case  "on  the
    papers".  To give the appellants time to consider  matters  with  their
    representative, the case should not be allocated for  further  decision
    until 21 days from this date.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           25 March 2015
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
