
IAC-FH-CK-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 March 2015                      |On 13 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Ashrafhul Hassan Olid
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M A Chowdury, KC Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash given on 4 December 2014 whereby  she
    allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
    State that he should be removed from the country because he was said to
    have been working in breach of the conditions of his  leave  to  be  in
    this country.

2.   It is unquestionably the case that were he to have been found  to  have
    been working that would have been a breach of his  conditions  and  was
    capable in the  circumstances  of  founding  a  proper  basis  for  his
    removal.  Of course the full circumstances in which he  may  have  been
    working were highly material and that follows from the guidance  issued
    under Section 10(1)(a) of the Act to caseworkers.  What is  there  said
    is that if Section 10 removal is  to  operate  because  of  working  in
    breach of a condition in relation to employment, the breach must be  of
    sufficient gravity to warrant such action and essentially there  should
    ideally be an admission under caution,  a  statement  by  the  employer
    implicating him or her, documentary evidence such as payslips and so on
    and records and sight  by  the  Immigration  Officer  of  the  offender
    working, preferably on two or more separate occasions, over an extended
    period.

3.   What happened here it seems was that a  visit  was  carried  out  on  3
    April 2014 and it is said that  at  the  place  in  question,  which  I
    presume was a restaurant, the appellant was found, it was said,  to  be
    working and when being questioned during two interviews the summary  is
    that he is said to have admitted  helping  out  at  the  restaurant  on
    Thursdays,  Fridays  and   Saturdays   in   exchange   for   food   and
    accommodation.  The judge heard evidence from  the  proprietor  of  the
    restaurant  and  he  said  that  he  indeed  had  given  the  appellant
    accommodation and provided him with food.  It was not a question of him
    working.  He never received any money and there was no question of  any
    tax returns or relevant documentary material.

4.   The conclusion of the First-tier Judge was not helped because  the  two
    interviews under caution records were  not  produced.   The  Presenting
    Officer was asked  to  provide  but  apparently  declined  to  seek  an
    adjournment to obtain the record of the interviews.  That was frankly a
    wrong approach.  Clearly the record of  the  interviews  was  material.
    However, it seems probable that the reason that the judge did not grant
    an adjournment was because in the light  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
    approach she decided that in all probability she would allow the appeal
    in due course.  She no doubt had a  statement  from  Mr  Chowdury.   Of
    course what she did not have was the appellant or any evidence from the
    appellant and the reason for that was that the appellant had  left  the
    country in May 2014, about a month or so  after  the  appeal  had  been
    lodged and it is to be noted that the notice indicating the Section  10
    decision stated that decisions had been taken to remove him but he  was
    entitled to appeal after he had left the United Kingdom, that is to say
    that he only had an out of country right of appeal.   That  was  wrong.
    Section 82(1)(d) of the 2002 Act provides that where a  decision  which
    means that existing leave to remain is brought to  an  end  it  is  one
    which attracts an in-country right of appeal in accordance with Section
    92(1) of the Act as then in force.

5.   It frankly is, to say the  least,  surprising  that  that  mistake  was
    made.  However, the  appellant,  who  apparently  was  then  acting  in
    person, lodged his appeal and then left the country, believing that  he
    only had an out of country right of appeal.  That is what I am informed
    by Mr Chowdhury, who has appeared on his behalf,  although  I  have  no
    statement to that effect.  However, if he followed  what  he  was  told
    that perhaps is not altogether surprising.

6.   However, the difficulty in his  path  is  that  by  virtue  of  Section
    104(4) of the 2002 Act which was then in force his leaving the  country
    meant that his appeal was to  be  treated  as  abandoned.   That  is  a
    mandatory provision and there is no way round it.  I should say that it
    has now been repealed by the 2014 Act but that repeal of course was not
    effective as at May 2014.  It may be I suppose that the reason  why  it
    has been repealed is that it was recognised that it might  be  sensible
    to allow an appeal to proceed as if an out of country  appeal  even  if
    the individual leaves the country.

7.   It may be wondered why now, since he has left the country  and  has  no
    present intention to return to this country, to maintain the appeal was
    in his interests and the answer is that if in the future he should want
    to come to this country for a visit perhaps or for  any  proper  reason
    the fact that he has been removed under Section 10 will be held against
    him and that is a matter that he would like to overcome.

8.   It seems to me that in the circumstances  having  regard  to  what  has
    happened in the course of this case and having regard to  the  decision
    of the judge which was a decision she was  entitled  to  reach  on  the
    material before her, particularly as the guidance was  such  as  in  my
    view made it somewhat doubtful whether this was a removal decision that
    was entirely justified, it would be wrong to hold against him  were  he
    to make any future application for entry  to  this  country  that  this
    Section 10 action had been taken.

9.   I note with pleasure that Mr Tarlow, who has appeared on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State, fully accepts that this approach I  have  indicated
    is one which in all the circumstances would be only fair in  connection
    with this particular appellant but that, as I said to Mr Chowdhury,  is
    I am afraid the best that I can do for him because, albeit  the  matter
    should have been spotted by those who appeared below and  indeed  I  am
    afraid by the judge as well, regrettably it was not.  I would just  say
    I think that anyone in this jurisdiction can be forgiven in  the  light
    of the complications in the immigration law as  it  has  developed  for
    overlooking some particular point.

10.  Be that as it may, for the reasons I have given I have  to  allow  this
    appeal and quash the decision of the First-tier Judge but,  as  I  have
    indicated, in my view this should not be held against the appellant  in
    the future.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 5 March 2015

Mr Justice Collins
