
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17585/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 March 2015                              |On 24 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           DORAH kWEBETA  RUBAIRO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lane, instructed by Rotherham & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a determination promulgated on 21  August  2014  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge V A  Osborne which allowed the Article 8 ECHR appeal  of
    Ms Rubairo.

 2. For the purposes of this  determination,  I  refer  to  Ms  Rubairo  as
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The claimant is a Tanzanian citizen born on 1 June 1975.  She  came  to
    the UK as a student in July 2005. She married a German national  on  25
    February 2008. She was issued with a residence card recognising her  as
    the family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights until  12
    April 2013. The couple separated in July 2010 and the appellant started
    divorce proceedings in 2012.  The  divorce  was  made  absolute  on  10
    January 2014. On 3 February  2014  she  applied  to  be  recognised  as
    someone with a retained right of residence. The respondent refused that
    application on 24 March 2014.

 4. The appeal against that refusal came before Judge Osborne on 14  August
    2014. The appeal against refusal to recognise the appellant had a right
    of residence as the former spouse of an EEA  national  was  refused  by
    Judge Osborne and there was no cross appeal against that decision.

 5. Judge Osborne went on to allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR  on  the
    basis of  the  appellant's  private  life.  As  I  understood  it,  the
    respondent's challenge to that decision is twofold. Firstly, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge misdirected itself in law in failing to follow  the
    correct legal approach in  the  proportionality  assessment.  Secondly,
    there  was  insufficient  evidence  justifying  the  finding  that  the
    appellant's private life was of such weight that her return to Tanzania
    was  disproportionate   such  that   the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  was irrational or perverse.

 6. I found that both grounds had merit.

 7. Judge Osborne found at [37] that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    private  life  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  contained  in
    Appendix 276ADE. She had not been in the UK for 20 years  and  retained
    links to Tanzania. The failure to meet the Immigration Rules  does  not
    feature  anywhere  in  Judge  Obsorne's   proportionality   assessment,
    however.  The  failure  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  fell  to  be
    considered as a starting and  central  factor  in  any  proportionality
    assessment. In Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  558  at  [42],  the
    Court of Appeal confirms that:

        "The authorities make it clear that the focus of any assessment  of
        whether  an  interference  with  private  life  pursuant   to   the
        requirements of immigration  control  is  proportionate  should  be
        whether the Secretary of State's decision  is  in  accordance  with
        those provisions."

    and at [47]:

         "The passages from the judgments in  the  cases  of  Nagre  and  MF
         (Nigeria) appear to give the Rules greater weight than as merely  a
         starting point for the consideration of the proportionality  of  an
         interference with Article 8 rights."

 8. An additional error arises in the application of section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. At  [45]  and  [47],  the
    First-tier  Tribunal   judge  weighs  positively  (and  correctly)  the
    factors stated to be in the appellant's favour, her employment  history
    and her level of English.

 9. At [44], however, the First-tier Tribunal  weighs  in  the  appellant's
    favour that her private  life  was  established  whilst  she  was  here
    lawfully. That is not how the wording of s.117B (4) indicates that this
    factor should be applied. The factors  identified,  family  or  private
    life formed whilst the person concerned was  in  the  UK  illegally  or
    precariously, attract little weight in the proportionality  assessment.
    The section does not indicate that where a family or  private  life  is
    established whilst the person concerned is here lawfully  or  otherwise
    than in precarious circumstances, that a positive factor arises  to  be
    weighed in the person's favour.

10. Further, nowhere does the proportionality consideration show  that  the
    factor contained in s.117B (1),  that  the  "maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest", was  addressed  by  the
    judge beyond being set out at [42].

11. The second ground of appeal has merit as the  appellant's  evidence  on
    her private life before the First-tier Tribunal was very  limited  and,
    in my view, was simply not capable of supporting  the  judge's  finding
    that it could outweigh the public  interest  in  effective  immigration
    control. The appellant's evidence went no further than  that  contained
    at [12] of her witness statement dated 26 June 2014 which stated:

         "I have lived in the UK for nearly nine years and I  have  lots  of
         friends here. I go to church twice a week - on Friday and Saturday.
         I do house-to-house calling with the church and we also do  charity
         work for people overseas. My church is Seventh Day Adventist."

12. Indeed, the First-tier Tribunal   comments  at  [40]  that  "any  other
    details of the specifics of the Appellant's private life  are  entirely
    unknown to me" and at [46] that, other than the s.117B factors referred
    to above:

         "Although the Appellant has not given  much  detail  of  any  other
        aspects of her private life  I am satisfied that she has integrated
        into society here to the extent that she wishes to  remain  here  -
        she told me she has  a  circle  of  friends  and  that  her  church
        community was of particular significance to her."

13. I must exercise caution in substituting  my  view  where  the  decision
    reached was legitimately open to Judge Osborne. Given the  undisputedly
    sparse evidence of the appellant's limited private  life,  however,  it
    was my conclusion that it could be said to have been reasonably open to
    him to find a disproportionate interference arose here.

14. Further, nowhere  does  the  First-tier  Tribunal   consider  that  the
    appellant would be able to enjoy a private life of at  least  the  same
    level in Tanzania, the country  where  she  has  lived  for  the  large
    majority of her life, and where she has a child and other relatives.

15. For all of these reasons I found that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error  on  a  point  of  law  in  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment such that it must be set aside and remade.

16. I proceeded to  remake  that  part  of  the  decision.  As  above,  the
    appellant cannot meet the provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Her
    length of residence comes nowhere near that deemed by the Secretary  of
    State to be sufficient to found an Article 8 private  life  claim.  She
    also has ties of some note in Tanzania where she grew  up,  lived  half
    her adult life, married and had a child and where her  other  relatives
    still live.

17. What, then, can bring her case  into  the  limited  category  that  can
    succeed where the Immigration Rules are not met? As required by s.117B,
    I weigh in her favour her fluent English and that she has  not  been  a
    burden on the taxpayer since coming to the UK.

18. It was not my view that her genuine belief that she would remain in the
    UK permanently when she married an EEA national as found by the  First-
    tier Tribunal  at [40] was something that could carry very much  weight
    in the proportionality assessment. I do  not  dispute  that  it  was  a
    genuine belief but it was not one that she was  entitled  to  hold  and
    then place reliance on when her circumstances changed such that she had
    no legal right to remain longer.

19. It was my conclusion that even after weighing anything of relevance  in
    favour of the appellant at its highest, it could not be  said  that  on
    these facts a disproportionate interference arose in  relation  to  her
    private life. I therefore refused the Article 8 claim.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

17. I re-make the appeal, refusing it under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 23 March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
