
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17931/2013
                                                               IA/17932/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 16 September 2015                 |
|Prepared 30 July 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARD


                                   Between

                           muhammad ahsan shabbir
                                 nadia ahsan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel, instructed by A-Z Syed Ali
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first Appellant, a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  22  June
    1978, and his wife, the second Appellant, his dependant, date of  birth
    24 June 1979, appealed against the respondent's decisions dated  1  May
    2013 to refuse a combined  application,  dated  12  December  2012,  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under
    the points-based system.  The Secretary  of  State  also  made  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

2.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cary  (the  judge)
    who, on 19 January 2015 promulgated a  decision  whereby  he  dismissed
    their appeals.  It is correct to say that  the  judge  failed  to  note
    their appeals against removal under Section 47 but  in  fact  the  case
    file shows the removal directions were withdrawn on 2 June 2014.

3.   The grounds seeking permission are dated 2 February  2015.   Permission
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P M J Hollingworth on 9  March
    2015.  Permission was given essentially on the basis that the judge had
    made adverse findings based upon evidence which did not contain a  full
    transcript  of  the  interview  of  the  first  Appellant.   The   full
    transcript was not provided in accordance  with  directions  that  were
    given on more than one occasion (2 June 2014, 22 September 2014  and  1
    October 2014) and nor was it provided to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    at the hearing of the appeal on 9 January 2014.

4.   There was even today no copy of the interview available and  there  was
    no explanation for its absence.  We would emphasise that Miss Isherwood
    was at no fault in this respect.  Her case file  showed  that  requests
    for the full interview had been duly made  to  the  caseworker  but  to
    which there was no evident response.

5.    Nevertheless  the  absence  of  the  full  transcript  has  formed   a
    significant part of the basis of the submissions by Mr Chohan  that  it
    was unfair for the hearing to have proceeded before the judge,  in  the
    absence of a copy of the interview.  In its absence, the judge had been
    unfair in his assessment of the  reliability  and  credibility  of  the
    first Appellant's evidence.

6.   The first ground as drafted stated:-

         "It appears that the  IJ  demanded  evidence  that  is  beyond  the
         threshold of balance  of  probabilities  as  he  demanded  detailed
         breakdown of a non-PBS interview and the IJ  himself  admitted  not
         having the complete part  of  that  interview  as  conducted.   The
         honourable IJ knowingly presided over incomplete fact  yet  it  was
         the interest of justice that he was clearly  directing  himself  to
         and it is in the interests of justice that he should  preside  over
         the complete facts."[sic]

7.   The position was that the judge had the opportunity to hear  the  first
    Appellant's evidence, an explanation of the events in question and  the
    documents that had been provided.  The first Appellant  set  out  in  a
    document, dated 12 May 2013,  a  number  of  robust  points  of  appeal
    against the adverse  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  that
    included a discussion of, amongst other  things,  the  availability  of
    funds, the nature of the business that he described he had been running
    for a period of time and on other matters which had formed the basis of
    adverse comments in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

8.   On a consideration of the decision as such and the  ground  as  drafted
    it does not seem to us that the judge omitted to consider the  evidence
    that was advanced or the Appellant's explanation of  the  matter.   The
    same point applied to  both  the  existence  of  the  funds  the  first
    Appellant claimed were held by Mr Hussain, a family friend in Pakistan,
    as well as the nature of the business  that  he  was  running  and  the
    particular difficulties faced, because of his  immigration  status,  in
    not having a bank account into which the funds could  be  paid  in  the
    United Kingdom.

9.   The judge took those matters into  account.  At  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision he set out the  correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof.  He
    directed himself correctly to the relevant consideration of the date of
    application, the matters in being at  the  time  and  he  drew  to  his
    attention paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.

10.  The findings thereafter made the judge, particularly in  paragraphs  27
    to 30 of the decision, set out why he did not accept that  funding  was
    genuinely available and intended for investment in the  United  Kingdom
    business.

11.  The judge was also mindful of the related issue  as  to  whether  there
    was a genuine business, if self-employment  had  been  established  and
    that the first Appellant was a director of one or more businesses.  The
    judge, at paragraphs 31 to 35 of the decision, concluded that the first
    Appellant had not shown himself to be a genuine  entrepreneur  who,  at
    the date of  the  application,  genuinely  intended  and  was  able  to
    establish a business within the UK.

12.  Consideration of the same issue also touched upon the  availability  of
    funds and the existence of a bank account which  had  been  dealt  with
    earlier in the judge's decision.

13.  We find in the circumstances that ground 1 does  not  succeed  because,
    contrary to what is asserted, the judge was  not  applying  either  the
    wrong standard of proof nor was he taking into account evidence that he
    was not entitled to do.  The first Appellant had for his  own  purposes
    advanced explanations and later documentation to show  that  he  had  a
    genuine business at the material time.  Such  evidence  was  not  being
    argued to establish as a fact he met the requirements at  the  date  of
    decision but rather that he was a genuine businessman.  It was a matter
    for the judge, having weighed that evidence, that  he  did  not  accept
    that the first Appellant was a  genuine  businessman.  Thus  on  either
    bases, given the refusal with reference to the attributes in Appendix A
    of the Rules, it was clear that the appeal could not succeed.

14.  In relation to the ground 2,  the  judge  did  take  into  account  the
    relevance of the banking situation and for that, and indeed many  other
    reasons, ultimately rejected the first Appellant's credibility and  the
    sufficiency of the evidence to meet the requirements for such a Tier  1
    PBS application.We did not find ground 2 raised any arguable  error  of
    law

15.  Ground 3, raised a legal issue as to  dates  which  were  material  but
    that was not pursued before us. Had it been necessary to address it  we
    would have rejected the ground.

16.  Finally, the issue was raised, with reference to an  unnumbered  ground
    (paragraph8), of a failure by the judge to consider Articles 6  and  8,
    we assume of the Human  Rights  Act.  There  was  no  record  that  the
    Appellant had relied upon Article 8 as a ground of appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision nor did the submitted grounds of appeal refer  to
    Article 8 ECHR.The first appellant's evidence  and  statement  did  not
    refer to Article 8 issues.  It is clear that  in  the  grounds  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal seeking permission to appeal the  decision  of  the
    judge, there was  an  Article  8  ground  of  appeal  but  without  any
    particulars.It was not asserted the first Appellant had raised  Article
    8 as an issue with the judge but it had not been dealt with. Rather  as
    drafted, the ground suggested that because of the  Appellants  were  in
    effect seeking ILR, as a result of the Tier 1  application,  the  judge
    was obliged to consider Article 8. If that was the suggestion we  think
    the point was and is misconceived nor was it a Robinson  obvious  point
    that the judge should have addressed.

17.  The Record of Proceedings does not suggest that Article 8  was  pursued
    at the hearing before the judge.  We note  that  in  paragraph  35  the
    judge indicated that Article  8  was  not  raised  in  the  appeal.  We
    conclude from the case file that the Appellants  did  not  provide  any
    evidence to the judge to support an Article 8 claim.

18.  It is hard to see how, when a person  cannot  succeed  in  obtaining  a
    particular category of PBS which permits him to stay, that  it  can  be
    argued that their human rights are engaged, particularly when they  had
    no  rights  to  remain.  Self-evidently  the  position  was  that   the
    Appellants were in a position to return to their home country and  have
    a life for themselves there. In the circumstances, even  if  Article  8
    had been raised we do not think another Tribunal, even considering such
    a claim, would have reached any different decision.The judge's decision
    does not disclose any arguable error of law on that matter.

19.  We note with concern that whoever at Immigration Chambers  drafted  the
    grounds seeking permission, who is not identified, should  have  wholly
    ignored the judge's finding in paragraph 35  that  Article  8  was  not
    raised in the appeal and, if that fact was disputed, failed  properlyto
    plead the error of law.

20.  The Original Tribunal decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
