
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/17607/2014
                                                               IA/15806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Manchester                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th  January 2015                           |On 5th May 2015            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                              Mrs Younis Begum
                                 Haider Ali
                        (No ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bloomer, counsel instructed by Mamoon Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Mrs Younis Begum date of birth 1 January  1958  and  Mr
    Haider Ali date of birth 13 March 1996, are citizens of Pakistan.

 2. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it  necessary
    to make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone promulgated on  17th July  2014,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the Appellants' appeals against  the  decisions  of
    the Respondent dated 28th February 2014 to remove the  appellants  from
    the United Kingdom.

 4. By decision made on the 12th of November 2014 leave to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge Shaerf.  Thus  the  matter  appears
    before me to determine in the first instance whether or not there is  a
    material error of law in the original determination.

 5. Whilst the grounds of the application for leave to  appeal  had  raised
    issues under the Immigration Rules, it was noted in the leave by  Judge
    Shaerf that the appellant's representative had confirmed at the  First-
    tier Hearing before Judge Gladstone that the appeals were  in  relation
    to Article 8 of the ECHR alone.

 6. Before me the representative for the appellants also confirmed that the
    appellants could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules  and  that
    therefore the appeals were only being pursued on the grounds of Article
    8 of the ECHR outside the rules.

 7. Judge Shaerf referred to the fact that Judge Gladstone  made  extensive
    examination of the facts and found overall that the general credibility
    of the appellants and  sponsor  was  seriously  damaged.  Judge  Shaerf
    states that Judge Gladstone should have identified which specific facts
    she found as proved. Judge Shaerf also found that Judge  Gladstone  had
    applied a threshold test in line with the case  of  Gulshan  2013  UKUT
    00640. The approach advocated in the case of Gulshan has  been  brought
    into question by the case of MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985.
    MM has emphasised that the correct approach is as  set  out  in  Razgar
    2004 UKHL 27 and Huang 2007 UKHL 11.

Immigration history

 8. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 June  2012  entering
    on visit visas valid from 24 May  2012  until  24  November  2012.  The
    appellants were coming to visit Waseem Yaseen  the  son  of  the  first
    appellant and the brother of the second appellant.

 9. The applications for visit visas had originally been refused. There had
    been an appeal in the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Davies at  which
    the appeals had been allowed. The sponsor had  given  evidence  at  the
    appeal hearing.

10. Having entered on the 14th June 2012 by the 7 July 2012 the  appellants
    were applying for indefinite leave to remain as dependent relatives  of
    Waseem Yaseen, a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.

11. That application was rejected as the fee in respect of the  application
    was declined. Whilst the applications were resubmitted they were  again
    rejected on 5 November 2012 and 15 November 2012.

12. The applications were finally submitted  and  accepted  on  3  December
    2012. Those applications were refused by decisions  made  on  the  24th
    February  2014.  The  decisions  made  were  to  remove   both  of  the
    appellants from the United Kingdom

13. The appellants appealed  against  the  immigration  decisions  and  the
    appeals were heard by Judge Gladstone on 3 July 2014.

14. The second appellant despite being an adult at the time of the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal did not give evidence.

15. The basis upon which the first appellant and the second appellant  were
    seeking to remain in the United Kingdom  was  on  the  basis  of  their
    Article 8 Rights, family life relating to Waseem Yaseen,  the  sponsor,
    and his family.

16. The first appellant had been to the United Kingdom or applied  to  come
    to the United Kingdom on a number of previous occasions.  Details  from
    previous  applications  and  judgements  in  respect  of  appeals  were
    referred to in the determination by Judge Gladstone.

17.  In Pakistan in the  first  appellant  had  been  married  but,  it  is
    alleged, just prior to her coming to the United Kingdom her husband had
    divorced her and forced her  to  authorise  the  transfer  of  all  her
    property to him by reason of her thumbprint  on  legal  documents.  The
    first appellant was claiming that she was unaware of the divorce  until
    she arrived in the UK, when papers were discovered in her documents  in
    which was a divorce certificate.  The  first  appellant  was  therefore
    claiming that she would have  no  support  back  in  Pakistan  and  was
    reliant upon the sponsor for financial support. The first appellant was
    also claiming that she was certain medical conditions, which  had  made
    it impossible for her to carryout household chores in Pakistan.

18. Reliance was also placed on the fact that the sponsor and his wife  had
    a child that was very sick. It is claimed  that  the  sponsor  and  his
    family required the support of the appellants  that  what  was  a  very
    difficult time for them.  The child that was ill was born in May 2013.

Error of Law

19. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that Judge Gladstone has failed
    to identify what facts she has found proved.

20. The appellants' immigration history has been examined with care by  the
    judge. The judge found that the details provided in support of previous
    applications for visit visas, including evidence  given  in  an  appeal
    hearing for the visit visa on which the appellants  travelled  and  the
    details for the present application and appeal were not consistent. The
    conclusions Judge Gladstone were to the effect that the appellants  and
    the sponsor were willing to tailor their evidence seeking to meet which
    ever situation suited the application they  were  making  at  the  time
    best. Judge  Gladstone  clearly  found  that  the  credibility  of  the
    appellants and the sponsor severely damaged and that  central  elements
    of the accounts were not true.

21. An example of this as noted by the judge was the claim by  the  sponsor
    that he had  been  supporting  the  appellants  for  some  eight  years
    according to the  present  application  and  statements  of  the  first
    appellant  and  sponsor.  However  when  the  judge  examined  previous
    applications made by the first appellant there  were  claims  that  the
    appellants lived in a prosperous circumstances with  servants  and  the
    first appellant's husband, TM, had a transport business and substantial
    earnings. There were also references to the first appellant  having  an
    interest in family  lands  and  to  her  looking  after  her  siblings'
    property. The details are set out in paragraphs 100, 103, 105, 106  and
    107 of the decision.

22. In paragraph 107 there is reference to the appeal relating to the visit
    visas upon which  the  appellant  travel.  In  that  determination  the
    evidence was that the first appellant was dependent upon her  husband's
    income from a transport business according to the evidence given by the
    sponsor before Immigration Judge Davies.

23. Judge Gladstone points out in paragraph 109 that given the  appellant's
    comfortable financial circumstances  as  evidenced  on  many  occasions
    previously it was difficult to believe or understand the sponsor's  and
    the first appellant's evidence that the sponsor  had  been  financially
    supporting the appellants for  eight  years.  Judge  Gladstone  clearly
    rejected the claims that the sponsor had been supporting the appellants
    prior to the appellants coming to the UK.

24. There are further inconsistencies in the evidence as to  the  state  of
    health of the first appellant. In paragraph 111 there is  reference  to
    the first appellant claiming that she was suffering  from  hepatitis  C
    and had been unable to do any household chores. However as set  out  in
    paragraph  110  at  the  time  of  originally  making  the  visit  visa
    application she had stated that she had no health  problems.  The  same
    had been the case with regard to previous applications.  The  judge  in
    the paragraphs points out the significant changes  between  the  claims
    made in respect of the first appellant's health between April/June 2012
    and July  2012.  In  the  former  claiming  that  she  had  no  medical
    conditions. Yet in the latter suggesting that because of her  hepatitis
    C she could not undertake basic chores such as cooking and cleaning  or
    bathing. In paragraph 125 the judge notes  the  ability  of  the  first
    appellant to undertake physical task in the United  Kingdom  which  she
    was claiming she could not perform in Pakistan.  Again  the  judge  had
    rejected the evidence of the first appellant and the sponsor.

25. The judge has also noted the inconsistencies  and  contradictions  with
    regard to the circumstances of the divorce  of  the  first  appellant's
    from her husband. The account being given  was  that  after  the  first
    appellant's husband had died the first appellant  had  been  forced  to
    marry her second husband. The second  husband  had  tricked  the  first
    appellant into signing her property over to him and then  divorced  the
    first appellant.

26. This second marriage was a marriage that lasted twenty years, in  which
    the first appellant had at least one child, the second  appellant.  The
    judge also noted that during the course of the proceedings the property
    that the first appellant was claiming to be hers was in point  of  fact
    joint property owned with her husband.

27.  The judge has specifically rejected the claims made by the sponsor and
    first appellant as to the circumstances of  the  divorce.  Judge  noted
    that when details were put to the sponsor about the  timing  of  events
    and the effect of property transfers the sponsor sought to  change  his
    evidence. The sponsor had not done so prior to be contradictory details
    being put to him. (See paragraph 113). The judge noted that  the  first
    appellant and the sponsor stated that "the document" identified as  the
    divorce certificate, page 38 and dated 11 July  2012,  was  a  document
    that had been in the first appellant's papers when she arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in June 2012[paragraphs 74 and  75  and  paragraphs  116
    onwards].

28. Initially the sponsor confirmed this. However when it was  pointed  out
    that that could not be the case given the dates on  the  document,  the
    sponsor sought to suggest that the document  was  a  later  translation
    issued by the Union Council. When asked where the original document was
    the sponsor was claiming that the document was at home. No good  reason
    had been given as to why the original had never been  produced  to  the
    Tribunal or the Home Office and was not in the bundle.

29. In paragraph 115 Judge Gladstone had noted  that  claims  made  in  the
    first appellant's application had been  contradicted  by  the  evidence
    given by the appellant herself before the judge. Even  the  dates  upon
    the  documents  allegedly  being  the  divorce  certificate   are   not
    consistent with the claims made in the  applications.  The  application
    dated 5  July  stated  that  the  first  appellant  had  been  recently
    divorced. However the divorce certificate is dated 11 July.

30. In substance on each and every claim that was made  by  the  appellants
    the judge has pointed out inconsistencies within the evidence such that
    it is clear she  did  not  find  the  claims  or  the  appellants'  and
    sponsor's evidence credible. The judge  has  given  valid  reasons  for
    finding that their accounts were not credible.

31. At paragraph 122 the Judge makes the following material findings:-

        Given all the above I do  not  accept  the  initial  bases  of  the
        applications made in December 2012, that the 1st appellant had lost
        her property, and the TM had divorced her. Even if  that  were  so,
        which I reject for all the reasons given, the first  appellant  has
        an interest in family land, and had also looked after her  siblings
        property in Pakistan (para 99), so she still  has  assets  in  that
        country, and somewhere  to  go.  The  overall  credibility  of  the
        appellant's has been severely damaged.

32. It is clear that all of the major elements to support  the  appellants'
    claim in respect of Article 8 had been found by the  judge  not  to  be
    credible. Clearly the judge was satisfied that  the  first  and  second
    appellants were related to their sponsor. The  appellants  had  entered
    the UK on visit visas and within  a  very  short  space  of  time  were
    seeking to remain. They had not been supported by the sponsor prior  to
    coming to the United Kingdom. The appellants had lived separately  from
    the sponsor for a significant period  of  time  before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom living a separate life  in  Pakistan  with  husband  and
    father respectively until coming to the UK. The judge had not found the
    circumstances with regard to the claim to have been forced to  transfer
    her property to the  alleged  ex-husband  credible.  The  judge  within
    paragraph 122 specifically rejects the claim  that  the  appellant  had
    lost all her property or that her husband had divorced her.  The  judge
    was satisfied that the first appellant continued to have an interest in
    family land and that she also had siblings in Pakistan and had property
    of her siblings that she looked after.

33. There was no evidence of dependency of the second  appellant  upon  the
    sponsor. The second appellant appears to have  been  supported  by  his
    father in Pakistan. No reason appears to have been given other than the
    fact that he was 16 at the time of entering the United  Kingdom  as  to
    why he could not return to live with his father in Pakistan. There  was
    evidence that he had entered into an Islamic marriage but as  noted  in
    paragraph 130 he was not living with his claimed spouse.

34. The appellants had to prove the basis for claiming that they had family
    and private life rights in the UK and the judge as clearly rejected the
    evidence and account given by the first appellant and the sponsor.  The
    judge has clearly rejected all the major elements that  the  appellants
    were seeking to advance to support their claims of rights to remain  in
    the UK.

35. The compassionate circumstances with regard to the third child  of  the
    sponsor's family are clearly set out within paragraphs 94 and 95 of the
    determination.  Whilst  the  judge   notes   that   the   compassionate
    circumstances with regard to the child, the child  had  not  been  born
    until 14th May 2013 after the application to remain had  been  made  by
    the appellants. It became clear within six months of the child's  birth
    that the child was ill.  The judge does point  out  that  those  issues
    were not raised until after the decisions had been  made.  The  sponsor
    has two other children, who at the time of the hearing  were  five  and
    four. The elder of the two children appears to  be  in  school.  It  is
    correct to say that the judge does not challenge  that  the  appellants
    appeared to be providing some degree of support to the sponsor and  his
    family at a difficult time.  However  even  then  as  is  evident  from
    paragraph 124 the judge questioned whether the second appellant who had
    originally authenticated his application with the thumbprint  but  then
    signed the later statement could possibly be assisting the elder  child
    with her homework.

36. In the circumstances the judge took account of all the evidence and has
    made adequate and sufficient findings of facts on the major elements of
    the appellants' claims to deal with the appeal.

37. The second ground relied upon by the appellants is that the  judge  has
    followed the case of Gulshan  (Article  8-New  Rules-correct  Approach)
    UKUT 00640. In following the case of Gulshan  it  is  argued  that  the
    judge has applied a threshold test and failed to  follow  the  guidance
    given in the cases of Razgar 2004 UKHL 27 and Huang 2007 UKHL 11.

38. The decision of MM 2014  EWCA  Civ  985  indicates  that  there  is  no
    justification for an additional threshold in the approach advocated  in
    Razgar and emphasises that the final criteria in Article  8  is  always
    whether the decision is proportionately justified.

39. On an examination of paragraph 131 of the decision  it  is  clear  that
    Judge Gladstone has not gone through all the stages  advocated  in  the
    case law. However the judge does as a final matter make a decision that
    taking account of the findings the case would in any event have  failed
    on proportionality.

40. It is clear that whatever else was a  consideration  in  the  case  the
    judge was satisfied that given the circumstances the  decision  by  the
    respondent was proportionately justified. Given the  findings  of  fact
    made that was a decision that the judge was entitled  to  make  on  the
    evidence.  Whilst there may be issues as to whether there is  a  family
    life and whether the decision interferes with that sufficiently, it was
    for the appellants to prove  such  and  the  judge's  approach  in  not
    examining those issues was to the benefit of the appellants. There  was
    no issue that the decision taken was in accordance  with  the  law  and
    that it was for the purpose of maintaining immigration  control  as  an
    aspect of the economic well-being of the country. The final issue to be
    determined was whether the decision was proportionately justified.  The
    judge has made sufficient findings to enable her to deal  with  article
    8.

41. Given that the judge has fully justified the decision that the decision
    is proportionately justified, there is no material error of law in  the
    approach of the judge.

42. I did at the conclusion of the hearing indicate to the  representatives
    that if there were an error of law, which I do not find to be the case,
    I had all the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and the  findings
    of fact by Judge Gladstone and that I felt in the circumstances I could
    go on to the remake the decision. I am satisfied on the  basis  of  the
    evidence, if there had been an error, I could remake  the  decision  on
    the basis of the evidence currently lodged in any event.

43. In any event even if there had been an error of law and the case had to
    be re-assessed on the basis of the findings of  fact  made,  given  the
    findings I would not have found that there  was  a  close  family  unit
    between the appellants and the sponsor. It is clear that at the time of
    coming to the United Kingdom as found by the judge the appellants  were
    independent of the sponsor financially and had not lived closely to the
    sponsor and his family for a substantial period  of  time.  Whilst  the
    help and assistance that they provided in looking after  the  children,
    whilst the child that was ill was cared for, may have helped the family
    there is no right to pick to have family members in the United  Kingdom
    to assist in that manner. Similarly there was no  evidence  that  other
    family members in the United Kingdom already could  not  have  provided
    that assistance. There are also in the United Kingdom  social  services
    and other organisations that may assist.

44. For the purposes of Article 8 to establish family life  it  has  to  be
    proved that there is  financial  dependence  and  dependence  otherwise
    going beyond the normal ties of family  after  a  member  has  left  to
    establish his own family unit. Given  the  circumstances  there  is  no
    financial dependency on the basis of the findings  by  Judge  Gladstone
    and whilst support and assistance has been provided I do not find  that
    such goes beyond that which could be expected in a family situation.  I
    take the approach advocate did in the case of Kugathas 2003 INLR 170.

45. By reason of the matters set out I would not have found that there  was
    a family life under Article  8.  If  there  were  a  family  life,  the
    decision would significantly interfere with that family life,  I  would
    in any event have found that the decision was in  accordance  with  the
    law and for the purposes  of  maintaining  immigration  control  as  an
    aspect of the economic well-being of the country. The final issue to be
    determined to gain is the issue of proportionality.

46. In assessing proportionality I do take  account  of  the  circumstances
    both of the appellant and the sponsor's family. However I am  satisfied
    on the evidence that it is clear and evident that the  appellants  came
    to the United Kingdom seeking to remain here. I  am  satisfied  however
    are that the appellants have financial means and accommodation back  in
    Pakistan with which to support themselves and have  family  members  in
    Pakistan on whom they can rely for assistance  and  support.  Whilst  I
    take account of the compassionate circumstances, I am satisfied in  all
    the circumstances that the decision to remove each of the appellants is
    proportionately justified.

47. For the reasons set out there is no material error of  law  within  the
    original determination and the decision to dismiss the appeals  on  all
    grounds stands.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


