

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17971/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st March 2014                            |On 27th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                                  Miss Uzma Mahmood


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Ali (instructed by Shehzad Law Chambers)
For the Respondent:  Mr A McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
         permission, against a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge Pickup) who  in a determination promulgated on 5th  December
         2013 dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision to refuse her leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier
         1 (Entrepreneur) migrant.
    2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that Judge Pickup had
         not determined all the grounds of appeal raised by  the  Appellant,
         in particular that the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the
         Human Rights Act 1998 and on Article 8 grounds.


    3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge granting permission felt that it was
         an arguable error of law to fail to consider the Appellant's  human
         rights.


    4.   The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  on
         12th February 2014. On that occasion she was tasked  with  deciding
         whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of law and
         if so whether and to what extent the determination  should  be  set
         aside. She noted that the grounds were that the error was a failure
         to deal with Article 8.  She also noted that the Secretary of State
         argued that Article 8 was not engaged because there was no  removal
         decision.


    5.   Mrs Ali however sought  to  argue  before  Judge  Bruce  that  the
         decision  was  flawed  for  procedural  impropriety.   She   sought
         permission to amend the  grounds  of  appeal  which  had  not  been
         drafted by her.  She  told  Judge  Bruce  that  she  had  been  the
         representative before Judge Pickup and that the case  had  been  on
         the float list.  She told Judge Bruce that Judge Pickup  would  not
         permit her to make an Article 8 argument or permit her to call oral
         evidence. At that point Judge Bruce, quite rightly pointed  out  to
         Mrs Ali that if she was intending to make  such  a  suggestion  she
         would firstly need to seek to amend the grounds,  secondly  file  a
         witness statement and thirdly would be unable to represent the case
         because she was a witness. She therefore adjourned the  hearing  to
         enable the Appellant to obtain advice  about  whether  she  was  to
         pursue those matters and for Mrs Ali to take instructions.


    6.   Between then and the hearing  before  me  those  representing  the
         Appellant made a Rule 15 application to submit further evidence  in
         the event that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  set
         aside, an application to amend the grounds to submit that the Judge
          erred in failing to address the grounds of appeal  which  in  fact
         were not before him as they were not in the court file and that  it
         was an error to  have  proceeded  without  the  grounds  of  appeal
         because in so doing he did not address all grounds of appeal.


    7.   The representatives also submitted a  bundle  of  documents  which
         included the original grounds  of  appeal  that  should  have  been
         before the First-tier Tribunal but were not. They  did  not  pursue
         any allegation of procedural unfairness on the part of Judge Pickup
         and indeed Mrs Ali appeared again in front of me.


    8.   Firstly, I would make clear  that  it  is  quite  clear  from  the
         Tribunal's IT system that the grounds of appeal, omitted  when  the
         original Notice of Appeal was submitted, were received by the First-
         tier Tribunal  prior to the hearing before Judge  Pickup  but  were
         not put on the file and therefore not before him. I have seen those
         grounds  of  appeal.  They  are  lengthy.   Paragraph   1   is   an
         "Introduction". Paragraphs 2 to 11 are "Background" and the grounds
         start at paragraph 12 on  page  7.  Paragraphs  12  through  to  20
         complain that the Secretary  of  State  did  not  act  fairly.  The
         grounds are then summarised in paragraph 21 as five  points.   This
         is the crucial part of the grounds so I set it out in full:-


             (I) That the decision is not in accordance with the law;


              (II) That the decision is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public  authority  not  to  act
             contrary to the Human Rights Convention) as being incompatible
             with the Appellant's Convention rights;


              (III) That the decision is otherwise not in  accordance  with
         the law;


                (IV)  That  the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
             exercised  differently   a   discretion   conferred   by   the
             Immigration Rules.


               (V) That removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom  in
             consequence of the immigration decision  breaches  the  United
             Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or would be
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being
             incompatible with the Appellant convention rights.


    9.   It is abundantly clear that paragraph 21 is a  standard  paragraph
         inserted into all grounds  by  these  representatives.  It  has  no
         distinct application to a  particular  appeal.  So  much  is  clear
         because paragraph (V) refers to the decision breaching the  Refugee
         Convention when clearly that was never an  issue  in  this  appeal.
         Similarly paragraph (IV) refers to a discretion  conferred  by  the
         Immigration Rules when in PBS cases there is no discretion.


    10.  Accordingly, the reference to section 6 of the Human Rights Act is
         part of that standard paragraph. Nowhere  in  the  preceding  seven
         pages of grounds is there any reference to the  Appellant's  family
         or private life or any thing indicating  how  removal  would  be  a
         disproportionate breach of her Article 8 rights.


    11.  I asked Mrs Ali to take me to  the  evidence  in  the  Appellant's
         bundle before the First-tier Tribunal that went to Article  8.   In
         short there was none.  The best Mrs  Ali  could  do  was  refer  to
         paragraph 4 of the Appellant's witness statement that reads:  -  "I
         first entered the UK on 19/01/2007 for studies"


    12.   I asked Mrs Ali to take  me  to  a  skeleton  argument  that  the
         decision breached Article 8.  There was no skeleton argument in  my
         or the Home Office Presenting Officers' file.  She did produce  one
         however and copies were made. That four-page document  contains  no
         reference whatsoever to Article 8.
    13.  The a Record of Proceedings indicates that  the  Appellant  relied
         upon the principles of  fairness  and  the  evidential  flexibility
         policy only.


    14.   It  is  abundantly  clear  therefore  that  Article  8,  although
         contained in a standard paragraph in the grounds of appeal, was not
         relied upon at the hearing, no submissions were made with regard to
         it and no evidence was adduced  in  relation  to  it.  Accordingly,
         Judge Pickup can hardly be criticised for failing to deal with  it.
         The total absence of evidence or submissions in relation to Article
         8 would justifiably lead him to assume that it was not relied upon.
         I am reinforced in that decision by the judgement in Sarkar  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 195 in which the Court of Appeal make  clear  that  if  an
         argument is not pursued before the First-tier Tribunal then it  can
         be taken that the Appellant has abandoned it and  at  paragraph  19
         Lord Justice Moore-Bick indicated it was not suggested, nor in  his
         view could it be, that the Act required the Tribunal  to  determine
         grounds of appeal which the Appellant had chosen not to pursue.


    15.  In any event there is absolutely no evidence  in  this  case  that
         could possibly lead to  the  appeal  being  allowed  on  Article  8
         grounds.


    16.  There is no other ground of appeal that it can be said  the  Judge
         ought to have dealt with but did not.  The fact  that  the  grounds
         were not before him is thus immaterial.  In any event the Appellant
         was represented by Counsel who submitted a  skeleton  argument  and
         presented the case and should be expected to make  all  the  points
         relied upon.


    16.  Accordingly, I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an
         error of law in its determination  and  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                 Dated 21st March 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
