
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17549/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 5 December 2016              |On 6 December 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |Vidharshana Bhathiya Bandara S Palihana           |Respondent   |
|           |Wickramasinghe Mudiyanselage                      |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms. B Daykin, of Counsel, instructed by Theva
                    Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Permission has been granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Graham  who,  following  a
    hearing on 2 June 2016, allowed outright the appeal of Mr Mudiyanselage
    (hereafter the "applicant"), a national of Sri Lanka born on  28  March
    1983, against a decision of the Secretary of State  of  28  April  2015
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area`) Regulations  2006  (the
    "2006 EEA Regulations").

 2. The applicant had made  an  application  on  29  December  2014  for  a
    residence card as the unmarried partner of  a  Ms  Prianka  Sinnathamby
    (hereafter the "sponsor"), an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in
    the United Kingdom. The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  that  the
    applicant was an extended family member under regulation 8(5) of t 2006
    EEA Regulations. She did not accept that the applicant was in a durable
    relationship with the sponsor.

 3. The judge found the applicant and the sponsor  credible  witnesses  and
    that they were in  a  durable  relationship.  She  allowed  the  appeal
    outright under the 2006 EEA regulations.

 4. The Secretary of State's grounds, which were lodged on  15  June  2016,
    contended that the judge had materially erred  in  law,  in  that,  she
    failed to follow the decision  in  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) head note (iii) of which states:

           Regulation 17(4) makes the issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
           OFM/extended family member a matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
           Secretary of State has not yet  exercised  that  discretion  the
           most an Immigration Judge is entitled to  do  is  to  allow  the
           appeal as being not in  accordance  with  the  law  leaving  the
           matter of whether to exercise this discretion in the appellant's
           favour or not to the Secretary of State.

 5. On 19 September 2016, the Upper Tribunal reported the decision in  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). This was a decision in
    an appeal heard before Mr C M G Ockelton,  Vice  President,  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb. The Upper Tribunal held in Sala that there is  no
    statutory right of appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State not to grant a residence card to  a  person  claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member.

 6. At the hearing, Ms Jones informed me that she could not go  behind  the
    decision in Sala on the basis of which she said she had to accept  that
    the applicant did not have a right of appeal. However, she was keen  to
    ensure that the finding of  the  judge,  that  the  applicant  and  the
    sponsor were in a durable relationship, be preserved.

 7. I drew the attention of Ms Jones to the fact that, if the judge did not
    have jurisdiction to entertain an appeal, her  reasoning  and  findings
    are in law something that should not have taken place. Nevertheless, it
    is right to acknowledge that the Secretary of State did not take  issue
    with the judge's reasoning and her finding that, as at the date of  the
    hearing before the judge, the applicant was an extended  family  member
    because he was in a durable relationship with the sponsor.

 8. Given that Ms Jones accepted that the judge did not  have  jurisdiction
    to entertain an appeal, I have decided that the decision of  the  judge
    does involve an error on a point of law such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside. The error is that  the  judge  did  not  have  jurisdiction  and
    therefore she erred in proceeding to decide the appeal. The error as to
    jurisdiction is self-evidently material.

 9. I have re-made the decision on the appeal. On the authority of Sala and
    as accepted by Ms Jones, I have concluded that the  applicant's  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal was not a valid appeal against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse the applicant's application  for  a
    residence card as an extended family member.

10. On this basis, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
    allowed.

11. However, given that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  challenge  the
    judge's reasoning, I record that, although she is not bound to do so in
    law, the Secretary of State ought to take the  judge's  reasoning  into
    account if the issue as to whether the applicant was an extended family
    member of the sponsor as at 2 June 2016 (the date of the hearing before
    the judge) is relevant to any further decision that  the  Secretary  of
    State may make.

12. Mr Duffy informed me that he would note  in  the  respondent's  records
    that the Secretary of  State  had  granted  a  residence  card  to  the
    applicant in Sala in any event.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law such that it fell to be set aside. I have  set  aside
    it. I have proceeded  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the  appeal.  The
    decision is that there is no valid  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision of 28 April 2015 because there was no right of  appeal
    against that decision.

[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 5 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
