
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17723/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 20th January 2015                      |On 9th April 2015                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEpartment
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Miss THai Hai Ha Tran
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Claimant:  Ms Tran attended in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Miss Thai Hai Ha Tran date  of  birth  11th  of  November
    1981, is a citizen of Vietnam.  I have considered whether or not any of
    the parties to the present proceedings requires the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. Having considered all the circumstances I  do  not
    make such a direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal. For the purposes of the  present
    proceedings I refer to Ms Tran as the claimant so as not to confuse the
    parties in any reference to original determination, in  which  she  was
    the appellant.

 3. The claimant made application to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of long residence and on the basis of Article 8 private life.  By
    decision taken on 24 March 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    claimant's application and made a decision to remove the claimant  from
    the United Kingdom. The claimant appealed against the  decisions  taken
    by the Secretary of State. The appeal was heard by Judge Hawden-Beal on
    the 2nd October 2014.

 4. By the determination promulgated on 17 October 2014 the  judge  allowed
    the claimant's appeal on Article  8  private  life  grounds  only.  The
    appeal on immigration grounds was dismissed.

 5. By decision made on the 2 December 2014 leave to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade  to  the
    Secretary of State. Thus the matter appears before me to  determine  in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 6. The grounds of appeal seek to argue two issues, namely:

      a) That the judge has misdirected himself in that he has  allowed  the
         appeal on Article 8 grounds on a near miss basis, that is,  as  the
         claimant in the main meets  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules the appeal should be allowed by reason thereof.

      b) That the judge has failed to apply section 117 B  of  2002  Act  as
         amended correctly. It is asserted that the judge has considered the
         period of time that the claimant has been in the United Kingdom and
         has failed to notice that that  period  has  all  been  whilst  the
         immigration status of the claimant  has  either  been  unlawful  or
         precarious and as such little weight should be given to the private
         life acquired during that period of time.

 7. There is a rule 24 response. I have in coming to  a  decision  in  this
    matter considered all of  the  documents  and  evidence  presented  and
    examined with care the determination by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 8. The claimant first arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003. She  has  not
    left the United Kingdom since that date. The claimant  has  had  lawful
    leave to remain for most of that period. However for the period between
    June 2010 and 9 November 2011 there was a gap in her  lawful  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. I draw attention to paragraph 12  of  the
    determination, in which detail is given to the circumstances.

 9. As stated the claimant arrived as a student in 2003 and had  her  leave
    extended  at  various  stages  until  July  2009.  At  that  stage   an
    application to extend was made but that application was refused and her
    appeal against that the refusal was dismissed in December 2009.  It  is
    indicated that  there  were  onward  appeals  but  these  were  finally
    dismissed on June 11, 2010. As of 11 June  2010  the  claimant  had  no
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom. For the period December 2009  to
    June 2010 the claimant's leave would be  extended  in  accordance  with
    Section 3C of the 1971 Immigration Act.

10. There is then a break of 16 months before  the  appellant  was  granted
    further leave.

11. It appears as set out in her  statement  that  the  claimant  had  been
    studying at college and there was no issue with regard to the  claimant
    being a genuine student, attending diligently and working  assiduously.
    However, after the claimant had made an application for further  leave,
    the college, at which she was studying, was taken off the  register  of
    approved sponsors. The college having been taken off the  register  the
    claimant's  application  was   refused.   As   set   out   below   some
    responsibility for the break in lawful leave may lie with the claimant,
    who at material times may have submitted her application and  documents
    late.

12. Subsequent to the appeal involving the claimant being dismissed,  cases
    such as Thakur 2011 UKUT 151 and Patel 2011 UKUT 211  have  dealt  with
    similar issues, where through no fault of an applicant he or she  found
    that they were no longer able to continue their studies. The applicants
    concerned were to be given a further short period of  leave  to  enable
    them to make a fresh application. That course  was  not  taken  in  the
    claimant's case, it may be in part because  one  or  other  application
    made by the claimant was late. Had that been done it may  be  that  the
    period without leave would have been reduced.

13. In  order  to  succeed  on  the  basis  of  long  residence  under  the
    immigration rules the claimant was required to have 10 years continuous
    lawful residence. Short breaks in such lawful residence were  permitted
    but not breaks of 16 months. There was a  discretion  under  the  rules
    whereby the Secretary of State could consider whether  or  not  in  the
    circumstances to allow the application. The judge correctly within  the
    determination has considered the  application  of  the  rules  and  the
    exercise of the discretion. The judge has come to the  conclusion  that
    the claimant does not meet the requirements of the rules and  that  the
    refusal to exercise the discretion was justified in the circumstances.

14. In coming to that decision the judge noted that during  the  period  of
    the gap in lawful residence the claimant  may  have  made  applications
    late and may be in part responsible for the gap  in  lawful  residence.
    Before me the claimant and her partner sought to  explain  that  having
    had the application refused because the college lost its licence, other
    problems than arose with changes in the rules and the  requirements  of
    the rules as to the dates that bank statements had to cover, the  dates
    and details on the CAS and other documentary requirements resulting  in
    the claimant having to submit applications and supporting documents and
    then having to resubmit another application  with  different  documents
    because of the changes.  The claimant indicated that she was  receiving
    help from one or other college at which she had been studying and still
    the problems with the documentation because of the changes in the rules
    arose. It appears that even the colleges themselves were  uncertain  as
    to what documents were required.

15. Ultimately, having marshalled the documents needed for the application,
    a valid  application  was  made,  the  claimant  was  given  leave  and
    commenced  studying  on  a  degree  course   at   the   University   of
    Bedfordshire. At the time of the grant, the claimant was in the  second
    year of her three-year degree course having lodged an application which
    was granted in November 2011.

16. It appears to be accepted that the total period without  leave  was  16
    months.

17. The judge having considered all the  circumstances,  as  stated,  found
    that the claimant did not meet the requirements to be granted leave  on
    the basis of long residence and found  that  the  refusal  to  exercise
    discretion in favour of the claimant was justified.

18. The judge thereafter went on to consider Article 8 outside the rules on
    the basis of private life. It is at this point  that  it  is  suggested
    that the judge has applied a near-miss principle to the case. The judge
    in the course of the determination makes reference to the fact that the
    appellant had some nine years and seven months lawful leave and that by
    comparison the 16 months without leave was relatively a short period.

19. There was a skeleton argument on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    before the judge and that issue was specifically addressed.

20. I do not accept that the judge has applied a near miss  principle.  The
    judge has not merely stated that because the claimant  has  nearly  met
    the requirements of the rules and there is a relatively short period of
    time for which the appellant did not have valid leave, she was allowing
    the appeal. The judge  has  considered  all  of  the  circumstances  in
    assessing article 8. The length of time that the claimant has  been  in
    the United Kingdom and the lawfulness of  that  length  of  time  is  a
    material factor. It is a fact that the judge is required to  take  into
    account, albeit in accordance with section 117B of the 2002 Act, it may
    be that little weight has to be given to such. However it is  certainly
    a factor that has to be taken into account. The judge has  gone  on  to
    consider other factors such as the commitment that the claimant had  to
    her education; the relationship that the claimant had with her partner;
    the business that the claimant has established; the work that  she  has
    undertaken in establishing that business. The judge has also considered
    various references from people, who know the claimant, with  regard  to
    the claimant's integration into the United Kingdom.

21. Besides the factors set out in 117 B  (4)  section  117  also  requires
    consideration to be given to other factors such as the  ability  of  an
    individual to speak English and the ability to  maintain  oneself,  the
    judge has considered such factors.  In  such  circumstances  I  do  not
    accept the judge has applied a  near  miss  principal.  The  judge  has
    considered many other factors in considering the Article 8 exercise, as
    she was obliged to do.

22. The second point raised relates to paragraph 29  of  the  determination
    and section  117A  -  B  of  the  2002  Act  as  amended  [specifically
    subparagraphs (B) (4) and (5)]. Section 117 provides: --

         117A Application of this part

             1) This part applies where a Court or Tribunal is  required  to
                determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-



                   a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and
                   family life under Article 8 , and

                   b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the
                   Human Rights Act 1998

             2) In considering the public interest in question, the court or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                   a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section
                   117B, ...

             3) In subsection (2), " the public interest question" means the
                question of whether an interference with a person's right to
                respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified  under
                Article 8 (2)

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

             1) The maintenance of effective immigration control is  in  the
                public interest.

             2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                the persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons  who  can
                speak English-

                   a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                   b) a better able to integrate into society.

             3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are financially independent because such persons-

                   a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                   b) a better able to integrate into society

             4) Little weight should be given to-

                   a) a private life,

                   b) a relationship formed with the qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully

             5) Little weight should be given to a private life establish by
                a person at a time when the persons  immigration  status  is
                precarious.

             6) .....

23. Firstly in respect of section 117B (1-3) the judge is required to  take
    into account specific factors. It is clear from the determination  that
    the judge has taken those factors into account.

24. It is argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that in  paragraph  29
    of the determination  the  judge  has  failed  properly  to  apply  the
    provisions of section 117B.

25.  The  material  part  of  Paragraph  29  deals  with   the   issue   of
    proportionality and Section 117 provides:-

         ... But is it proportionate? She was here lawfully for 2003-10  and
         from 2011 to date which, excluding  the  16  months  when  she  was
         without leave amounts to 9 years and seven months. She has  studied
         throughout almost all of that time and has now started a  business.
         She is not dependent upon public funds can speak English which  are
         the considerations under the public interest question now posed  in
         section 117B of the 2002 Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act. I
         accept that her private life during the 16 months when she  had  no
         leave to be here, was continuing when  her  status  was  precarious
         accordingly I am obliged to place little weight on that  period  of
         time but that 16 month period is a drop in the ocean when  compared
         to the 115 months she has been here lawfully.

26. First and foremost in  dealing  with  the  period  of  leave  that  the
    claimant had the judge has failed to notice that  part  of  the  period
    falls into subparagraph (4) as the appellant did not  have  any  lawful
    leave to be in the United Kingdom for a period of 16 months. The  judge
    has miscategorised that as  precarious,  when  in  fact  it  should  be
    considered to  be  unlawful.  Whether  that  makes  any  difference  is
    doubtful as in either case the statutory provision requires that little
    weight is to be given to such.

27. It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  take  account  of
    subparagraph (5) in looking  at  the  whole  of  the  period  that  the
    claimant was in the United Kingdom. It is  argued  that  the  statutory
    provisions mean that little weight should be given to any private  life
    acquired during the whole of the period in the United  Kingdom  as  the
    claimant's status was for the remaining period  to  be  categorised  as
    "precarious". Whilst the claimant was in the UK for the period  of  115
    months in total, adding together the periods of leave before and  after
    the break in the leave, it is submitted that her status was  precarious
    throughout the whole of that period. .

28. It is the Secretary of States argument that the  claimant  clearly  had
    been in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2003  and  that  her  status  was
    precarious throughout. On behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  it  was
    contended that the intention of the section was that only a person with
    indefinite leave to remain or with a right to reside as a citizen had a
    status that was not precarious and that anything less than  that  meant
    that the person's immigration status was precarious.

29. Arguably if it had been the intention of the  Parliament  that  only  a
    person with indefinite leave or more permanent status than that  should
    have account or weight given to any private life acquired  during  that
    period of time, the statutory  provision  could  have  stated  such  in
    specific terms. Instead the term used was precarious. In one sense  any
    status is precarious in that it can be  brought  to  an  end  or  maybe
    terminated or deportation proceedings commenced or the leave revoked.

30. However it is argued that the immigration status of an individual being
    defined to a set period, such as a student with three  years  leave  to
    study  on  a  degree  level  course,  is  defined  and  therefore   not
    precarious. Unless action is taken the  student  will  be  entitled  to
    remain for three years and complete his degree course. From that  point
    of view his immigration leave as a student is fixed.

31. Precarious indicates  that  something  is  not  securely  held  or  not
    securely in position or alternatively is dangerously likely to fail  or
    collapse or uncertain or dependent on chance.

32. It is a person's status that is precarious and not the leave that  they
    have. The provisions in Section 117B are  related  to  the  immigration
    status and clearly intended to look to the prospect of having  a  right
    to  remain  at  the  end  of  any  period  of  leave  because  of   the
    establishment of private life in the UK. Where in the normal course  of
    events a person's leave would have to be renewed and  is  therefore  of
    limited duration the prospects of being able to  remain  are  uncertain
    and therefore precarious. The term status requires that  one  looks  at
    the prospects of an individual having a right to remain. Anything  less
    than a continuing right to remain is not secure and is precarious.

33. In that context I take the term precarious to mean that  anything  less
    than indefinite leave would subject a person to the need  to  apply  to
    renew and continue their immigration leave and therefore any leave less
    than indefinite leave renders a person's status as precarious.

34. In failing to treat the claimant's status as precarious  and  therefore
    apply the provisions of section  117B  to  it  the  judge  has  made  a
    material error  of  law  in  assessing  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The
    assessment of article 8 has to take account of the  impact  of  section
    117B and the section is applicable to the whole of the period that  the
    claimant was in the UK.

35. At the hearing before me I invited submission as to  how,  if  I  found
    that there was an error of law, the case should be disposed of.

36. It was accepted that I had all the evidence before  me  upon  which  an
    assessment of Article 8 private life would be made. I am  satisfied  in
    the circumstances that I can justly determine the appeal on  the  basis
    of the evidence before me.

37. I note the  information  recorded  in  the  determination.  I  note  in
    paragraphs 15 and 17 the claimant's friends, her relationships  in  the
    UK and the degree of integration. I note the information  in  paragraph
    16. It is to be noted that the claimant commenced  her  business  after
    her last application was refused. The claimant commenced  her  business
    knowing that at that time she had no status.  I  take  account  of  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

38. In assessing Article 8 there is clearly no family life in the  UK.  The
    claimant has to rely upon private life. Her business was established at
    a time when she was aware that she had no status or  right  to  remain.
    Whilst otherwise the claimant refers to friends and the difficulty that
    she would have in keeping in touch, that would always be the case where
    an individual has been in a country for such a length of  time.  Whilst
    the claimant is in a relationship with a Mr Taylor, they  do  not  live
    together and they are not married. I take account of the fact that  the
    claimant has been running her business for some time.

39. The claimant clearly has established a private  life  in  the  UK.  The
    decisions will clearly  interfere  with  that  private  life.  For  the
    reasons set out in the original  determination  the  decisions  are  in
    accordance with the law and for the purpose of maintaining  immigration
    control, as an aspect of the economic well-being of the country.

40. The  issue  finally  to  be  determined  is  whether  the  decision  is
    proportionately justified. Taking account of all the evidence submitted
    and taking account of section 117B, I find that  the  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State is  proportionately  justified.  In  coming  to  the
    decision indicated I take account of all the evidence advanced  on  the
    claimant's behalf and section 117 of the 2002 Act.

Decision

41. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  a  material  error  of  law  and  I
    substitute the following decision:

      a) I dismiss this appeal on Immigration Rules grounds.

      b) I dismiss this appeal on Human Rights grounds.

      c) I make no fee award.

      d) I make no anonymity direction.



Signed        Date 1st April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

