
[pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17045/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2014                 |On 29th April 2015                   |
|Re made 25.4.2015                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

             DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR MAXWELL SONU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


                             Re making decision

Background

 1. The Claimant was born on 15th February 1983 and is a citizen of Ghana.

 2. The Secretary of State refused his application  for  a  residence  card
    under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  with  reference   to
    Regulations 7 and 8.  The Claimant failed to provide evidence  to  show
    that the proxy marriage in Ghana was lawful according to  Ghanaian  law
    (as the parties needed to show that they  were  of  Ghanaian  descent),
    that the statutory declaration was defective and that the guidelines in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages- EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) were not  met.
    There was insufficient evidence of cohabitation  to  show  the  parties
    were in a durable relationship.

 3. In a decision and reasons dated 13th November 2014, to  which  I  refer
    and on which I rely, the Upper Tribunal found a material error  of  law
    and set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Directions were
    made for the parties to produce evidence and submissions with reference
    to the application of Regulation 8(5) Immigration EEA Regulations  2006
    which remained to be determined. The  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the
    First -tier Tribunal should have gone on to consider the application of
    Regulation 8(5) as to the durability of the relationship.  It made some
    positive comments in its determination [7] but did not give any  proper
    consideration of the evidence or issue, and further  the  Secretary  of
    State did not have the opportunity to consider the 153 page  bundle  of
    documents submitted for the hearing.

Consideration of Regulation 8(5)

 4. Pursuant to the directions  the  Claimant  has  produced  the  original
    bundle of evidence  together  with  photographs,  a  letter  confirming
    pregnancy, witness statements  from  friends  and  neighbours,  utility
    bills, the child's birth certificate, and documents for employment  and
    wage slips.  The Secretary of State did not respond to  the  directions
    made and has not to date served any written  submissions.   I  have  in
    mind that at the error of law hearing there was  no  challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State to the  fact  that  the  Claimant's  wife,  who  was
    pregnant at the First-tier hearing and had since given birth  to  their
    son, or that the  relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting.  I  find
    evidence to show that the parties have been living together and are  in
    a genuine relationship, and that they now  have  a  child  together.  I
    proceed to remake the decision by allowing the appeal under  Regulation
    8(5).  I am satisfied on the evidence before me that the Claimant is in
    a durable  relationship  with  his  partner  who  is  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty Rights.

    The matter remains to be considered by the  Secretary  of  State  under
    Regulation 17 EEA Regulation.

Notice of Decision

5.   The appeal is allowed under Regulation  8(5)  of  the  EEA  Immigration
Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 25.4.2015

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

