
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17081/2013
                                                               IA/17085/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30th July 2014                             |on 13th August 2014          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            RAYMOND OZIEGBE AGBI
                           NNENNA NKECHINYERE AGBI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Ms Carver instructed by Westkin Associates

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On the 16th January 2014 at Stoke it was conceded by Mr Lister that
        the First-tier Tribunal Judge had materially erred in  law.  As  Mr
        Khan, who appeared on behalf of the Appellants  on  that  occasion,
        was without sufficient instructions and documentation to be able to
        proceed  the  hearing  was  adjourned  with  directions  given   to
        facilitate an exchange of evidence and the possibility of agreement
        being reached between  the  parties.  Unfortunately  this  has  not
        occurred and so the  matter  was  listed  for  the  purposes  of  a
        disposal hearing.


     2. The parties have exchanged correspondence regarding the location of
        the original documents submitted with the application, which Mr and
        Mrs Agbi state were not returned to them.  This lead to a  'subject
        access' request being made and Mr Lister  being  contacted  by  the
        relevant team within the Home Office on 3rd July  2014.  Mr  Lister
        was then able to review the file he had been sent and approved  the
        release of the documents although this had not occurred to date  as
        a result of this hearing.  The relevant papers have now  been  made
        available to the Tribunal and Miss Carver. They have been  retained
        by Mr Lister  and  are  to  be  released  in  accordance  with  the
        established procedures.


     3. What the documents allowed the Advocates to do was  to  narrow  the
        issues in dispute.  In fact, it was agreed that there was only  one
        relevant issue at large which  is  whether  the  material  provided
        satisfied the requirement of paragraph 41-SC (c)  (3)  (i)  of  the
        Rules.  It was submitted by Mr Lister that the  business  card  and
        leaflet proved do not show whether they have  been  published  only
        locally or nationally as there is no evidence showing how  far  the
        documents have been distributed and so the prescriptive element  of
        the Rules, had not been met. In relation  to  the  online  material
        proved with the application; this does not mention  the  Appellants
        name(s) and business activities which are  mandatory  requirements,
        on the home page of the website.


     4. Miss Caver accepted that the required information was not contained
        in these documents. As a consequence I find the Appellants have not
        proved that the information provided with the application  met  the
        mandatory requirements of the relevant rule  and  the  appeal  must
        therefore fail.


Decision

     5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


     6. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th August 2014







