
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17188/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th November 2014                           |On 8th January 2015        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                             mr ALI RIZWAN khan
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Pakistan  whose  application  for  a
    residence card as a spouse of a Lithuanian national was refused by  the
    Secretary of State and his subsequent appeal  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clarke in a determination  promulgated  on  1st  October
    2014.  Grounds of application were lodged primarily on the  basis  that
    the judge had failed to  consider  the  Appellant's  bundle  which  was
    submitted to the Tribunal.  It is said  that  had  this  evidence  been
    taken  into  account  the  outcome  of  the  hearing  would  have  been
    different.  Furthermore it was claimed that the  judge  had  failed  to
    take into account that the Appellant's wife had  attended  the  hearing
    and the judge could have asked questions of her.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    who noted that the Tribunal had apologised by  letter  dated  7th  July
    2014 to the effect that they had not yet managed to link the bundle  to
    the file despite evidence of this  having  been  delivered.   As  Judge
    Frankish put it, if the application was to be believed not one but  two
    things had gone "very wrong" with this  case,  namely  the  Appellant's
    evidence not coming into the assessment and the lack of credit for  the
    Sponsor being present.

 3. It was on this basis that the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. Mr Khan (and his wife) was present and  explained  to  me  that  he  no
    longer had legal representation.  He had received  a  letter  from  his
    representatives indicating that they were no longer acting for him  and
    he said he wanted to conduct the case himself.

 5. For the Home Office Miss Isherwood agreed that the judge did  not  have
    the bundle that he should have had, but looking carefully  through  the
    bundle which was now before us there was  no  material  evidence  there
    which would have enabled the judge to  have  changed  his  views.   The
    witness statement did not set out clear employment details for his  EEA
    national spouse.  In all these circumstances there was no error in law.



 6. Mr Khan explained that when he received the refusal letter he  had  not
    been asked to produce further wage slips.  Rather it was said that  the
    company concerned could not be contacted by  telephone  or  located  at
    Companies House, Yell.com or Google etc.  As such the Home  Office  was
    not satisfied that this was a genuine business.  Evidence in his bundle
    showed it was a genuine business.

 7. So far as the Sponsor was concerned, what had happened was that he  had
    told the Home Office Presenting Officer that his wife was  outside  the
    courtroom in response to a question from the solicitor as where was his
    wife.  He did not know he had to bring her into the actual hearing room
    for the appeal.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. As Judge Frankish pointed out in the  granting  of  permission  matters
    went slightly awry at the appeal before Judge Clarke in that the bundle
    which should have been before him was not.  Furthermore, when the judge
    found that he was not assisted by the fact that "the  Sponsor  did  not
    attend the hearing" (paragraph 15) there is no real dispute but that he
    was fundamentally wrong in that regard as the Sponsor had attended  the
    hearing.  This may well have had a bearing  on  his  finding  that  the
    Appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof  (paragraph  11).
    The judge repeated that this was a case where the  onus  of  proof  was
    important (paragraph 16).  He found that he could not rely on  the  two
    letters from Afro World.  However in the Appellant's bundle - which the
    judge should have had but did not - reference is made  to  Afro  World.
    Documents are produced which show the company does exist; in particular
    at page 29 there is a letter from Companies  House  referring  to  Afro
    World.  At page 30 there is  a  Google  document  confirming  that  the
    company does exist and details are provided.

10. In my view these documents are fundamental to the Appellant's case  and
    the fact that the judge was  denied  an  opportunity  to  consider  the
    documents amounted to severe procedural unfairness on the Appellant.

11. It therefore seems to me that the Appellant has not had a fair  hearing
    because the judge was not in a position  to  consider  documents  which
    should have been before him which  may  well  have  had  a  significant
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal.  Unfortunately, it  seems  to  me
    that further fact finding is necessary and this matter will have to  be
    heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in
    its entirety.  No findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  stand.
    Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2
    the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I set aside the decision.

15. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 7th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


