
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17998/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 March 2016                     |On 11 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            FATMA ELZAHRAA KHALIL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs. N. Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hindson, which was  promulgated  on  7
    August 2015. Mrs Khalil (hereafter "the  claimant")  is  a  citizen  of
    Egypt born on 23 April 1966.

2.    The claimant's  application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner was refused by the Secretary of State on  28  April  2015.  The
    appeal was decided by First- tier Tribunal Judge Hindson on the papers.
    The Judge noted that the claimant had extant leave  to  remain  as  the
    dependent of a Tier 1 Migrant, valid until September  2016.  The  Judge
    concluded that as the claimant did  not  have  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner under Appendix FM of the Rules, she could not qualify for leave
    in that category there under.  The  Judge  proceeded  to  consider  the
    appeal contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR. The Judge  was  of  the  view
    that the facts in the appeal required consideration of  the  principles
    enunciated in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 as  the  sole  basis  of
    refusal was to require the claimant to  return  to  Egypt  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance. The Judge  noted  that  there  was  no
    dispute the claimant's husband had been granted ILR.  The  Judge  noted
    with reference to  the  refusal  letter  that  one  of  the  claimant's
    children was "settled" in the UK, but there was no explanation why  the
    other child was not. The Judge concluded that it  was  unreasonable  to
    expect the claimant to return to Egypt with either one or both  of  her
    children, or to leave them behind in order to make and  application  to
    return. The Judge then stated as follows at paragraph 14:

    "I therefore allow the appeal under  Article  8  but  to  this  limited
    extent. The decision is to be remitted back to the Secretary  of  State
    so that a decision can be made on consideration of those components  of
    the Rule that have not been considered."

    The Judge gave notice of his decision in the following terms:

    "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds."

3.    The appeal by the Secretary of State is pleaded on  the  grounds  that
    the Judge erred by requiring the Secretary of  State  to  consider  the
    Immigration Rules when a finding had been made that  the  claimant  did
    not meet the Rules. It was further  argued  that  the  Judge  erred  in
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.    The Secretary of State's appeal against this decision  came  before  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to review it and to decide whether  or
    not to grant permission to appeal. On 16  February  2016  Judge  Chohan
    granted permission to appeal finding that the Judge had arguably  erred
    in law.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

5.    The claimant failed to attend the hearing. The Tribunal was  satisfied
    that the claimant had been duly notified of the date, time and place of
    hearing. There was no explanation for the claimant's absence. As I  was
    not satisfied that the situation would be any different if the Tribunal
    adjourned the appeal, I considered that it  was  in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed in the claimant's absence pursuant to rule 38 of The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  I  heard  submissions
    from Mrs Willocks-Briscoe at the end of which I reserved  my  decision.



Decision on Error of Law

6.    I am satisfied that  the  Judge's  decision  involved  the  making  of
    errors of law such that his decision must be set aside.

7.    With respect to the Judge, this is a  confused  decision  which  lacks
    clarity and reasoning. At [11] he finds that the claimant  cannot  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM of the Rules. However, at paragraph  14
    he states thus:

         "... The decision is to be remitted back to the Secretary of  State
         so that a decision can be made on consideration of those components
         of the Rule that have not been considered".

8.    It seems that the components of the Rule the Judge concluded  had  not
    been considered was in respect  of  the  financial  requirements  [12].
    Whilst, it is apparent from the letter of refusal  that  the  financial
    requirements had not been considered because  the  claimant  could  not
    meet the Rules on grounds of eligibility, there was simply no basis  in
    fact and law to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    reconsideration. The Rules could not be met.

9.    Notwithstanding  the  flawed  approach  under  the  Rules,  the  Judge
    ultimately allowed the appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  contrary  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR. In so doing his findings  encapsulated  at  [13]
    state as follows:

    "It is not disputed by the decision maker that the appellant's  husband
    has ILR. The refusal letter makes reference to one of  the  appellant's
    children being "settled", though it does not explain why,  or  why  the
    other child is not. In any  event,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  entirely
    unreasonable to expect the appellant and one or both of  her  children,
    to leave the UK and return to Egypt in order  to  make  an  application
    there to join her settled husband. It is equally unreasonable to expect
    her to leave one or both of her children in the UK whilst she goes back
    to Egypt."

10.   It was fundamentally on this basis that the Judge allowed the  appeal.
    Whilst the decision is silent as  to  the  answer  to  the  first  four
    questions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and fails  to  have  regard  to  the
    public interest, which is in itself a material  error,  the  difficulty
    with [13] is that it is conclusionary  and  stands  unsubstantiated  by
    reference to any evidence either at this juncture or elsewhere  in  the
    decision. I thus  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the  Judge's
    decision lacks sufficient reasoning and cannot stand. I set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Re-making the Decision

11.   The claimant waived her right to an oral hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal. She has had sufficient time to submit evidence in
      support of the appeal and she has not attended today. I am satisfied
      that I can and should proceed to remake the decision as Mrs Willocks-
      Briscoe invited me to do.

12.   I re-make the decision on the basis of the evidence before the  First-
      tier Tribunal, and the submissions that  I  have  heard  today.  I  am
      dismissing this appeal for the following reasons.

13.   Whilst Mrs Willocks-Briscoe pointed  out  that  the  claimant  is  not
      facing removal as she has extant leave to remain until September 2016,
      the claimant  nevertheless  has  raised  Article  8  and,  whilst  the
      exercise is somewhat academic in the circumstances, section 82 of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  permits  a  hypothetical
      consideration of Article 8 in the event of a removal.

14.   The evidence in the appeal is limited to say the least. Neither  party
      provided an appeal bundle. There is a  copy  of  the  refusal  letter,
      Notice of Appeal, Grounds of Appeal and some supporting documents.

15.   I first turn to consider the Immigration Rules. It  is  apparent  that
      the claimant does not qualify for leave as a partner under Appendix FM
      of the Rules on eligibility grounds  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
      Secretary of State in her decision. As the Exception to Appendix FM is
      not a freestanding provision the claimant does not qualify  for  leave
      on that basis either and, in  any  event,  there  is  no  evidence  to
      substantiate that the criteria under either limb of the  exception  is
      met. Further, the claimant fails to qualify for leave on private  life
      grounds pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. She has  not  lived
      in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  20  years.  In  relation  to
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) there is no evidence to substantiate a finding
      that the claimant has no ties to Egypt (that being the version of  the
      Rule in force at the  date  of  application).  Indeed  the  claimant's
      passport shows that she has visited that country on several  occasions
      since her arrival in December 2009.

16.   As for Article 8 outside of the Rules, there is no  dispute  that  the
      claimant has an established family life with her settled  husband  and
      her two children one of which is also settled here. Other  than  these
      bare facts there is no evidence as to the nature and circumstances  of
      the claimant's family life or private life for  that  matter.  I  thus
      concur with the submission of Mrs Willocks-Briscoe that  there  is  no
      evidence that could substantiate an interference of sufficient gravity
      so as to engage Article 8, but even in the event that there  was  such
      an interference, there is no evidence that it would be unreasonable to
      expect the claimant to return to Egypt  either  permanently  with  her
      family or on a temporary basis. For similar reasons, the claimant  has
      failed to prove that  the  public  interest  considerations  that  the
      Tribunal must have regard to should not prevail in her  case.  In  the
      absence of any evidence in respect of the children's age,  health  and
      circumstances the only conclusion that I can draw is that it is in the
      best interests of the children, which I have considered as  a  primary
      consideration, for them to remain  with  their  mother.  Such  is  the
      lacuna in  the  evidence  in  this  case  that  it  only  permits  one
      conclusion.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.  I  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.  This  appeal   is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
