
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17428/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 6 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                              Miss Evin Atabay
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Joshi, Legal Representative from Kinas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Law promulgated on 30 May 2014 in which he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision made on 14 March 2014 refusing to vary  leave
    to enter or  remain  by  reference  to  the  Turkey-European  Community
    Association Agreement and, secondly, issuing removal  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in the decision  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Law.

3.   At the hearing before me Mr Parkinson and Ms Joshi confirmed that  they
    had had a preliminary discussion and reached agreement that there was a
    material error of law and that the matter should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

4.   The grounds of appeal allege that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    wrong to dismiss the appeal on the grounds of non-compliance  with  the
    Procedure Rules, specifically finding  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    supply a notice of immigration  decision  together  with  her  form  of
    notice of appeal, under Rule 15(2)(c) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  The  appellant  argued  that   she
    experienced difficulties in  lodging  the  form  of  notice  of  appeal
    together with a copy of the relevant immigration decision by  fax  with
    the Tribunal and she made reference to several attempts  to  lodge  her
    proceedings and produced emails in support.  Within the file of  papers
    I retrieved a form of notice of appeal together with  the  respondent's
    immigration decision which were faxed to the Tribunal on 1  April  2014
    at 15.19 hours and officially stamped as received by the Tribunal on  1
    April 2014 (which was the deadline for the appeal).


5.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy on  17  June
    2014 and he concluded that it was arguable  that  the  judge  erred  by
    disposing of the appeal under Rule 15 rather than Rule 9(2) of the said
    Procedure Rules.  I am satisfied that Rule 9(2) does not apply  to  the
    particular circumstances.

Discussion

6.   I find that there is evidence to show that the Tribunal  administration
    accepted the notice of appeal together with  the  immigration  decision
    forwarded by the appellant on 1 April 2014 within the  time  limit.   I
    find that First Tier Tribunal's decision  was  procedurally  wrong  and
    unfair as it effectively denied the appellant   her  the  right  to  an
    appeal hearing. There was evidence that she  met  the  time  limit  for
    lodging the appeal and that she had  in  fact  submitted  the  relevant
    paperwork.  I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Tribunal decision.

Decision

7.   There is a material error of law in the  decision.   I  set  aside  the
    determination. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor
    House to be heard on 16 December 2014 (not before Immigration Judge J S
    Law).

Signed                                  Date 4.8.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

No anonymity order
No fee award.

Signed                                  Date 4.8.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
