
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17012/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th April 2017                      |On 5th May 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                      DH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Noor of Blackstone Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 21st  April
    2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis of  his
    private and family life in the UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 10th October 2016.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    5th April 2009 with entry clearance as  a  working  holidaymaker  valid
    from 22nd March 2009 until 22nd March 2011.  It appears that he did not
    apply for further leave to remain and overstayed that leave.

 4. According to the papers the Appellant met his partner early in 2013 and
    they had an Islamic marriage on  3rd  November  2014.  The  Appellant's
    partner, who is  a  British  citizen,  has  a  child  from  a  previous
    relationship who is also a British  citizen.   The  Appellant  and  his
    partner also had a daughter born on 1st August 2015.  At  the  time  of
    the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's  partner  was
    pregnant with the couple's second child.

 5. In the Reasons for Refusal Letter the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  under
    the partner route because the couple were not in a valid  marriage  and
    had not at that time been living together for at least two years  prior
    to the date of  the  application.   It  was  not  considered  that  the
    Appellant met the definition of a parent in relation to  his  partner's
    child. The Secretary of State considered that  the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE.   The  Secretary  of  State
    noted that the Appellant's partner  was  pregnant  but  said  that  the
    Appellant's partner was not expected to leave the UK and  was  entitled
    to a full range of care and support services as a  British  citizen  in
    the UK.

 6. The judge noted in  his  decision  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    concluded that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of  Appendix
    FM or paragraph 276ADE.  The  judge  set  out  the  provisions  of  the
    guidance set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  and  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 7. The judge accepted that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his daughter, who is a qualifying child as a  British
    citizen.  In assessing proportionality at paragraph 23 the judge looked
    at the Secretary of State's published guidance as to when it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK and  noted
    that the Appellant has a  poor  immigration  history  but  went  on  to
    consider wider circumstances. The  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    partner has suffered with schizophrenia since the age of 16 and  is  in
    receipt of prescribed medication and  the  assistance  of  a  community
    psychiatric nurse to manage her condition.  The judge took into account
    that, as a sufferer with a significant mental illness  the  Appellant's
    partner has responsibility for two, soon to be  three,  young  children
    and that she receives very considerable support from the Appellant.

 8. The judge said that given the Appellant's partner's circumstances  with
    young  children  and  schizophrenia,  the  prospect  of  her   securing
    employment that will take her over the financial threshold of  Appendix
    FM is remote as are the prospects of her saving sufficient funds to  be
    able to  visit  the  Appellant  in  Bangladesh  with  their  two  young
    children.  Therefore the  judge  concluded  that  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant would separate a father from his two young children  for  the
    considerable foreseeable future. In those circumstances, even with  the
    Appellant's poor immigration history, the judge considered that removal
    is not appropriate and the judge was not satisfied that the decision to
    remove is proportionate [23].

 9. The Secretary of State contends in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge
    failed to address herself in line  with  the  guidance  in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and to identify whether there is a compelling  case
    for a grant of leave outside the Rules where the provisions of Appendix
    FM cannot be met.  It is contended that it cannot be inferred that  the
    mere fact of the Sponsor's  medical  condition  constitutes  compelling
    circumstances. It is contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    consideration of the statutory considerations under Section 117B of the
    2002 Act was inadequate.  It is contended that no recognition was given
    to the fact that  little  weight  ought  to  have  been  given  to  the
    relationship which was formed when the Appellant had no leave to remain
    in the UK.

10. The Secretary of State contends that the reference  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to the decision in Zambrano is misconceived  as  if  the
    Appellant is removed the British children could remain in the  UK  with
    the mother.  They are not forced to leave the UK.  It is contended that
    the assertion by the judge that  an  application  for  entry  clearance
    would be unlikely to succeed should have weighed against the  Appellant
    in any Article 8 analysis.

11. The  second  Ground  of  Appeal  contends  that  the  judge  failed  to
    articulate why in all the circumstances it would not be reasonable  for
    the family to relocate to Bangladesh nor why it would not be reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    22nd February 2017 on the basis that the grounds of appeal are arguable
    as the Appellant is in a situation of his own making in  which  it  was
    known that he was liable to removal and that children are not a  bypass
    to the Immigration Rules nor are the medical needs of another person.

13. In the Rule 24 reply it is contended that,  although  the  decision  is
    short, the explanation and reasons given are sufficient  and  adequate.
    It is contended that matters of weight are for  the  individual  judge.
    It is contended that the judge was entitled to attach as much weight as
    he saw fit to the evidence unless perversity  was  established.  It  is
    contended  that  the  Appellant's   partner's   medical   issues   were
    significant and a factor which the judge took  into  account  properly.
    Reference is made to the decision  in  MA  (Pakistan)  &  Ors  v  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  at
    paragraph 35 where it was conceded on behalf of the Home Office that it
    would be relatively rare for it to be reasonable to expect a child  who
    is a British citizen  to  leave  the  UK.  It  is  contended  that  the
    Secretary of State has not identified strong reasons why  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect three British children to relocate and  leave  the
    UK.  Reliance is placed on the Secretary of State's  guidance  entitled
    "Immigration Directorate Instruction,  Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0b, Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-
    Year Routes", dated August 2015, at 11.2.3.  It is contended  that  the
    facts of this case are such that the children would be forced to  leave
    the UK if the Appellant left because their mother would not be able  to
    care for them in his absence as he plays a pivotal  role.  Reliance  is
    further placed on the decision in Makhlouf v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department (Northern Ireland) [2016] UKSC 59 at paragraphs 46  and
    47 where it states at paragraph 47 that children must be recognised  as
    rights holders in their own right and not just  as  adjuncts  to  other
    people's rights.  It is contended that no strong  or  powerful  reasons
    are given to justify the removal of the children and their family.

14. At the hearing before me Ms Isherwood relied on the  decisions  in  the
    cases of MM (Lebanon) & Ors v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10 and the  decision  in
    Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  UKSC  11.
    She submitted that there is a material error.  She submitted  that  the
    judge  failed  to  appreciate  that  there  are  two  options  for  the
    Appellant, either his partner could go back to Bangladesh or she  could
    stay in the UK but she is not being required to leave the  UK  nor  are
    the children.  She submitted that in this case the Appellant overstayed
    his visa.  It could be inferred from his witness statement that he  has
    been working in the UK and that he worked illegally. She submitted that
    the judge erroneously  gave  positive  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  for   entry
    clearance.  She submitted that the judge made no assessment of Appendix
    FM or 276ADE nor did he make a full assessment of paragraph 117B.

15. Ms Isherwood submitted that the evidence  shows  that  the  Appellant's
    partner has not had an episode of schizophrenia since she  was  16  and
    that since then she has had outpatient appointments and  is  undergoing
    successful treatment.  She submitted that the judge  failed  to  assess
    that evidence.

16. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge gave  insufficient  consideration
    to the public interest and did not apply all of the criteria in Section
    117B.  There was no assessment given  to  the  Appellant's  ability  to
    speak the English language, as to whether the Appellant is a burden  on
    taxpayers, and no account taken of the fact that the  relationship  was
    formed when the Appellant was unlawfully in the UK. She submitted  that
    there was no assessment of the best interests of the child.

17. Ms Isherwood referred to the case of Agyarko, noting that  the  Supreme
    Court reaffirmed that the balance needs to be struck between Article  8
    and the public interest.  She referred to paragraph 57, which states as
    follows:

         "57.     That approach is also appropriate when a court or tribunal
         is considering whether a refusal of leave to remain  is  compatible
         with  article  8  in  the  context  of  precarious   family   life.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether the refusal  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the removal of the person  in  question  against
         the impact on private and family life. In doing so, it should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control."

18. Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  family  life  here  is  precarious
    therefore there must be very  strong  or  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in immigration control.  In this case, she
    submitted, there was no full assessment of the public interest to  show
    that a balance has been struck.

19. Mr Noor relied on his Rule 24 response, submitting that it is up to the
    judge to give weight to the whole evidence and that the judge has given
    sufficient reasons.  He submitted that the judge was entitled to  reach
    the conclusions he did in light of the whole documentary  evidence  and
    the decision was not perverse.  He submitted that the judge had set out
    the Razgar test and Section 117B as well as the Home Office guidance at
    paragraph 23 and had considered all of the factors there.

20. He submitted that the judge had given  adequate  consideration  to  the
    factors as set  out  in  MA  (Pakistan),  considering  the  Appellant's
    stepdaughter and his own children.  He submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered the best interests of the children, the medical situation of
    the Appellant's partner and the family as a full unit.

21. In response Ms Isherwood submitted that  Mr  Noor  had  not  shown  the
    evidence relied upon.  She relied on paragraph 54 of  the  decision  of
    Agyarko noting that the European Court had stated that where  there  is
    precarious  family  life  it  is  likely  to  be  only  in  exceptional
    circumstances that the removal of the non-national family  member  will
    constitute a violation of Article 8. It was  her  submission  that  the
    judge had not considered whether there were  exceptional  circumstances
    in this case.  She submitted that it is insufficient to  just  set  out
    the provisions of section 117B without considering the  factors  there.
    She submitted that this is an Appellant with no entitlement  to  remain
    in the UK and that he cannot choose where he wants to live.

    Discussion

22. I accept that in this decision the judge did not  specifically  address
    whether the Appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph
    276ADE.  However, I note that at paragraphs 14 and 15  the  judge  said
    that those provisions had been considered in the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  It does not appear that any submission was  put  forward  that
    the Appellant could meet the requirements of these Rules.

23. In circumstances where there is a step-child, children of the Appellant
    and where his partner has mental health issues I therefore accept  that
    it was appropriate for the judge to go on to  consider  the  Article  8
    claim under the guidance and stages set out in the decision in  Razgar.
    In so doing the judge was required to consider the public  interest  as
    set out in paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act.

24. Ultimately the judge was considering Section 117B(6) and he  ultimately
    decided that the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with his daughter, who is a qualifying child.  The judge then  went  on
    to consider whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave
    the UK.  In considering reasonableness the judge took into account  the
    Respondent's policy on Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family  life  at
    11.2.3, which asks whether it would be unreasonable to expect a British
    citizen child to leave the UK.  That policy states:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano."

25. The guidance goes on to say:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

       . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph  398
         of the Immigration Rules;

       . a very poor immigration history,  such  as  where  the  person  has
         repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation."

26. It is clear that the judge applied this guidance  in  this  case.   The
    judge acknowledged that the  Appellant  here  has  a  poor  immigration
    history but recognised that there were wider circumstances which he had
    to consider in assessing proportionality.  One of the main  factors  he
    considered in this regard was the  Appellant's  wife's  mental  health,
    noting that she has a significant mental illness and responsibility for
    two young children and receiving very  considerable  support  from  the
    Appellant.  The judge noted that the Appellant  would  have  difficulty
    meeting the financial requirements of Appendix FM because of his wife's
    mental health condition.

27. The judge also noted that the prospects of the wife and children  being
    able to visit the Appellant  in  Bangladesh  were  remote.   The  judge
    therefore concluded that the removal of the  Appellant  would  separate
    the father from his two young children for the considerable foreseeable
    future.  These were conclusions open to the judge on the basis that  it
    could not  be  considered  reasonable  for  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    children  to  leave  the  UK  and  that  these  consequences  would  be
    foreseeable.

28. I accept Ms Isherwood's submission that the judge did not consider  the
    best interests of the children separately. However, I consider it clear
    that the judge did consider the  children's  best  interests  from  his
    conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  children  to
    leave the UK, that the children's mother required the  support  of  the
    Appellant to look after  them  and  that  it  would  not  be  in  their
    interests to be separated from their father for a  considerable  period
    of time.  I therefore accept that the best interests  of  the  children
    were considered by the judge.

29. I have considered the guidance given by the Supreme Court  in  Agyarko,
    in particular at paragraph 57.  The judge clearly gave  weight  to  the
    Appellant's poor immigration  history  and  therefore  his  immigration
    status when he entered into this relationship.

30. I note the  guidance  in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public
    interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC) where  the  President  gave
    guidance on the application of section 117B (4) and (5)  as  summarised
    in the head note as follows:

         "(5) The "little weight" provisions in Part 5A of the 2002  Act  do
         not entail an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;  "little
         weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
         boundaries, will result in the measurement of the quantum of weight
         considered appropriate in  the  fact  sensitive  context  of  every
         case."

31.  Applying  this  guidance  it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant's   poor
    immigration history and lack of status when he formed the  relationship
    was not determinative of the public interest.

32. I have considered the guidance given in MM (Lebanon)  and  SS  (Congo).
    In my view it is clear from the judge's  analysis  that  he  found  the
    Appellant's claim to be sufficiently strong or compelling  to  outweigh
    the public interest in immigration control.

33. I find that the conclusions reached by the judge were open  to  him  on
    the basis of the evidence and on the basis of the interpretation of the
    legal principles and I am satisfied that the grounds disclose no  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

