
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/17028/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Taylor House                                 Decision  and  Reasons
                                             promulgated
On 23 October 2015           On 17 May 2016


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                  Randeer Harindu Sulakshan Liyanapathiran
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For  the  Appellant:      Ms  A  Brockleby-Weller,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer.
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  M  Sowerby  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Indra
                       Sebastian Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davey promulgated on 10 June 2015, allowing the appeal of  Mr  Randeer
      Harindu Sulakshan Liyanapathiran against a decision of  the  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department dated 22  March  2014  to  refuse  to
      issue a Derivative Residence Card.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Liyanapathiran is the respondent, for the sake of consistency with the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr Liyanapathiran as the Appellant and the Secretary of State  as  the
      Respondent.


   3. The Appellant's personal details and immigration history are a  matter
      of record on file and known to the parties; they are also set  out  in
      the body of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It is unnecessary
      to re-rehearse such matters here; I refer to any pertinent matters  as
      is incidental for the purposes of this decision.


   4. The Appellant's application for a Derivative Residence Card was  based
      on his claim to be the primary carer of Ms  Nawalage  Harischandra,  a
      British citizen born on 23 Aug 1932.


   5. Although in the Appellant's  application  form  at  section  3.11  the
      Appellant described himself as the 'grand nephew' of Ms  Harischandra,
      and he was  also  thus  described  in  a  supporting  letter  from  Ms
      Harischandra dated 28 Nov 2013, the Respondent's 'reasons for refusal'
      letter ('RFRL') dated 22 March 2014 refers to Ms Harischandra  as  the
      Appellant's grandmother.


   6. As such - and seemingly on the basis of a misconception of fact  -  no
      issue was expressly raised  in  the  RFRL  in  respect  of  regulation
      15A(7)(a) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2006, whereby in order to be a 'primary carer' of another  person  for
      the purposes of regulation 15A(4A) it is necessary  to  be  either  "a
      direct relative or a legal guardian of that person".


   7. But for this misconception of fact, it is likely that  the  Respondent
      would have raised the issue  in  the  RFRL  because  the  Respondent's
      policy guidance document on 'Derivative rights  of  residence'  states
      that "Direct relatives include the following:  parents;  grandparents;
      spouse or civil  partner...;  children;  grandchildren",  and  further
      excludes stepchildren who "are  not  considered  to  come  within  the
      definition of 'direct relative'... unless there is  also  an  adoption
      order or legal guardianship order in place".


   8. I pause to acknowledge that the list of relatives is presented in  the
      Respondent's policy guidance document as non-exhaustive (i.e. "include
      the following").




   9. The Appellant is the child of Ms Harischandra's brother's  daughter  -
      the child of her fraternal  niece.  He  is  thereby  not  amongst  the
      categories of relative identified in the Respondent's guidance  -  and
      is not obviously in a category of similar familial proximity to  those
      categories expressly identified.


  10. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  appears  to  have  accepted  that  the
      Appellant was a direct relative on no other basis than mere assertion:
      see paragraph 4 ("[Ms Harischandra] confirmed that the Appellant was a
      direct  relative..."),  and  paragraph  7  ("I  accept  her  statutory
      declaration, dated 13 January 2014, that the  Appellant  is  a  direct
      relative...") .




  11. In my judgement he was in error to accept such  an  assertion  without
      any analysis of either the evidence by way of the  various  birth  and
      marriage certificates tracing the relationship, or otherwise by giving
      consideration to the meaning of 'direct relative'.


  12. Mr Sowerby has submitted that the Judge  did  not  simply  parrot  the
      mistake of the Respondent, but made his own finding, open  to  him  on
      the evidence, that  the  Appellant  was  the  direct  relative  of  Ms
      Harischandra. I acknowledge that the Judge does not  expressly  repeat
      the mistake of the RFRL - he does not describe Ms Harischandra as  the
      Appellant's grandmother. But, neither does the Judge  state  what  the
      relationship actually is,  or  make  any  reference  to  the  possible
      meaning of direct relative. The Judge was faced with a mixed  question
      of fact and law, and in my judgement has not made any relevant express
      finding of fact (i.e. as to the exact nature of the relationship), and
      has not apparently had regard to the question of law (i.e.  what  does
      'direct relative' mean).


  13. In the alternative, Mr Sowerby submits that any  such  error  was  not
      material, because the Appellant is indeed to be regarded as  a  direct
      relative of Ms Harischandra. In this context he relies upon  the  fact
      that there is no specific definition of 'direct relative' to be  found
      in the EEA Regulations, or otherwise in Directive 2004/38/EC; that the
      Respondent's guidance is non-exhaustive in identifying  categories  of
      relative;  and  that  the  Appellant  is  indeed  a  relative  of   Ms
      Harischandra who can trace his bloodline directly to her.


  14. The word 'direct' appears in  regulation  7  in  the  context  of  the
      definition of a family member. So far as is relevant, regulation  7(1)
      provides:

"... the following persons  shall  be  treated  as  the  family  members  of
      another person

(a) his spouse or his civil partner;

(b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are
      (i) under 21; or
      (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

(c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of  his  spouse
      or his civil partner

(d) [not relevant here]"


  15. Regulation 8 provides definitions of categories  of  persons  who  are
      considered to be extended family members under the Regulations. In  so
      far as any particular category refers  to  'a  relative',  it  is  not
      qualified by the adjective 'direct'.


  16. In such circumstances, in my  judgement,  the  word  'direct'  in  the
      context of 'direct relative', must be seen as connoting a person in  a
      closer familial relationship than that of an extended  family  member,
      and therefore one approximating the definition  of  a  family  member.
      Further,  when  one  considers  together  the  similar  but   slightly
      different stylisations found in regulation 7  -  "direct  descendants"
      and "direct relatives in [the] ascending line" (my emphasis) -  it  is
      clear in my judgement that what the Regulations have  in  mind  is  'a
      direct line'.  I find that  'direct  relative'  means  a  relative  in
      direct line.


  17. On the facts here  the  Appellant  is  not  in  direct  line  with  Ms
      Harischandra. He can trace a direct line  back  to  Ms  Harischandra's
      brother via his own mother, but that  is  not  a  direct  line  to  Ms
      Harischandra.




  18. Accordingly I am satisfied that paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Respondent's
      Grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal - which
      constituted the essential basis upon which permission  to  appeal  was
      granted - are made out.


  19. It follows not only that there is a material error  of  law  requiring
      that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal be set  aside,  but  that
      the decision in the appeal on remaking must  inevitably  be  that  the
      appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations.


  20. As such it is unnecessary to consider the further grounds of challenge
      in respect of the issue pursuant to regulation 15A(4A)(c) - whether Ms
      Harischandra would be unable to reside in the UK  or  in  another  EEA
      State if the Appellant were required to leave. Were  it  necessary  to
      consider this issue I would likely  have  found  in  the  Respondent's
      favour and concluded that the Judge had also erred in this regard.  In
      particular, whilst the Judge has identified that  Ms  Harischandra  is
      mentally strong and independent of character and  as  such  would  not
      wish to be cared for by social services or other strangers, it is  not
      readily apparent that  in  circumstances  where  she  gave  no  direct
      statement to the effect that she would quit the UK in the event of the
      Appellant's departure, that the Judge has  made  any  express  finding
      that Ms Harischandra would  not  elect  to  accept  care  from  social
      services if the alternative was relocation to Sri Lanka to  live  with
      the Appellant. The Judge arguably  also  did  not  make  any  critical
      examination of the benefits  Ms  Harischandra  currently  receives  by
      virtue of living in the UK by way of, for example, medical assistance,
      compared to what might be available to her in Sri Lanka, as  informing
      an assessment of whether she would more likely than not leave the  UK:
      see Ayinde & Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano) [2015]  UKUT  00560
      (IAC). Rather the Judge's analysis is essentially one of finding  that
      comparative care to that currently received would  not  be  available:
      that is not the test, and nor is it a determinative indicator that  Ms
      Harischandra would leave the UK in consequence.




  21. For completeness I note that whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge made
      sympathetic observations in respect of the merits  of  an  alternative
      submission relying upon Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  he  quite  correctly
      ruled that he was not obliged to reach a decision in this regard. (Now
      see: Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
      00466 (IAC).) In any event the Appellant has raised no issue  in  this
      regard before the Upper Tribunal.


Decision

  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  23. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     9 May 2016




