
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/17236/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 8 December 2015                       |              On 22 December 2015     |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                             mrs marivic de mesa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Sowerby, Counsel instructed by direct access

For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") from the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Youngerwood sitting at Taylor  House  on
    17 March 2015) dismissing her appeal against the decision by  the  SSHD
    to refuse to issue her with a residence card  as  confirmation  of  her
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights here. The ground of refusal, and the ground on
    which the appeal was dismissed, was that the appellant  had  failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence that her husband was currently economically
    active in the UK as a self-employed  person.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FTT") did not make an anonymity order, and I  do  not  consider  that
    such an order is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. One of the reasons given by the judge for  dismissing  the  appeal  was
    that the appellant and the sponsor  had  not,  "for  whatever  reason",
    attended the hearing  to  be  questioned  about  their  case,  and,  in
    particular, the change of work status of the sponsor from  employed  to
    self-employed. The appellant clearly knew the date of the  hearing  and
    had not, "on the evidence before me", submitted any evidence as to  her
    inability to attend the hearing.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the UT raising  three
    grounds. The only one which is pertinent is the second one,  which  was
    that the judge had unjustly proceeded with the hearing when there was a
    valid medical excuse for the appellant and the sponsor  not  attending,
    and the appellant had made a written request to  the  Tribunal  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing on medical grounds, which was backed up by a
    medical certificate.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. UT Judge McWilliam granted permission to  appeal  on  ground  2  as  it
    appeared to her that the documents referred to  by  the  appellant  had
    been faxed to Taylor House on 16 March 2015, "and arguably should  have
    been before the judge".

Reasons for Finding an Error of law

 5. Judge Youngerwood acted reasonably in proceeding with  the  hearing  of
    the appeal in the absence of the appellant and the sponsor, as  on  the
    evidence before him there was no satisfactory  excuse  for  their  non-
    attendance.

 6. However, unknown to him, the appellant had  the  day  before  faxed  to
    Taylor House a written request for an adjournment  on  medical  grounds
    and a medical certificate.   It is open to debate whether the  evidence
    she provided was sufficiently cogent to justify  an  adjournment  being
    granted. But the fact remains that, through no fault  of  hers  or  the
    judge, there was procedural unfairness. She  was  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing on the issue of whether an adjournment should be  granted,  and
    the judge draw an  adverse  inference  from  her  apparent  failure  to
    explain why she and the sponsor had not attended.

 7. There has thus been a defect of a procedural nature in the  proceedings
    at first instance which has resulted in unfairness and which amounts to
    a material error of  law  requiring  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be set aside: MM (unfairness: E&R) Sudan [2014] 105 (IAC).





Conclusion

 8. The decision of the FTT contained an error of law, and accordingly  the
    decision is set aside.  Given  the  nature  of  the  error  (procedural
    unfairness), the appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to
    the FTT for a de novo hearing.

Anonymity



No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

