

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
  IA/17516/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2014                           |On 9 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                           MISS IFEOMA SILVIA IBEH


                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                   Appellant

                                   And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal has been brought by the appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria
    whose date of birth is 22 November 2002. Her application to be  allowed
    to remain in the UK under Regulation 26 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 was rejected by the respondent  as  the
    respondent was not satisfied that she was a family member  of  Christan
    Emezie Ibeh (the sponsor) a Dutch national. Her  appeal  was  heard  at
    Richmond. It was decided on papers and dismissed by First Tier Tribunal
    Judge Fox on 12 August 2014 for  reasons  given  in  the  determination
    promulgated on 12 August 2014. On 1 September 2004 the appellant  wrote
    to the Tribunal and based upon this letter Judge Hollingworth, a  Judge
    of the First Tier Tribunal granted the appellant permission to  appeal.
    In his decision the  Judge  said,  "Confusion  has  arisen  as  to  the
    sequence of decisions in the context of  the  validity  of  an  appeal.
    Doubt has arisen in relation to the scope of material available  for  a
    substantive hearing. In the circumstances arguable errors of  law  have
    arisen. The case must therefore be listed for a full oral hearing."

 2. At the hearing before me upon a careful perusal  of  the  case  file  I
    concluded, having first given Mr Shilliday to make  representations  to
    the contrary that this appeal should be remitted to be heard afresh  by
    the First Tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House. London.

 3. Accordingly this appeal is allowed  and  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal sitting at Taylor House. The appellant  upon  receipt  of  the
    notice of hearing from Taylor House must  make  immediate  arrangements
    for representation at the appeal and file the papers that  she  intends
    to rely on in support of her appeal, seven days in advance of the  date
    of hearing.














K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
4 December 2014




















