
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17834/2015
     IA/17840/2015
     ia/17843/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On May 4, 2017                         |On May 15, 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                        mrs temitope esther allinson
                                    [t a]
                                    [s a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr F Abe, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I do not make an anonymity direction under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellants are Nigerian nationals.  The  first-named  appellant  is
    the mother of the second and third-named appellants who were born on  [
    ] 2007 and [ ] 2013.

 3. On February 15, 2015 the appellants each made an application for  leave
    to remain on the basis of human rights under both the Immigration Rules
    and Article 8 ECHR.  The respondent refused those applications on April
    22, 2015 and the appellants appealed those decisions on  May  11,  2015
    under Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 4. Their appeals initially came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Zahed (hereafter referred to as the Judge) on June 24, 2016  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on September 28, 2016 the  Judge  dismissed  their
    appeals.  The appellants lodged their grounds of appeal and  permission
    to appeal was given by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grimmett  on
    February 2, 2017 and the matter came before myself initially  on  March
    9, 2017 when I heard representations on whether there had been an error
    in law.

 5. Although the second and third appellants' names continue to  appear  on
    the list I ascertained at the  previous  hearing  they  had  both  been
    granted  British  citizenship  on  the  basis  of  naturalisation   and
    consequently the Judge should have treated their appeals  as  abandoned
    under  Rule  16  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  Both Mr Avery and Mr  Abe
    agreed with  this  position  and  their  appeals  should  therefore  be
    formally marked as abandoned.

 6. Having taken submissions it was accepted that the first named appellant
    could not  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  because  at  the  date  of
    application neither child was a British citizen and under  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules and paragraph  276ADE,  HC  395,  this  was  a
    prerequisite.

 7. I found there had been an error in law as the Judge failed to give full
    consideration as to whether it was in the children's best interests for
    them to remain when considering article 8 ECHR.

 8. I preserved the credibility findings made by the Judge in paragraphs  8
    to 14 of his decision and I  directed  that  the  case  be  listed  for
    further oral evidence and documentary evidence that  was  served  under
    Rule 15 (2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 9. At the resumed hearing that took place on the above date  I  took  oral
    evidence from the appellant.  She was cross-examined by  Mr  Avery  and
    she maintained that she and the children's  father,  Mr  Allinson,  had
    separated after the second child was born in 2013.  It was put  to  her
    that the Judge had previously rejected her claim that they were  living
    separately and she confirmed that she had nothing else to  add  to  the
    earlier evidence she had previously given and she maintained that  they
    lived separately.  She was asked whether they were  in  a  relationship
    before she came to the United Kingdom and initially  she  claimed  that
    they had met each other here but when pushed she then stated that  they
    met each other in Nigeria and she apologised for the error.   The  only
    contact she had now was because of the children.  She  was  then  asked
    about the children's nationality applications and  she  confirmed  that
    she had signed the application form at the solicitor's office  and  she
    was aware the application had been submitted.  She was  asked  why  the
    children's father had stated he was at her address  and  she  suggested
    that this was because documents would need to be  sent  somewhere.   It
    was pointed out that all documents were sent to the solicitor  but  she
    could not assist any further on that point.  She  also  confirmed  that
    Kim Ward had signed the document as a referee but could not add further
    information about that.  She was also unaware that he had obtained  his
    residency status as the partner of an EEA national and that he had been
    granted this in 2014 and this was despite her claim that they had  been
    together until 2013.  Her previous asylum application was also  put  to
    her and she denied that the person she claimed she was fleeing from was
    Mr Allinson.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Avery submitted that the appellant's application to  remain  in  her
    own right had absolutely no merit based on her  very  poor  immigration
    history.  He pointed out that she had been here for seven years  before
    she made an application to regularise her immigration status  and  that
    having come here as a visitor her status was always  precarious.   This
    appellant could only succeed on the  back  of  the  fact  she  has  two
    children who have now been naturalised as British citizens.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that the fact she had entered the United  Kingdom  illegally,
    overstayed and had had previous applications refused and then failed to
    leave the country were factors the Tribunal could consider.  There were
    several adverse credibility findings made against the appellant by  the
    Judge who originally heard  her  case.   That  Judge  had  specifically
    rejected her claim that she had sole responsibility  for  the  children
    and Mr Avery submitted there was nothing new advanced today that  would
    persuade a Tribunal to depart from that earlier finding.  She had given
    conflicting evidence about when she met Mr Allinson and there was  also
    the fact that Mr Allinson appeared to have obtained permanent residency
    as an EEA national spouse, estranged or otherwise, in 2014 and this was
    despite her claim that they lived together until  2013.   Her  evidence
    was therefore conflicted and lacking in credibility and no weight could
    therefore  be  placed  upon  anything  she  was   saying.    When   the
    naturalisation documents  were  submitted  Mr  Allinson's  address  was
    recorded as the same as her address and the support worker  had  signed
    the application form supporting it and Mr Avery submitted she would not
    have done so if the information was  incorrect.   The  only  additional
    evidence that had recently been submitted that would assist  the  court
    were the letters from Haseltine Primary School who confirmed that  both
    children attended school with Triumph joining the school in April  2013
    and Sophie joining the school in September, 2016.

11. Mr Avery submitted that in considering this  appeal  regard  should  be
    given to Section 117B of the 2002 Act and whilst  he  accepted  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act states that public interest  does  not  require
    her  removal  where  she  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect that child to leave the United Kingdom  he  nevertheless  argued
    that case law makes clear that that this is a standalone  consideration
    but evidence of criminality and a very poor immigration  history  could
    outweigh that and could also outweigh the respondent's own policy  that
    was set out in a document entitled "Family life as a partner or  parent
    and private life 10-year route" dated August 2015.  Although the policy
    was not formally in place at the date of the decision it  was  in  date
    when this matter came before the Tribunal  and  of  course  remains  in
    force today.

12. He submitted that following the guidance at paragraph 11.2.3  it  would
    be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr
    Avery pointed out that her conduct in  entering  illegally  could  have
    opened her up to prosecution  and  she  has  a  very  poor  immigration
    history.  Mr Avery acknowledged the recent  decision  of  SF  &  Others
    (guidance, post-2014 Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC)  but  he
    submitted that this was one of  those  cases  where  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to require the children to leave.

13. Mr Abe rejected Mr Avery's  submissions  and  maintained  that  as  the
    children were British citizens it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the United Kingdom especially as they had lived all their
    lives here.  The children had been born here  and  had  never  been  to
    Nigeria and were currently attending school.  Mr Avery's submission  on
    criminality had no basis as she had not been charged with  any  offence
    and it had never been suggested that she was at risk of  being  charged
    with any offence.  Whilst he acknowledged her immigration  history  was
    poor he pointed out that she had taken steps to regularise her  status.



14. It is against that background that I make my findings.

    FINDINGS

15. I am dealing today with an application by an  appellant  who  seeks  to
    remain here under Article 8  ECHR  because  she  did  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules pertinent to her application.  When the  applications
    were submitted, the children did not  have  British  status  but  I  am
    satisfied, having looked at the recent bundle that both the second  and
    third named appellants are British citizens and that  a  naturalisation
    certificate for both of them had been issued on April 12,  2016.   That
    application was submitted by the children's father and it seems to have
    been issued on the back of him obtaining permanent residence to  reside
    in the United Kingdom.

16. This issue was raised by Mr Avery at the hearing but  it  seems  to  me
    that I have to approach this appeal on the basis that the children have
    British citizenship lawfully unless someone says otherwise.  I have  no
    reason to go behind either certificate and of course both children have
    been issued with British passports  which  were  shown  to  me  at  the
    hearing.

17. I found the appellant to be very evasive and it is still  unclear  what
    role exactly Mr Allinson plays in both hers and her  children's  lives.
    The appellant maintains that his role is limited to  the  children  and
    that they separated in 2013 but the naturalisation documents that  were
    referred to at the hearing suggested that in 2016 his address  was  the
    same as hers which maybe points to him having a larger  role  than  the
    appellant suggested.

18. The courts have  spent  some  time  considering  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for a child, who is British, to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    where their mother/father/primary carer has no status.

19. The position I am faced with is that  the  appellant  came  here  on  a
    temporary visa and overstayed and whilst attempts  have  been  made  to
    regularise that status they had been rejected at every point by  either
    the respondent or a court.  Mr Avery suggested that her behaviour could
    be viewed as falling below the threshold set out in  paragraph  398  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The appellant has never been  investigated  for
    any criminal offence and I do not believe  or  find  that  her  actions
    would  engage  this  element  of  the  guidance   and   amount   to   a
    countervailing circumstance which would enable  the  respondent  to  go
    against her own policy.

20. There is a very poor immigration history and Mr Abe  whilst  suggesting
    she had taken steps to regularise her status has not persuaded me  that
    her immigration history is anything but "very poor".

21. The issue is further complicated by the respondent's  own  policy  that
    was issued in August 2015 and  in  particular  the  guidance  given  at
    11.2.3.  That guidance makes it clear  that  save  in  cases  involving
    criminality the decision maker must not take a decision in relation  to
    the parent or primary carer of a British citizen child where the effect
    of that decision would be to force that British child to leave the  EU.
    The guidance  reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice  judgment  in
    Zambrano.  Where a decision to refuse the application would  require  a
    parent or primary carer to  leave  the  EU  the  case  must  always  be
    assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect a British
    citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or primary carer and  in
    such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant that parent leave to
    enable  them  to  remain  with  the  child  provided  that  there   was
    satisfactory  evidence   of   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship.  The guidance however  makes  it  clear  that  where  the
    parent's conduct gives rise to considerations of such  weight  then  if
    the child could stay with another parent then leave could be refused.

22. Since I heard this appeal  but  before  I  prepared  my  decision,  the
    decision of Chavez-Vilchez [2017] EUECJ C-133/15 was issued. The  Court
    expanded the Zambrano approach further stating-

         "70.   In this case, in order to assess the risk that a  particular
         child, who is a Union citizen, might  be  compelled  to  leave  the
         territory of the European Union and  thereby  be  deprived  of  the
         genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  on  him
         by Article 20 TFEU if the child's  third-country  national  parent
         were to be refused  a  right  of  residence  in  the  Member  State
         concerned, it is important to determine, in each case at  issue  in
         the main proceedings, which parent is  the  primary  carer  of  the
         child and whether there is in fact  a  relationship  of  dependency
         between the child and the third-country national parent. As part of
         that assessment, the competent authorities must take account of the
         right to respect for family life, as stated in  Article 7  of  the
         Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union,  that  article
         requiring to be read in conjunction with  the  obligation  to  take
         into consideration the best interests of the child,  recognised  in
         Article 24(2) of that charter.

         71      For the purposes of such an assessment, the fact that  the
         other parent, a Union citizen, is  actually  able  and  willing  to
         assume sole responsibility for the primary day-to-day care  of  the
         child is a relevant factor, but it is not in  itself  a  sufficient
         ground for a conclusion that  there  is  not,  between  the  third-
         country national parent and  the  child,  such  a  relationship  of
         dependency that the child would be compelled to leave the territory
         of the European Union if a right of residence were refused to  that
         third-country national. In reaching such a conclusion, account must
         be taken, in the best interests of the child concerned, of all  the
         specific circumstances, including the age of the child, the child's
         physical and emotional development, the  extent  of  his  emotional
         ties both to the Union citizen  parent  and  to  the  third-country
         national parent, and the risks which  separation  from  the  latter
         might entail for that child's equilibrium."

23. The Tribunal in SF & Others considered the respondent's policy and  the
    correct approach and  noted  at  paragraph  8  that  in  deciding  what
    approach to take consideration should be given to  the  possibility  of
    the British child staying with another parent  or  alternative  primary
    carer.  The Tribunal noted in that case that there was  no  criminality
    and concluded at paragraph 9 that it was inevitable that the appellants
    in that case (mother and child) should have been granted  a  period  of
    leave to enable the British citizen  child  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with  them.   The  Tribunal  noted  that  the  guidance  is  an
    important source of the respondent's view of what is to be regarded  as
    reasonable.  At paragraph 12 the Tribunal made clear that  where  there
    is clear guidance where an assessment has to be made and that  guidance
    clearly demonstrates what the outcome of the assessment would have been
    the Tribunal should take that guidance into account and apply it.   The
    Tribunal went on to  find  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    youngest child to leave the United Kingdom and consequently allowed the
    mother's and other sibling's appeals.

24. The recent decision of Chavez-Vilchez merely reinforces  this  position
    and making it clear that  even  where  the  EU  national  parent  could
    possibly look after the children regard must still be had to "the  best
    interests of the child concerned, of all  the  specific  circumstances,
    including the age of the child,  the  child's  physical  and  emotional
    development, the extent of his emotional ties both to the Union citizen
    parent and to the third-country national parent, and  the  risks  which
    separation from the latter might entail for that child's equilibrium".

25. The issue therefore for me to decide is whether there is a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the appellant and her  children  and  I
    find that there is.

26. Following Section 117B(6) I then have to consider whether it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant's mother has  a  very  poor  immigration  history  but  these
    children were born and have lived their lives in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There is no criminality in this appeal and the status of the children's
    father raises more questions than answers.  If he obtained  his  status
    as the partner of an EEA national then it seems unlikely that he  would
    have been living with the appellant.  Evidence would  have  had  to  be
    submitted to support the permanency of that relationship.  The position
    however is further complicated in that that certificate was obtained in
    2014 but when the application for nationality was submitted in 2016  Mr
    Allinson had put his address as the appellant's.

27. However, I have to consider the fact that if the appellant  is  removed
    then that would leave the two young children and in  particular  Sophie
    without their mother with no real prospect of her  ever  being  granted
    leave to rejoin  her  children  who  are  both  recognised  as  British
    citizens and who have never ventured outside of this country. These are
    young children with a high dependency on their mother  with  whom  they
    live and if the mother was removed that would almost  certainly  affect
    their equilibrium.

28. In spite of the adverse findings made I conclude that  Section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act is not outweighed  by  any  of  the  other  factors  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and  in  light  of  the  respondent's  own
    policy and the guidance given by the Tribunal and Court in SF &  Others
    and Chavez-Vilchez I allow the first named appellant's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

29. There was a material error in law and I set aside the decision.  I have
    remade the decision and in respect of the first named appellant I allow
    her appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

30. With regard to the second and third  named  appellants  I  treat  their
    applications as abandoned for the reasons set out earlier.

31. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date May 12, 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not  make  a  fee  award  as  I  have  allowed  this  appeal  based  on
information that has subsequently been served.

Signed                              Date May 12, 2017







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

