
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17857/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 February 2014                         |On 12 February 2014        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                         MISS ABIBAT YINKA SULAIMON
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr O Jibowu of counsel
           instructed by M J Solomon & Partners
          For the Respondent: Ms A Everett a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  19  February
      1988. She has been given permission to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge  ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her
      appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  grant  her  a
      residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK  as  the
      extended family member of an EEA national under Regulation 8(1) of the
      Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").  The
      appellant's brother born on 7 March 1976 is her sponsor and  he  is  a
      French national.


   2. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was  dependent  on
      the sponsor prior to entering the UK or that  she  had  been  residing
      with or was dependent on him since entering the  UK.  The  application
      was refused under the 2006 Regulations and on Article 8  human  rights
      grounds.


   3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard her appeal  on  26  November
      2013. Both parties were represented the appellant  by  Mr  Jibowu  who
      appears before me. The appellant and the sponsor gave  oral  evidence.
      The FTTJ referred to the reported determination of the Upper  Tribunal
      in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79  (IAC)  and  set
      out the relevant provisions which I will repeat;


         "Under the scheme set out in reg 8 (2) of the Immigration (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an "extended family member"  in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:


                         i. prior dependency and present dependency


                        ii. prior membership  of  a  household  and  present
         membership of
                            household


                       iii. prior dependency and  present  membership  of  a
         household;


                       iv. prior  membership  of  a  household  and  present
         dependency.


         It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and   present
         connection in the same capacity:  i.e.  dependency-  dependency  or
         household membership-household membership ((i) or  (ii)  above).  A
         person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv)."


   4. The FTTJ did not  believe  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  the
      sponsor. Whether he also disbelieved the evidence of  the  appellant's
      father is a question to which I will need  to  return.  There  was  an
      almost total dearth of documentary evidence in circumstances where the
      FTTJ considered that the appellant, who was legally represented, could
      and should have produced this particularly where  the  refusal  letter
      had made it clear why the application was being refused  and  put  the
      appellant on notice as to what evidence was required. The  FTTJ  found
      that the appellant had not established that she and  her  brother  had
      lived together in Nigeria in the same household before he came to this
      country or that she had been dependent  on  him  in  Nigeria.  In  the
      circumstances it did not matter whether the appellant could  establish
      dependency on the sponsor in this country. She could not  satisfy  any
      of the required tests.


   5. The FTTJ found that the appellant had not established that she  had  a
      family life in the UK and  only  a  very  limited  private  life.  The
      proposed interference with her right to respect for these was  not  of
      such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


   6. The FTTJ dismiss the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and on  Article
      8 human rights grounds.


   7. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal. The grounds argue  that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  by
      failing to make any findings of credibility or fact in relation to the
      evidence which the appellant's father had given in an  affidavit.  The
      FTTJ had not applied the appropriate standard of  proof  and  had  not
      correctly followed what the Upper Tribunal said  in  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
      meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC). It is said that there was no
      dispute about the sponsor's support for the appellant in journeying to
      the UK and prior payment for her admission to College.  This  amounted
      to prior dependency whilst the appellant was in Nigeria. This was  not
      a case where there was a sudden or contrived dependency.


   8. The appellant representatives submitted a further bundle of  documents
      on the day of the hearing. Some of this was before the FTTJ. There  is
      also new evidence which was not before the FTTJ. The new evidence does
      not fall to be considered unless I conclude that there is an error  of
      law such that the decision should be set aside.


   9. Mr Jibowu relied on the grounds of appeal and  argued  that  the  FTTJ
      erred  in  law  by  saying  nothing  about  the  appellant's  father's
      affidavit in his reasoning and conclusions. The  failure  to  consider
      the father's evidence was an error of law  which  could  have  made  a
      difference. He argued that in paragraph 10 of  the  determination  the
      FTTJ made a finding that the sponsor had paid for the appellant school
      fees and flights. I pointed out that this paragraph  did  not  contain
      findings by the FTTJ  but  a  record  of  evidence  given.  Mr  Jibowu
      accepted this. I was asked to set aside the decision and  adjourn  for
      it to be remade in the Upper Tribunal at a later date in the light  of
      the new evidence which it was accepted had been submitted  later  than
      it should have been.


  10. Ms Everett submitted that it was clear that the FTTJ was aware of  the
      evidence from the appellant's father. It was not clear  whether,  even
      if this was  believed  it  would  have  made  any  difference  to  the
      appellants claim. There were a few relevant details. It was clear that
      the FTTJ disbelieved both the appellant and the sponsor because of the
      total lack of any documentary evidence. The FTTJ gave examples of  the
      sort of documentary evidence which could have been expected. This  was
      the type  of  application  where  such  documentary  evidence  was  of
      particular importance. The appellant's father had  not  submitted  any
      documentary evidence either. Ihemedu made it clear that there  was  no
      relaxation in the burden of proof merely because  an  application  was
      made from within the UK rather than abroad. I was asked to  find  that
      there was no error of law and to uphold the decision is of the FTTJ. I
      reserved my determination.


  11. The appellant's father's witness  statement  dated  11  November  2013
      contains 10 short paragraphs. There  is  also  an  affidavit  dated  5
      November 2013. The affidavit does not confirm  what  is  said  in  the
      witness statement. The affidavit is headed; "affidavit for  correction
      of name". It is directed to the question of whether the family name is
      Sulaimon or Sule and why the appellant might  use  the  latter  rather
      than  the  former.  The  witness  statement  does  not  refer  to  any
      documentary evidence which might support the appellant's claims.


  12. I find that the FTTJ was aware  of  the  witness  statement  from  the
      appellant's father. It is referred to in paragraph 6. The FTTJ did not
      accept the  evidence  of  the  appellant  or  the  sponsor  which,  he
      concluded, meant that  she  had  not  established  that  she  met  the
      requirements of the 2006 Regulations. Whilst he did not state in terms
      that he rejected the statement from the appellant's father I  find  it
      is sufficiently clear that  he  did  not  accept  this  evidence.  The
      father's statement contains nothing material to  the  issues  in  this
      appeal which goes beyond anything said by the appellant or the sponsor
      and it does not provide any of the documentary evidence which the FTTJ
      found to be conspicuously lacking.


  13. There is a correct statement of the burden and standard  of  proof  in
      paragraph 31 of the determination. I can find no indication  that  the
      FTTJ did not follow this.


  14. In paragraph 38 of the determination the FTTJ referred to  what  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Storey said in paragraph 17 of Dauhoo namely;


         "It should be recalled that in Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
         [2011] UKUT 340 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that:


          "If an applicant chooses not to apply from  abroad  for  a  family
         permit under reg 12 of the 2006 Regulations, thereby denying the UK
         authorities an opportunity to check documentation  in  the  country
         concerned, he cannot expect any relaxation in the burden  of  proof
         that applies to him when seeking to establish an EEA right."


  15. I can find no indication that the FTTJ  took  these  passages  out  of
      context. The grounds do not make it clear how it is suggested that  he
      did. I find that these were appropriate principles properly applied.


  16. The grounds  of  appeal  contain  an  incorrect  statement  which  was
      repeated by Mr Jibowu the hearing. The FTTJ did not  accept  that  the
      sponsor had paid for the appellant's school fees and flights. What  he
      said in paragraph 10 was not findings but a record of evidence  given.
      Mr Jibowu accepted this.


  17. The FTTJ did not  accept  that  there  was  prior  dependence  by  the
      appellant on the sponsor before she left Nigeria by way  of  deposits,
      school fees or airfares.


  18.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.






      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 9
      February 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

