
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17111/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 May 2015                                |On 9 June 2015                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                       miss Florence Kizito Nansubuga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lucas sitting at Taylor House on 3  November
    2014) dismissing her appeal against the decision by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to grant her leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds
    outside the Rules, and to give directions  for  her  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.
     The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do
    not consider that the appellant should be accorded anonymity for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Uganda, whose date of birth is  19  July
    1972.  On 5 December 2004 she was granted leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  Her visit visa  expired  on  7  May  2005.   The
    appellant overstayed, and applied on 24 August 2007 for leave to remain
    outside the Rules.  This application is recorded as having been refused
    with a right of appeal on 19 December 2007.  The  appellant  lodged  an
    appeal on 23 April 2009, and her appeal was subsequently  dismissed  on
    16 June 2009.  A High Court review was refused on 3 July 2009.   By  15
    July 2009, the appellant had exhausted her appeal rights.

 3. On 1 October 2013 the appellant's solicitors applied on her behalf  for
    ILR on  the  ground  that  she  qualified  for  ILR  under  the  Legacy
    Programme.  They submitted that in relation to Article 8, their  client
    had established a private life by virtue of her  residence  since  2004
    and any interference would not be in accordance with the law under  the
    Razgar test.  When considering the appellant's case,  the  Home  Office
    was asked to give consideration to the fact that she had  a  long  term
    partner in Fred Kaddu who was currently awaiting a decision on his  own
    settlement application.  The letter from Mr Kaddu was  attached.   They
    were not cohabiting at present, but intended to do so in the future.

 4. On 16 February 2014, the  appellant's  solicitors  wrote  a  follow  up
    letter to the Home Office in  which  they  said  they  had  regrettably
    misunderstood their client's case.  It now transpired that in fact  the
    appellant and her partner had been living together  in  excess  of  two
    continuous years, since 2009.

 5.  The  solicitors  went  on  to  submit  that  the  appellant  met   the
    requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.    It   would   be
    unreasonable to expect her partner to leave the UK and lose the  rights
    and entitlements afforded to him  under  his  (recent)  grant  of  ILR.
    Furthermore, he would lose his employment  as  a  bus  driver  and  his
    pension entitlements etc.   There  were  no  sufficient  factors  which
    justified requiring  him  to  leave  the  UK  and  to  discontinue  the
    enjoyment of his family life in the UK with the appellant.  The correct
    test for insurmountable obstacles was one of "reasonableness".

 6. On 24 March 2014 the Secretary of State gave  her  reasons  for  making
    directions  for  the  appellant's  removal  to  Uganda.   She  met  the
    suitability requirements under Appendix FM,  but  not  the  eligibility
    requirements.  She had not sought to raise the issue of a  relationship
    of Mr Kaddu until she was faced with the  imminent  prospect  of  being
    removed from the UK.

 7. In October 2013 it was stated that the appellant was not cohabiting  at
    present with Mr Kaddu, but intended to do so in the future.   The  Home
    Office had requested  further  details  to  establish  the  appellant's
    relationship with Mr Kaddu.  In a letter dated  16  February  2014  her
    solicitors said the appellant was unable to produce  utility  bills  or
    bank statements to evidence cohabitation due to her inability to obtain
    employment.  They also had sought to explain her failure to inform them
    or the Home Office of her change of address (when she  allegedly  moved
    from her old address to live at Mr Kaddu's address) as being due to her
    needing to keep her previous address so as to  remain  registered  with
    her doctor's surgery in the locality  of  her  previous  address.   She
    claimed that she was  concerned  that  the  GP  surgery  local  to  her
    partner's house would not register her, due to her immigration  status.
    This was not accepted.  General practitioners did not require  evidence
    of a person's immigration status  in  the  United  Kingdom  purely  for
    registering with the practice.   The  practitioner's  services  website
    clearly provided instructions on the  type  of  documentation  normally
    required when registering with a new practice.  It was limited to proof
    of identity and evidence of a new address.  It was not  known  for  the
    NHS to deny a new patient registration with a local surgery based  upon
    their immigration status.

 8. The respondent went on to review the documents which had been  provided
    in support of the claim that  the  couple  had  cohabited  since  2009.
    While the appellant  and  Mr  Kaddu  may  have  enjoyed  some  form  of
    relationship, it was not accepted they were partners as defined for the
    purposes of the Immigration Rules.   It  had  not  been  shown  to  the
    relevant standard that their relationship was one which was long  term,
    committed and akin to marriage.  So the appellant had not satisfied the
    eligibility requirement of Appendix FM of the Rules with regard to  her
    relationship with Mr Kaddu.

 9. As such, she therefore failed to fulfil EX.1(b) of Appendix FM  of  the
    Rules,  and  it  was  considered  that   her   removal   was   entirely
    proportionate and in line with Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

10. With regard to an alternative claim on private life  grounds,  she  was
    served with a form IS15A notice of 20 December 2007  informing  her  of
    the immigration status and liability to detention and removal.  She had
    failed to establish that she had twenty years' residence in the UK,  or
    that she had no social, cultural or family ties  to  Uganda  remaining.
    She had spent the  majority  of  her  life  in  Uganda,  including  her
    formative years, before coming to the UK.  So she would  not  suffer  a
    flagrant denial of the right to a private life on her return,  and  she
    could reasonably be expected to re-establish a private life there.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Lucas,  both  parties  were   legally
    represented.  At the outset of the appeal, Mr Turner, Counsel  for  the
    appellant, stated that this was an Article 8 case  outside  the  Rules.
    The  appellant,  Mr  Kaddu  and  two  supporting  witnesses  gave  oral
    evidence.   They  adopted  as  their  evidence-in-chief  their  witness
    statements in the  appellant's  bundle.   As  noted  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph [13], Mr Power on behalf of the Secretary of State chose  not
    to ask any  questions  of  the  witnesses,  and  the  appeal  therefore
    proceeded by way of submissions.

12. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Power relied upon  the  refusal
    decision.  He pointed out, and Mr Turner  agreed,  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in this  case.
    He submitted that her case was not exceptional, and the public interest
    in her removal displaced any interference with her private life in  the
    UK.

13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Turner submitted that the appellant  was
    in a durable relationship within the UK  and  it  was  unreasonable  to
    expect her to return to  Uganda.   There  was  no  possibility  of  her
    failing to meet the financial requirements in an application for  entry
    clearance, as her husband was employed as an accountant, and there  was
    no recourse to public funds.  So  the  only  issue  in  this  case  was
    whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant to return to  Uganda,
    and apply for entry clearance to return.  He argued that this would  be
    disproportionate, as it would serve no reasonable public interest.

14. At paragraph [19] of his  subsequent  decision,  Judge  Lucas  set  out
    verbatim Mr Kaddu's explanation for the appellant  hitherto  concealing
    the fact that she had (allegedly)  been  cohabiting  with  him  at  his
    address since 2009, rather than continuing to reside at  244A  Godstone
    Road.  His explanation in paragraph 11 of  his  witness  statement  was
    that she had continued to give the Godstone Road address as her address
    for official purposes even after she moved in with him, as she did  not
    want the other occupants at their present address to  open  letters  to
    her from the Home Office and or her solicitors.  She also had  problems
    in registering with a GP  in  the  area  they  lived  now.   For  these
    reasons, she used the old address and they now regretted not disclosing
    to their solicitors that they had cohabited  from  2009  and  that  the
    appellant had changed her address.

15. The judge's findings were set out in paragraphs [22]  to  [39]  of  his
    decision.  He was not persuaded that the relationship relied  upon  was
    either genuine or even if  it  was,  that  it  was  of  the  depth  and
    durability to engage Article 8 rights within the UK.  He found that the
    relationship was being relied upon in order to ensure  the  appellant's
    continued presence in the UK in the  light  of  there  being  no  other
    rights or reasons to be here.  There was no conclusive evidence to show
    that the appellant and her partner were in  a  durable  and  long  term
    relationship,  and  there  was  certainly  little  or  no  evidence  of
    cohabitation since 2009.  He did not accept  that  her  supporters  had
    done anything else than try to assist her with her present application.
     They could not be faulted in trying to assist her,  but  the  Tribunal
    placed little weight upon their evidence which attempted to  paint  the
    picture of a durable and long term relationship in  the  present  case.
    The evidence of the appellant and her partner was of limited weight  as
    to the fact and durability of their relationship.  She clearly  had  an
    interest in seeking to remain in the UK as she clearly had  done  since
    her appeal  rights  were  exhausted  in  2009.   It  was  against  this
    background that the present  application  was  considered.   Given  the
    flimsy evidence of the relationship, it was not at all unreasonable  to
    expect and require the appellant to leave the UK and  apply  for  entry
    clearance if that was to be her wish.  There were little or no  grounds
    for the assertion that Article 8 of ECHR applied in this case.

16. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal under the Rules, and also under
    Article 8 ECHR.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

17. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, arguing that the  judge
    had erred in law in the following respects: he had been wrong  to  find
    no durable relationship in the  absence  of  cross-examination  on  the
    subject; he had failed to follow the two stage Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) v SSHD approach; he had wrongly assessed Article 8; and he  had
    applied the wrong standard of proof at paragraph [22].

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

18. On 20 January 2015 Judge Frankish granted permission to appeal  on  all
    grounds raised.

The Rule 24 Response

19. On 30 January 2015 a member of the Specialists Appeals Team settled the
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  The grounds advanced  raised  no
    material arguable errors of law that would be capable of vitiating  the
    appeal outcome and they were advanced in  mere  disagreement  with  the
    negative outcome of the appeal.  In summary, the  respondent  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself  appropriately  and
    made findings that they were reasonable and sustainable on the evidence
    before him.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.  The explanation provided by the appellant's  solicitors
    was that the appellant had notified them  that  she  had  no  financial
    resources to pay for legal representation at the hearing, and that  she
    was in a state of depression such that she was  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing to give witness evidence.  The appellant  had  instructed  them
    she did not wish to withdraw her appeal, but requested for the  hearing
    to proceed on the papers.

21. Ms Fijiwala on behalf of the respondent took me  through  each  of  the
    grounds of appeal,  and  submitted  that  they  did  not  stand  up  to
    scrutiny.

Discussion

22. Ground 1 is that it was not open to the judge to reject the evidence of
    the appellant being in a durable relationship with Mr Kaddu, as none of
    the witnesses were cross-examined by the Presenting  Officer,  "thereby
    accepting the evidence without any challenge".

23. As he made clear at the hearing, in choosing not to  cross-examine  the
    witnesses the Presenting Officer was not thereby conceding  that  their
    evidence should be accepted by the judge.  He made it clear that he was
    adhering to the position taken by the Secretary of State in the refusal
    letter, which was that the appellant's relationship with Mr Kaddu (such
    as it was) was not a relationship akin to marriage for the purposes  of
    Appendix FM, and in particular that it was not shown that  the  parties
    had cohabited in a relationship akin to marriage for at least two years
    prior to the date of application.

24. There was no  procedural  unfairness  in  the  Presenting  Officer  not
    formally putting to each of the witnesses  the  case  advanced  in  the
    refusal letter.  The appellant knew from the refusal  letter  the  case
    that she had to meet at the appeal hearing, and  the  burden  of  proof
    always rested with her to bring forward evidence by way of appeal  that
    was of sufficient cogency to carry the day.  There was no obligation on
    the Presenting Officer to cross-examine any of the witnesses so  as  to
    give them the opportunity  to  improve  the  appellant's  case  by  the
    provision  of  additional  information.   In  not  cross-examining  the
    witnesses, the Presenting Officer took the  calculated  risk  that  the
    judge might decide that the evidence in the witness  statements,  taken
    in  conjunction  with  the  documentary  evidence,  was  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof.

25. It is not suggested that the judge has failed to give adequate  reasons
    for disbelieving the core claim that Mr  Kaddu  is  a  partner  of  the
    appellant for the purposes of  Appendix  FM.   In  particular,  despite
    having allegedly cohabited with Mr Kaddu since 2009,  it  was  only  in
    February 2014 that the appellant's solicitors made this claim,  despite
    having asserted the contrary (on instructions from the appellant)  only
    a few months earlier.  The judge alluded to this crucial discrepancy at
    paragraph [29] of his decision.

26. In short,  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant had not shown that she was in a durable relationship with  Mr
    Kaddu akin to marriage, such as to meet the eligibility requirements of
    Appendix FM.

27. The premise which underlies ground 2 is that the judge  ought  to  have
    found that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with a partner who is settled in the UK, which is  the  first  limb  of
    paragraph EX.1(b) of the Rules.  Since the judge gave adequate  reasons
    for  finding  that  the  appellant  did  not   meet   the   eligibility
    requirements such as to bring the exemption criteria  in  EX.1  of  the
    Rules into focus, ground 2 falls away.

28. Ground 2 is also of no merit for another, quite  separate  reason.   It
    was  not  argued  on  behalf  of  the   appellant   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  Mr  Kaddu  continuing  in
    Uganda.  The way the case was put  was  that  it  was  unreasonable  to
    expect Mr Kaddu to relocate to Uganda with the appellant. Mr Turner did
    not submit that there were insurmountable obstacles to  him  doing  so,
    having regard to the definition of insurmountable obstacles in EX.2.

29. It is convenient at  this  stage  to  address  the  criticism  made  at
    paragraph  31(n)  of  the  permission  application  (albeit  that   the
    criticism is advanced in the context of ground 3).   The  criticism  is
    that the judge failed to consider the  asylum  grounds  raised  by  the
    appellant when assessing the case on proportionality.  For if there  is
    any merit in this argument, it is  potentially  also  relevant  to  the
    question of whether the evidence disclosed insurmountable obstacles.

30. The judge did not ignore the fact  that  both  the  appellant  and  her
    partner had raised in their witness statements  what  he  described  as
    "asylum issues".  This was noted by him at paragraphs [17] and [18]  of
    his decision. At paragraph 9 of her  witness  statement  the  appellant
    said she feared returning to Uganda, and regretted not making an asylum
    application at the time she came to the UK.  In his witness  statement,
    Mr Kaddu said that the appellant had told her that she  was  scared  of
    going back to Uganda due to reasons connected with war and unrest.  Her
    family members had been killed  as  they  were  seen  as  opposing  the
    government.

31. At paragraph [26] of his decision, the  judge  said  that  he  was  not
    taking this aspect of the claim into consideration  in  addressing  the
    proportionality issue, because there had  been  no  asylum  claim  and,
    "this was not addressed on the appellant's behalf by Mr Turner".

32. Mr Turner did not seek to argue before the First-tier Tribunal that the
    "asylum issues" presented an obstacle  to  the  appellant's  return  to
    Uganda, or an obstacle to  Mr  Kaddu  relocating  to  Uganda  with  the
    appellant. It is also  not  argued  by  way  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In the permission application, the reasons advanced as to why
    it is not reasonable to expect Mr Kaddu to leave the UK are:

      i) it cannot be reasonable to expect Mr Kaddu to leave the UK where he
         has rights provided for by his grant of ILR;

     ii) it is not reasonable to require Mr Kaddu to lose those rights which
         will happen if he is resident outside the  UK  for  more  than  two
         years;

    iii) it is not reasonable to require Mr Kaddu to give up his position of
         employment and the rights afforded, such  as  pension  contribution
         etc.

33. Since the "asylum issues" did not form a part of the  appellant's  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it was open to the judge  not  to  take
    them into account when assessing proportionality.  By the  same  token,
    the raising of the "asylum issues" in the witness  statements  did  not
    trigger an obligation on the part of  the  judge  to  consider  whether
    there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  between   the
    appellant and Mr Kaddu continuing in Uganda.

34. Moreover, no reasonable Tribunal properly directed could have taken the
    "asylum issues" into account  as  the  appellant  did  not  purport  to
    discharge the evidential obligations which arise in the  context  of  a
    putative asylum claim.  On analysis, the appellant was not asserting  a
    well-founded fear of  persecution  on  return  to  Uganda,  but  merely
    asserting that she had  a  genuine  fear.   Mr  Kaddu  in  his  witness
    statement also did not assert a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Uganda, which was apparently the country of his birth.  At paragraph  7
    of his witness statement, he says he cannot see  himself  returning  to
    Uganda and living there because he does  not  agree  with  the  present
    government in Uganda as it is a corrupt dictatorship that oppresses any
    opposition. However, he does not claim that he  would  actively  oppose
    the government if he returned to Uganda after an eleven year absence.

35. Ground 3 is that the judge failed to  carry  out  a  lawful  assessment
    under Article 8, following the required two stage process; and that the
    finding that it was lawful to remove the appellant simply  for  her  to
    make an application from abroad to return  to  the  United  Kingdom  is
    perverse, having regard  to  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40  and  Hayat  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.

36. There was no merit in  ground  3.   The  judge  followed  a  two  stage
    process.  It was accepted by Mr  Turner  that  the  appellant  did  not
    qualify under the Rules (Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE) and therefore  the
    judge needed to say no more with regard to stage one..  If he had  been
    minded to allow the appeal at stage two, it would have been an error of
    law for him not to take into account the reasons why the appellant  did
    not succeed at stage one.  But as he was not minded to allow the appeal
    at stage two, he did not need to rehearse the reasons why the appellant
    failed under stage one.

37. It was not perverse for the judge to find that  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to leave the UK and apply for entry clearance from
    Uganda if that was her wish.  The judge gave adequate reasons for  this
    finding, and no error of law is disclosed either by  reference  to  the
    authorities cited in the grounds of appeal, or by reference  to  R  (on
    the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

38. It is also argued in ground 3 that the judge misdirected himself as  to
    the burden of proof at paragraph [22].  In that paragraph, he began  by
    saying the burden of proof was on the appellant  and  the  standard  of
    proof in relation to the Rules was on the balance of probabilities.  He
    then went on to say that the standard of proof in relation to Article 8
    of ECHR is of "a real risk of the relevant violation".

39. When granting permission to appeal, Judge Frankish said that the phrase
    "real risk" lacked jurisprudential attribution ("real risk  of  serious
    harm" being in asylum test, not an Article 8 test).

40. The correct standard of proof for both the Rules and Article 8  is  the
    balance of probabilities.  The one exception to  the  general  rule  is
    where what is apprehended in  the  country  of  return  is  a  flagrant
    violation of the applicant's Article 8 rights,  such  as  an  applicant
    having her son taken away from her.  The judge misdirected  himself  as
    to the correct standard of proof, but he did not thereby prejudice  the
    appellant.  On the contrary, the appellant potentially  benefited  from
    having the lower standard of proof applicable to  asylum  claims  being
    applied to all aspects of her Article 8 claim.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson





























