
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/17280/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th January 2018                       |On 5th March 2018                |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             MD Shahidur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Pullig
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 27th July 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 20th August 1982.   He
    entered the UK on 2nd September 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student with
    leave to expire on 1st January 2012.  He was then granted further leave
    to remain on 25th July 2012 to expire on 28th August 2014.  On the same
    day he made an application as a family member of an EU  national  which
    was refused on 8th November 2014.  On 4th December he  applied  for  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student extension without a CAS.

 3. On 17th February 2015 he made  an  application  on  the  basis  of  his
    private and family life, which was refused on 22nd April 2015 and it is
    this  decision  which  was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  before   the
    Immigration Judge.

 4. The appellant attempted to have  the  appeal  adjourned  prior  to  the
    hearing on the grounds that he was unwell.  The adjournment application
    was refused and the case was dealt with on the basis of submissions  by
    the representative and the Presenting Officer.

 5. The judge concluded that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  He then wrote

         "Turning to the question of whether or not I should  consider  this
         appeal outside the Immigration Rules, as is said on a  freestanding
         basis, I am guided by the Court of Appeal decision  in  SSHD  v  SS
         Congo and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  where  it  notes  that  the
         Immigration Rules, as far as this case is concerned  at  least,  do
         not constitute a complete code but in order to consider  Article  8
         outside those Rules I need  to  have  compelling  circumstances  in
         order for me to do so.  I find that none have been put in  evidence
         and thus I do not need to proceed further."

 6. He dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant's former representatives sought permission to  appeal  on
    the grounds that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    length of stay and his family life with his paternal cousin, a  Spanish
    national, and had not given any reasons as to why his  removal  was  in
    the public interest.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Murray on 29th November 2017.
     Judge Murray stated that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that  he
    should not  consider  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    arguably an error of law in the light of the Supreme  Court's  judgment
    in MM Lebanon [2017] UKSC 10 in which the  Supreme  Court  allowed  the
    appeal of the appellant SS from SS Congo, concluding that the issue  is
    always whether the authorities have struck a fair balance  between  the
    individual and public interests.

Submissions

 9. Ms Pal accepted that the judge ought to have considered Article  8  but
    argued that the appeal was bound to fail since the judge could not have
    found family life in this case and any private life  which  he  enjoyed
    had always been precarious.  The failure to consider Article 8  outside
    the Rules was therefore immaterial.

10. Mr Khan submitted that the judge had a duty  to  consider  all  of  the
    evidence in the round.  The appellant had been in the UK for five years
    as a student and all of the subsequent applications had been made in  a
    timely manner.  The outcome should not be prejudged.

Findings and Conclusions

11. The judge did not materially err in law.

12. First, there was no  evidence  upon  which  he  could  rationally  have
    concluded that the appellant  enjoyed  family  life  with  his  cousin.
    Although the appellant himself was said to  be  too  unwell  to  attend
    their hearing, there was no reason at all why his cousin could not have
    attended in order to explain to the judge why there were more than  the
    normal emotional ties between adults in this case so as  to  constitute
    family life.

13. So far as private life is concerned, the only evidence before the judge
    was that the appellant had been a student, but that he now had no basis
    upon which to stay in the UK.  The judge was unarguably correct to find
    that  there  were  no  significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    reintegration in Bangladesh.  The private life which he enjoys with his
    friends has been established at a time when the appellant was in the UK
    on a temporary basis.  It has always been precarious.  He  has  made  a
    series of unsuccessful applications and has no basis of stay in the  UK
    within the Immigration Rules.  There is no possible  basis  upon  which
    this application could ever have succeeded.

Notice of Decision

14. The original judge did not err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 24 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
