
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17910/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      | On 27 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL K DRABU CBE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                MR ADIL SHAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fujiwala, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Khan of Lincolns Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent is a national of Pakistan and his given date of birth is
    2 September 1986. His application made on 12 February 2013 for leave to
    remain under "EEA - Zambrano- Direct Family Member" was refused by  the
    Secretary of State for reasons given in her letter of  28  March  2014.
    Judge of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Hussain  at  Richmond  heard  the
    respondent's appeal against the decision on  27  November  2014.  After
    receiving documentary evidence  and  hearing  oral  evidence  from  the
    respondent and his spouse Judge Hussain allowed the appeal for  reasons
    given in his written determination dated 31 December 2014.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to Upper Tribunal on
    5 January 2015. Judge Chambers, a Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    refused to grant permission for reasons given I his decision  dated  10
    February 2015.

 3. On 25 February 2015, the Secretary of  State  renewed  her  application
    before  Upper  Tribunal.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane   granted
    permission stating in his decision dated 26 May 2015, "It  is  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law that, only because  her
    mother works, the child would be  "unable"  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom, if the appellant was required to leave."

 4. At the hearing of the appeal Ms Fujiwala argued that Judge Hussain  had
    applied an incorrect test and asked me to look with care at  the  legal
    principles set out in the decisions  in  MA  &  SM,  making  particular
    reference to Paragraph 41 thereof. She submitted that the child of  the
    appellant would not be compelled to leave the United Kingdom and if  he
    were to leave, that would be because of the choice of the parents.  She
    asked that I should also look at the decision I  Hines  (paragraphs  23
    and 24) in so far as the  Judge  had  given  no  consideration  to  the
    sponsor reducing her work hours to take care of  the  child.  She  said
    that Judge Hussain should have dismissed the appeal.

 5. In response Mr Khan for the appellant argued that the findings made  by
    Judge Hussain were  perfectly  correct  and  sustainable.  He  drew  my
    particular attention to Paragraphs 11, 12 and 15 of the  determination.
    He relied on the principles set out in Sanada. He  submitted  that  the
    decision of Judge Hussain does not disclose any error  of  law  and  it
    should not be disturbed.

 6. Ms Fujiwala asked me to note by way of clarification that the  impugned
    decision does not require the mother and  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. I have given close and careful consideration to the grounds  of  appeal
    upon which the appellant relied in its application  for  permission  to
    appeal made before the First-tier Tribunal and which  was  refused  and
    the grounds advanced before the Upper Tribunal, which led  Judge  Clive
    Lane to grant permission. I have  also  studied  the  determination  of
    Judge Hussain carefully noting the findings of fact  made  by  him  and
    which I note have not been challenged in  the  proceedings  before  the
    Upper Tribunal. The findings made by Judge Hussain  are  well  reasoned
    and fully supported by the evidence before  him.  The  Judge  correctly
    identified the issues before him.  He  found  that  the  appellant  was
    indeed the primary carer of the infant  child.  Quite  properly  taking
    account of the "happily married relationship" the Judge noted that when
    the sponsor was asked what  would  happen  if  the  appellant  was  not
    allowed to stay in this country, she said, "they would have to move  as
    a family." The Judge accepted the  sincerity  of  that  statement.  The
    Judge then went on to consider whether the child who was  at  the  time
    less than two years old would have to move to Pakistan, the Judge said,
    "Bearing in mind that the child is only one and a half  years  old  and
    bearing in mind that the best interests of children is to  remain  with
    both their parents, it seems to me the conclusion inescapable that  the
    child would have to leave with his parents."

 8. I note that Judge Chambers, a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    refusing  permission  to  appeal  said  in  his  decision,  "The  Judge
    considered the Regulation (paragraph  11),  the  circumstances  of  the
    child and its parents (paragraphs 12 -18) and  took  into  account  the
    options for a child who was only one and a half years old. It is not in
    such circumstances surprising that the Judge on the facts reached  such
    a conclusion stating it was an inescapable conclusion."

 9. I also note that the reason given by  Judge  Clive  Lane  for  granting
    permission. Having looked at all the evidence  that  was  before  Judge
    Hussain, there was no way he could have made a sustainable finding that
    the child would be  able  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    appellant was required to leave. Judge Hussain had heard oral  evidence
    from the mother of the child as well as the appellant and he found  the
    evidence of both witnesses credible. There was no evidence  before  him
    that the child could be taken care of by anyone other than the  parents
    and primarily by the appellant. The appellant (Secretary of State)  was
    represented at the hearing before Judge Hussain and had the opportunity
    to probe the two witnesses on what network of support, if any, they had
    in the United Kingdom. In the absence of such evidence the Judge  could
    not have speculated as to whether the child could be  looked  after  by
    someone other  than  his  father  and/mother.  The  criticism  levelled
    against Judge Hussain that "he failed  to  give  consideration  to  the
    sponsor reducing her work hours" is misguided  and  misconceived  given
    that  the  evidence  before  him  was  that  under  the  existing  work
    arrangements of the mother of the child when the  evidence  before  him
    was "She has to work the hours she has chosen  in  order  to  bring  in
    sufficient funds."

10. I have studied paragraph 56 of the Upper Tribunal decision in MA and SM
    (Zimbrano:  EU  children  outside  EU  Iran  [2013]  UKUT   00380).   I
    unhesitatingly reject the  submission  made  by  Ms  Fujiwala  that  in
    determining this appeal Judge Hussain applied the incorrect legal test.
    Of course the child would leave the United Kingdom because the  parents
    would have no option but to take him with them. He is of a very  tender
    age and needs constant care and attention. The removal of the appellant
    would make it impossible for the mother to  take  care  of  the  infant
    without recourse to public funds. That cannot and is not in the  public
    interest nor is in the best interests of the child to be separated from
    his father in the circumstances of this case.

11. I have also taken into consideration the contents of paragraphs 23  and
    24 of the decision in Hines [2014] EWCA Civ 660 upon which Ms  Fujiwala
    placed reliance. I see nothing in the Court  of  Appeal  decision  that
    makes the decision made by Judge Hussain or his reasoning in support of
    his decision to allow the appeal, even arguably  flawed  let  alone  in
    material error of law. If anything the contents of the  two  paragraphs
    support the decision of Judge Hussain.  At the end of the day decisions
    in all cases are made based on the facts of the case in question as was
    the decision made by Judge Hussain in this case.

12. For the sake of completeness I should record  that  I  have  taken  due
    account of the written skeleton  argument  of  the  respondent  wherein
    reference has been made to the decision in Sanade (British  Children  -
    Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).

13. In my judgement the decision of Judge Hussain was not in material error
    of law and therefore his decision to allow the  appeal  must  stand  as
    must his order on Fee Award.


Judge K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

24 August 2015
