
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17114/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 13 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MUHAMMAD QASIM CHAUDHRY


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Khan, instructed by Parkview Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State.  The  case  concerns  a
    national of Pakistan (the claimant) who was born on 11 July  1987.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom with permission as a visitor on 23 August
    2013 and thereafter made application for leave to remain as the  spouse
    of a British national, Tahria Khan. The couple had married in  Pakistan
    on 10 June 2012.

 2. The Secretary of State refused to grant leave to remain on this  basis.
    The application was refused under the partner route of Appendix  FM  in
    the light of the nature of the  claimant's  immigration  status.  There
    were no children thus the requirements of EX.1(a) were  not  met.   The
    relationship was accepted as genuine and subsisting but there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the relationship continuing in Pakistan and
    thus EX.1(b) was not met. The respondent did not come within any of the
    provisions for private life under  paragraph  276ADE  and  it  was  not
    considered  there  were  any   exceptional   circumstances.    It   was
    acknowledged that Ms Khan was pregnant and due to give  birth  in  June
    but it was not unreasonable for the claimant to return to Pakistan  and
    apply for entry clearance.

 3. Although the respondent was not given a right of appeal  on  the  basis
    that he had made his application after expiry of leave, the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted the evidence of the respondent that an in  time
    application had been made.  By the time Judge A Parker heard the appeal
    on 2 September 2014, the British citizen child had been  born  (2  July
    2014).

 4. The judge accepted  the  Presenting  Officer's  argument  that  as  the
    respondent had entered as a visitor, the partner or  parent  route  was
    not available and thus considered the case solely under Article 8.   He
    applied  the  relevant  provisions  of  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and concluded that,

      i) it is in the best interests of the child to be with both parents;

     ii) the mother and child do not wish  to  reside  in  Pakistan  and  as
         British citizens that is an important consideration;

    iii)  there  was  no  realistic  prospect  of  a  successful  settlement
         application by the respondent under the Rules and

     iv) it was unreasonable to expect the  child  or  the  father  to  live
         elsewhere than the United Kingdom.

    On this basis he allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 5. The challenge by the Secretary of State is in terms that the judge  had
    erred in law in  his  approach  to  the  Article  8  assessment.   With
    reference to Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)
    and R (On the application of Nagre) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 720 [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) it is submitted that
    the  circumstances  of  the  claimant  were  neither   compelling   nor
    exceptional.  With reference to s.117B,  the  decision  to  remove  the
    claimant was proportionate. The grounds continue:

         "The [claimant] cannot speak English and will therefore  be  unable
         to integrate into society.  He will therefore have no  prospect  of
         employment  and  as  his  wife  is  not  working  he  will  not  be
         financially independent and will therefore also be a burden on  tax
         payers.  It is submitted that there is no insurmountable  obstacles
         to his wife and child from relocating  to  Pakistan  and  would  be
         reasonable for them to do so if they so wish.  Their reluctance  to
         do so is one of choice rather  than  necessity  and  therefore  any
         separation will purely be their own making.  It remains  their  own
         choice whether they remain here without the [claimant] or  relocate
         with him.  If they chose not to, they can  remain  in  contact  via
         modern methods of  communication  and  visits  as  they  have  done
         previously. It is  submitted  that  it  is  proportionate  for  the
         [claimant] to return until the requirements are met so that  he  is
         not a burden on tax payers and so a fair and effective  immigration
         system is maintained."

 6. By way of a Rule 24 response, it is first argued  that  the  respondent
    was exempt from meeting the minimum  income  requirement,  the  English
    language requirement and immigration status by virtue of his subsisting
    relationship with a British citizen child and  s.EX.1.   Miss  Khan  no
    longer relies on this argument.

 7. The second point raised was that the judge had identified and  properly
    applied the principles in  Gulshan  and  Nagre  in  order  to  reach  a
    conclusion that there were compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules.  The challenge was a disagreement with  the
    judicial findings and did not amount to an arguable error of law.   Any
    decision to remove the respondent would be a disproportionate breach of
    his Article 8 rights.

 8. In order to consider the materiality of any error if found,  I  invited
    submissions on the Secretary of State's current guidance on the  family
    life provisions  in  the  Rules  (Immigration  Directorate  Instruction
    Family Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  dated  November  2014)  in
    particular paragraph 11.2.3 from which I quote the initial paragraphs:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision-maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano.

         The  decision  maker  must  consult  the  following  guidance  when
         assessing cases involving criminality:

         .    Criminality guidance in ECHR cases (internal)

         .    Criminality guidance in the ECHR cases (external)

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK with that  parent
         or primary carer. In such cases it will usually be  appropriate  to
         grant leave to the parent or  primary  carer,  to  enable  them  to
         remain in the UK with the child,  provided  there  is  satisfactory
         evidence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parents or alternative primary carer in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could  cover amongst others:

         .    Criminality falling below the threshold set out  in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

         .    A very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on a child of any separation. If the
         decision-maker  is  minded  to  refuse,  in   circumstances   where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with the  senior  case  worker  and,  where  appropriate,
         advice may be sought from the Office of the Children's Champion  on
         the implications of the welfare of the child, in order to  in  form
         the decision..."

 9. The remainder of paragraph 11.2.3 is in terms that  the  decision-maker
    must first consider an application under the Rules  and  then  look  at
    exceptional  circumstances.   Guidance  is  also  given  where  neither
    category avails an applicant the case must be referred to European case
    work where all the following criteria are met:

         "(i)     the child is under the age of 18; and

         (ii)     the child is a British citizen; and

         (iii)    the primary carer (care responsibilities and court  orders
             are examples of evidence) if the child is a  non-EEA  national
             in the UK; and

         (iv)     there is no other  parent/guardian  carer  upon  whom  the
             child is dependent or who could care  for  the  child  if  the
             primary carer left the UK to go to a country outside the EU."

10. Miss Khan argued  that  the  reasonableness  of  the  decision  by  the
    claimant's British citizen wife was the aspect that  required  analysis
    in this case in the light of the child in the UK.  The test was not one
    of insurmountable obstacles.  She contended  that  there  had  been  no
    change since this aspect was considered by the Upper Tribunal in Sanade
    and Others (British children - Zambrano -  Direci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048
    (IAC).

11. Mr Diwnycz accepted that as the removal of the respondent would  result
    in a split in the family this would not be in accordance  with  current
    UKBA  guidance.   In  his  view,  that  guidance  where  there  is   no
    criminality  is  confined  to  the  first  paragraph  of  11.2.3.    He
    acknowledged that the test was not one of insurmountable obstacles.

12. In the light of this approach Miss Khan made  only  short  submissions.
    The judge had had regard  to  primary  legislation  and  had  carefully
    considered the case law and arrived at occlusions open  to  him.  There
    was no material error and in the light of the submissions  made  by  Mr
    Diwnycz, the Secretary of State had not made out her case.

13. By way of response, Mr Diwnycz considered that he had nothing to add to
    these  submissions.  He  clarified  that  he  did  not  challenge   the
    reasonableness of the decision of the claimant's wife that she and  the
    child should not accompany him to Pakistan; it was open to her to  make
    that decision and there was no "mechanism" whereby he  could  criticise
    it.

14. In the circumstances my decision can be shortly stated.

15. Section 117B(vi) provides:

         "(vi) in the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

16. The judge correctly identified the need to consider whether it would be
    unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom in [26] of
    his decision.  At [30] he found that it would be unreasonable  for  the
    claimant and the child to live elsewhere other than the UK.

17. Although not relevant to the considerations under s.117B(vi), Miss Khan
    pointed out that the respondent had produced evidence of his competence
    in English; his wife had been working as a hairdresser although she was
    required to give this up on the birth of the child.

18. As Mr Diwnycz has accepted  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the
    British citizen child to go to Pakistan  it  follows  that  the  public
    interest does not require the claimant's removal  under  section  117B.
    Furthermore, Mr Diwnycz has conceded that as removal  of  the  claimant
    would split the family, such removal would not be  in  accordance  with
    the Secretary of States guidance to her  staff.  Taking  these  matters
    together, the challenge to the judge's decision under article 8 is  now
    academic.

19. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal stands.

Signed
        Date 11 March 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson











