
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17032/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th July 2013                               |On 7th August 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                SAMIR ZORGUI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Sarsfield
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 2nd October 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Tunisia born on 26th March 1979.  He came
    to the UK as the spouse of Michelle Jepson on 30th September 2007.

 3. The Appellant has a complex  immigration  history.  He  first  made  an
    application for leave to remain as the spouse of a person  present  and
    settled in the UK on 11th September 2009 and was granted leave  to  run
    to 24th October 2011. He had not passed the "Life In The UK"  test  and
    would not be able to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  287  of  the
    Immigration Rules i.e. for indefinite leave  to  remain  and  therefore
    applied under paragraph 284.

 4. The Appellant's marriage broke down in about January 2010.  In  October
    2010 the Appellant's estranged spouse wrote to the Secretary  of  State
    alleging domestic violence and giving a different address for him.

 5. On 13th January 2011 and 16th February  2011  the  Secretary  of  State
    wrote to the Appellant at the address given  by  his  estranged  spouse
    explaining  that  consideration  was  being  given  to  curtailing  the
    Appellant's leave to remain but by that stage the Appellant was  living
    in Doncaster and he did not receive those letters.  On 9th  March  2011
    the Respondent made a decision to curtail  the  Appellant's  leave  and
    noted on the Appellant's file that as the address  was  unreliable  and
    UKBA would serve the notice of decision on both  the  address  and  the
    file in accordance with paragraph  7.2  of  the  Immigration  (Notices)
    Regulations 2003.

 6. The Appellant's marriage to Miss Jepson was dissolved in  August  2011.
    He submitted an application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  15th
    October 2011 and on 28th February 2012 applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules, which was  refused.  On
    10th July 2012 the Appellant appealed on the basis of his  relationship
    with a Miss Ridgard. At the time of the hearing before  the  judge  the
    Appellant was living with Melanie Ridgard having been in a relationship
    with her since April 2011.  Their baby was born in September 2012 after
    the date of the Respondent's  decision  but  before  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the judge.

The Judge's Determination

 7. The judge said that the Appellant's conduct had been  disgraceful.   He
    considered that he had deliberately chosen not to inform the Respondent
    about his new relationship and intended to enter in the  UK  and  avoid
    returning to Tunisia at all costs.  He stated that it was not until the
    Appellant's bundle was served less than two full  working  days  before
    the hearing that the Respondent was aware of the full  details  of  the
    relationship.  He said that his former  spouse  had  alleged  that  the
    Appellant had been violent and disrespectful to her and  that  he  owed
    her money and she had had to call the  police  several  times  and  the
    Appellant's own evidence supported what she said. His past conduct  was
    indicative of desperation to remain  in the UK at all costs.

 8. The judge said that the Appellant's actions over the  years  undermined
    his claim to have a genuine relationship with Miss Ridgard and  he  was
    not satisfied that  he  intended  to  live  with  her  and  their  baby
    permanently.  He had used her to try and remain here.

The grounds of application

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had been wrong to state that the Appellant's  bundle  had  been  served
    less than two full working days before the hearing. He had  served  the
    bundle  five  working  days  before  the  hearing  in  accordance  with
    directions. Moreover the judge  took  into  account  a  revenge  letter
    written by the Appellant's ex-spouse which had not  been  disclosed  to
    the Appellant until the day of the hearing and had remained  silent  as
    to the Respondent's failure to serve the bundle containing  the  letter
    from the ex spouse on the Appellant at all. He had shown bias.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Grant on 26 October
    2012 but, upon renewal, was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on
    20th December 2012.  The renewed grounds in addition  to  the  previous
    grounds make a number of further points.

11. Firstly, the curtailment letter of March 2011 was not  properly  served
    and therefore invalid because  it  was  not  sent  to  the  Appellant's
    solicitors at the time, which was the address given for correspondence.
     As a consequence his further application for indefinite leave on  15th
    October 2011 should have been treated as an  in  time  application  for
    further leave to remain.

12. Secondly,  the Appellant's relationship with Miss Ridgard was  properly
    raised at the correct time in the Section 120 notice and the judge  had
    erred in law in  failing  to  give  any  proper  consideration  to  the
    existence of family life between the Appellant and his child.

13. Finally the judge had erred  in  his  conclusions  as  to  the  abusive
    behaviour by the Appellant.  The evidence now available  and  submitted
    with the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was the result of
    a Magistrate's Court trial  against  the  Appellant  in  which  he  was
    charged with assaulting Michelle Jepson and found not guilty.  Had  the
    Respondent's bundle been served  in  accordance  with  directions  this
    evidence could  have been placed before the Tribunal. It supported  the
    Appellant's case that he had not been violent towards  his  spouse  and
    cast doubt on the reliability of her evidence.

The Hearing

14. The Appellant told me that he had financial problems and was  not  able
    to pay for representation.

15. So far as the curtailment issue was concerned he said that he had lived
    at the address given by his ex-wife for a short period.  He then  moved
    to Doncaster.  His last contact with his  previous  solicitors  was  in
    2009 when they had successfully applied for a further two  years  leave
    to remain.

16. The Appellant  said  that  unfortunately  his  relationship  with  Miss
    Ridgard had broken down. They had split up at the  end  of  April  2013
    although he still  wanted  to  make  the  relationship  work  with  his
    daughter. He had been to the Doncaster County Court and had asked  what
    he needed to do in order to make an application for  contact.  He  said
    that he had worked hard in the UK and educated himself and learned  how
    to treat people well. He wanted to be able to stay to have a chance  to
    make his relationship work with Miss Ridgard and to have  contact  with
    his daughter. He accepted that he had made mistakes but he had tried to
    do his best and he wanted his family back again.  If  he  was  able  to
    work his partner could come off benefits and the financial difficulties
    which had led to their problems would be resolved.

17. Mrs Pettersen submitted that there was  no  error  in  respect  of  the
    service of the curtailment letter but she accepted that the  judge  had
    been wrong in his criticisms of the Appellant  who  had  complied  with
    directions and put in the bundle in time.  She also accepted  that  the
    Respondent had arrived on the appeal day with fresh evidence which  had
    not been disclosed and said that the Presenting Officer's note  of  the
    hearing indicated that the representative had argued that  he  had  not
    had the opportunity to address the letter because the bundle  had  only
    been seen in court.

18. However she submitted that the Appellant no longer  had  any  basis  of
    stay in the UK, that his attempts to apply for contact were at  a  very
    early stage and the appeal should be dismissed.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law.

19. The Appellant argues that his application for leave to remain in the UK
    outside the Rules made on 15th October 2011 should have been treated as
    one made by a person  with  continuing  leave  to  remain  because  the
    curtailment  decision  had  not  been   properly  served.  However  the
    Respondent had attempted service on two addresses, namely  the  marital
    address and the address given by  the  Appellant's  former  wife.   The
    grounds state that the correspondence should  have  been  sent  to  his
    solicitor  in  accordance  with  the  notice  regulations.  However  he
    confirmed in court that Turpin and Miller were not  his  solicitors  at
    that time, since he had  had  no  contact  with  them  after  they  had
    completed his application for two years' leave in 2009. In  any  event,
    none of these arguments were raised before the judge who could not have
    been expected to deal with them.

20. The other criticisms of this determination are, however, well made.

21. Firstly, as Mrs Pettersen properly accepted, the judge's comments about
    the Appellant's failure to serve his bundle in a  timely  fashion  were
    wholly unfounded.  In fact the bundle was  served  in  compliance  with
    directions five working days before the  hearing.  The  judge's  unwise
    remarks are all the more disturbing since he makes no criticism of  the
    respondent who did  not  disclose  their  evidence  until  the  hearing
    itself.  There is no reference in the determination to the  Appellant's
    representative, as recorded in the Presenting Officer's minute  of  the
    hearing, arguing that he had not had the  opportunity  to  address  the
    letter and stating that it should be disregarded.

22. Secondly, the judge in  strong  language,  said  that  the  Appellant's
    conduct had been disgraceful, that he had acted deceitfully and he  was
    not satisfied that he was in a genuine relationship with  Miss  Ridgard
    or the child.  On the basis of the evidence as it was before the  judge
    it is difficult to see how he could have reached that conclusion.   The
    Appellant had come to the UK as a spouse and the marriage had subsisted
    for three years.  He made the correct in time application  for  further
    leave to remain at a time when the marriage was still subsisting and it
    is clear that he never received the  curtailment  decision.   When  the
    marriage had broken down he  again  made  an  appropriate  application,
    namely one to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  He did not seek to
    conceal the evidence of his relationship with  Miss  Ridgard  -  indeed
    there is no possible reason why it would have been in his interests  to
    do so.

23. There is no consideration of the Section 55 and the best  interests  of
    the Appellant's daughter with whom he was living at  the  time  of  the
    hearing.

24. Finally, in finding that the Appellant had  behaved  violently  towards
    Miss  Jepson,  the  judge  chose  to  accept  it  unsupported  evidence
    submitted on the day of the hearing by the Respondent of a witness  who
    previously must have been disbelieved by a magistrate during a trial.

25. The decision is set aside and must be remade.

Remaking the Decision

26. The Appellant does not enjoy family life with his ex-spouse, with  whom
    he has no  contact,  nor  with  Miss  Ridgard  with  whom  he  is  also
    estranged.  He says, and I accept, that he would like  to  be  able  to
    resume family life with her and   his  daughter  but  it  is  clear  on
    present evidence that the couple have little if any contact.   He  said
    that he had not seen Miss Ridgard or her  daughter  since  the  end  of
    April. He does however enjoy private life in the UK  having  been  here
    for some six years.  I accept that during that time  he  has  used  his
    time well, clearly working hard to improve his  now  excellent  English
    and working as a waiter in as number of hotels.

27. Removal would be an interference with his private life but lawful since
    he has no  basis  of  stay  here.  The  legitimate  aim  is  one  which
    encompasses the need for effective immigration control.

28. With respect to proportionality, the main argument in  the  Appellant's
    favour is his evident desire to remain in contact  with   his  daughter
    and his wish to reconcile with his partner.   There  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that the Appellant is not serious in his intention to  maintain
    contact with her and indeed it would be in her best interests to have a
    relationship with her father as well as her mother.

29. On the other hand the Appellant has lived all of his life, save for the
    last six years in Tunisia.  His parents are  there  and  he  will  have
    gained valuable experience through working in the tourist  industry  in
    the UK and acquiring fluent English.

30. The fact is that he has no basis for stay here. He has a conviction for
    common assault in relation to Ms Ridgard and was  given  a  conditional
    discharge and prohibited from contacting his partner as a part  of  the
    criminal proceedings and therefore  re-establishing  contact  with  his
    daughter will not be straightforward. This is not a situation in  which
    contact proceedings are ongoing and enquiries by the  Appellant  as  to
    the procedure to be adopted are at a very early stage. He does have the
    ability to apply for entry clearance to  exercise  contact  within  the
    Immigration Rules.

31. Taking all of the above into account, I conclude that the arguments  in
    favour of the Appellant's removal outweigh those in his favour.

Decision

32. The original judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.   It  is
    remade as follows. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

