
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17317/2013
                                                               IA/17324/2013
                                                               IA/17364/2013
                                                               IA/17367/2013
                                                               IA/17369/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 5 February 2015                           |On 9 February 2015             |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE PATTERSON DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                   UI (1)
                                   EE (2)
                                   JOE (3)
                                   JE (4)
                                  JOsE (5)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Pennington-Benton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria, born on 20 July 1984,  24
       June 1981,  3  June  2006,  18  October  2008  and  7  February  2013
       respectively.  The first  appellant  and  the  second  appellant  are
       partners and the other three  appellants  are  their  children.   The
       appeals have been  linked  and  heard  together  due  to  the  family
       relationships.

    2. The first appellant claims to have entered the UK in September  2000,
       aged sixteen, having been brought here by  a  Nigerian  family  as  a
       domestic worker.  She has remained in the United Kingdom ever  since.
       The second appellant last came to the United  Kingdom  in  May  2007,
       using a friend's passport, although  he  had  been  here  previously,
       arriving in December 2003.  The first and second  appellants  met  in
       2004.  The third, fourth and fifth appellants were all  born  in  the
       United Kingdom.  On 4 May 2010 the first four appellants applied  for
       leave outside the rules on the basis that removing them would  breach
       Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  This  was  refused  on  15
       March 2011 without a right of appeal.  Further  representations  were
       made on 6 May 2011 (the date of application).   The  first  appellant
       was served with notice of liability to removal on  10  October  2011.
       Additional evidence was submitted on 20 October 2011  and  5  January
       2012 after which the first appellant stopped reporting.  On  5  April
       2013 the fifth appellant's birth certificate was  submitted  together
       with information that  the  first  appellant  was  a  single  mother.
       Subsequently,  information  was  submitted  to  the  effect  she  had
       reconciled with the second appellant.

    3. On 29  April  2013  the  respondent  made  decisions  to  remove  the
       appellants to Nigeria, refusing  the  applications  by  reference  to
       Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
       appellants appealed.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wiseman  heard
       the appeals on 3 January  2014  and  dismissed  them  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 31 January 2014.  Judge  Wiseman's  decision  was  set
       aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden because he  had  conflated  the
       Article 8 claims of the respective appellants and he  had  failed  to
       consider whether the first appellant could  succeed  under  paragraph
       276ADE(vi) of the rules[1].  The appeal was remitted  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to be heard again by a different  judge  because  Judge
       Wiseman had not made sufficiently clear findings of fact in order  to
       re-make the decision.

    4. On 15 October 2014 the appeals were heard again by Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Onoufriou.  Counsel for the appellants,  who  had  also
       appeared before the Upper Tribunal, took a new  point  and  submitted
       that, as the applications were made before 9 July 2012 when  Appendix
       FM and paragraph 276ADE came into force, the decisions  were  not  in
       accordance with the law.  Reliance was placed on Edgehill v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402.  In  that  case
       the Court of Appeal held that it  was  unlawful  to  apply  paragraph
       276ADE to long residence applications that were  already  outstanding
       at the date the new rules came into force, which  was  9  July  2012.
       The transitional provisions of the Statement of Changes HC192,  given
       their natural and ordinary  meaning,  provided  that  the  respondent
       would not rely on the new rules when dealing with  applications  made
       before 9 July 2012.  Counsel conceded that the first appellant  could
       not succeed under the  pre-2012  long  residence  rules  because  the
       decision taken against the first appellant "stopped  the  clock"  and
       she could not accrue fourteen years' continuous residence.

    5. In any event, Judge Onoufriou did not  accept  counsel's  submission.
       He noted the case of YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, which he regarded as  authority  for
       the proposition that, where a case was remitted following the finding
       of an error of law, the Tribunal should apply the latest  rules.   He
       went on to apply paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  rules  in  its  current
       wording[2].  He was not satisfied the  appellants  had  no  remaining
       family ties in Nigeria, noting the absence of death certificates  for
       the first and second appellants' parents  and  the  fact  the  second
       appellant had returned  to  Nigeria  in  2006.   He  then  considered
       paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the rules, particularly in  relation
       to the third  appellant,  who  was  then  aged  eight[3].   We  note,
       however,  that  the  third  appellant  was  only   aged   four   when
       representations were made on 6 May 2011, which we regard as the  date
       of  application.   In  any  event,  Judge  Onoufriou  found  it   was
       reasonable to expect him to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The  best
       interests of all the children were taken into account.

    6.  The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  argue  three  points.
       Firstly, Judge Onoufriou misdirected himself by applying  the  rules.
       As the applications preceded the coming into force of Appendix FM and
       paragraph 276ADE, consideration should  have  been  by  reference  to
       Article 8 case law and  not  the  rules.   Edgehill  applied  and  YM
       (Uganda) did not because the latter was a deportation  case  and  the
       set of rules in  issue  were  different.   Secondly,  the  judge  had
       misdirected himself  in  his  assessment  of  the  first  appellant's
       credibility, particularly as he appeared to have merged the cases  of
       the first and second appellants (as had Judge Wiseman) in finding the
       former had a poor immigration history.  Thirdly, the judge failed  to
       make clear and separate findings in relation to the best interests of
       the fourth and fifth appellants.

    7. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Levin.

    8. We heard submissions on whether the Judge made a  material  error  of
       law.

    9. Mr Pennington-Benton appeared  before  us  for  the  appellants.   He
       focused his submissions on two grounds.   First,  whether  the  Judge
       made a sufficient and properly reasoned  decision  when  he  made  an
       adverse credibility finding against each appellant.  Second, that the
       Judge erred in applying the new Immigration Rules to  an  application
       made before 9 July 2012 when the  new  rules  came  into  effect.  He
       relied on Edgehill (supra).

   10. On the first ground it was  submitted  that  the  Judge  should  have
       considered the written and oral  evidence  together  to  come  to  an
       assessment as to whether the appellants were telling  the  truth:  he
       should have made findings on the core parts of the appellants'  case.
       His failure to do so means that the appellants have no  idea  whether
       their account is accepted, or not, or which parts were  accepted  and
       which parts where rejected.  In addition,  the  Judge  conflated  the
       case of the first appellant with that of the  second  appellant.   He
       placed particular reliance on the absence of documentary evidence, in
       particular, the lack of death certificates for  the  parents  of  the
       first appellant when there was an explanation for  their  absence  in
       the second supplementary statement of the first appellant with  which
       the Judge failed to deal.  The appellants' case was that they had  no
       ties with their country of origin.  As a result they had  no-one  who
       could assist them with providing the documentation.

   11. On the second ground the Secretary of State erred because she  should
       have applied the pre-2012 test  but  also  when  she  considered  the
       Article 8 claim she should have considered the current rules as well,
       which would then include the "no ties" test.  The Judge was wrong  on
       the application of YM (Uganda).  Because the Judge applied the  wrong
       rules there was  an  error  of  law  which,  it  was  submitted,  was
       material.  The appropriate approach was that in R (Singh) v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 2330, namely,  that  the
       decision can only be upheld if it  would  inevitably  have  been  the
       same.  The correct course was for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  for
       reconsideration.

   12. No oral submissions were made to us on any failure on the part of the
       Judge to make clear and separate findings in  relation  to  the  best
       interests of the fourth and fifth appellants. We observe that  it  is
       perfectly clear from a reading of the judgement that the FtTJ did  so
       [22].

   13. Mr Avery, for the respondent, contended that it was  clear  from  the
       judgement what evidence  the  Judge  accepted.   The  Judge  was  not
       satisfied on many points.  His reasons were set out in  paragraph  23
       of the judgment.  There was no material error in his adverse findings
       of credibility.

   14. Because the appellants were a family the Judge went on to assess them
       together.  His  disbelief  of  the  second  appellant  fed  into  his
       conclusions about the lack of documentation.   If  there  were  local
       contacts available then they would be available to both of the  adult
       appellants.  Mr Avery did not accept that the Judge  was  obliged  to
       make the findings which Mr Pennington-Benton submitted he should but,
       if he did have to, it made no material difference to the issue as  to
       whether the appellant had ties in their country of origin.

   15. The appellants' second ground was more complicated.  They were unable
       to rely on the case of Edgehill because  that  concerned  rules  that
       were implemented in 2012 under  different  provisions  to  the  rules
       which were implemented  at  the  same  time  as  the  2014  Act.  The
       appellants' reasoning, therefore, as to why the  Secretary  of  State
       should not have applied rule  276ADE  cannot  stand  up  because  the
       implementation provisions are different.  That is unlike the case  of
       YM (Uganda) where the phrasing is the same as the 2014 implementation
       provisions so that the same reasoning  would  apply  to  the  current
       circumstances.

   16. The right of appeal here arises from circumstances where rule 400  of
       the Immigration Rules applied.  That was in force at the date of  the
       decision and in fact bypasses the appellants' argument  because  what
       is being appealed is the decision to remove.

   17. Overall, because of the clear findings by the  Immigration  Judge  on
       credibility it would make no difference as to which test - whether it
       was the test of no ties to the country  to  which  the  person  being
       removed would have to go if required to leave the United  Kingdom  or
       very significant obstacles to the integration  into  the  country  to
       which  the  person  being  removed  would  have  to  go  -  that  the
       Immigration  Judge  applied.   Because  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
       findings on credibility it made no difference as  to  which  test  he
       applied because of his justifiable disbelief that he had no  evidence
       to go on.

DECISION

Adverse Credibility Findings

   18. In paragraph 22 of his judgment, having earlier set out the  evidence
       that he had received, both in written and oral form, from  the  first
       and second appellants at the hearing, the FtTJ said, "The facts  that
       I accept are that the appellant came to the United Kingdom many years
       ago although it is not certain precisely when.  ... I accept that she
       has been in a long term relationship for some  eight  years,  on  and
       off, with the second appellant by whom she has three children.   ..."
       Beyond  that  there  was  no  independent  evidence  to  support  the
       testimony of the first appellant.  The FtTJ regarded some independent
       evidence as critical to the acceptance of her evidence.  Reading  the
       decision letter as a whole we find that  the  FtTJ  was  quite  clear
       about what parts of the evidence of the first appellant he  accepted.
       Without any independent evidence he was unable to  accept  any  other
       part of the first appellant's evidence other than where  he  said  so
       expressly.

   19. On the second appellant the FtTJ found (in paragraphs 22 and 23) that
       there was no evidence that he was abused by his uncle.  He found that
       the account given by the second appellant of his return to Nigeria in
       2006 when he may or may not have returned to claim an inheritance but
       said he was living on the streets  for  some  six  months  and  being
       assisted by strangers to obtain a false passport  to  return  to  the
       United Kingdom to be totally  implausible.   The  second  appellant's
       credibility was further undermined  by  his  propensity  to  lie,  as
       evidenced by his use of a  false  passport  to  re-enter  the  United
       Kingdom, and his admitted lies in his interview.  His lack of candour
       about the first appellant's circumstances on her arrival  to  England
       was a further factor which provided evidence of lack  of  credibility
       and a propensity to deceive.

   20. For the sake of completeness  the  FtTJ  dealt  separately  with  the
       third, fourth and fifth appellants in paragraph 22.  He had no  doubt
       that the third appellant had learning difficulties  as  evidenced  by
       medical and school reports.  Likewise, the fourth  appellant  had  an
       asthmatic condition.  He was satisfied that  there  was  family  life
       between all five appellants and that they  obviously  had  a  private
       life.  That, however, had been established when they were fully aware
       of  their  precarious  immigration  status  contrary  to  the  public
       interest under section 117B of the 2002 Act.

   21. The FtTJ went on to make adverse  findings  of  credibility  on  both
       appellants particularly in  respect  of  the  death  certificates  in
       relation to their parents.  He recorded, "Even if they themselves did
       not know how to go about obtaining these documents,  they  have  been
       legally represented and the legal representatives  would  have  known
       what to do."  We find that was a perfectly justified finding  in  the
       circumstances  of  this  case  where  both  appellants  were  legally
       represented. He did not conflate the case of the first appellant with
       the case of the second appellant in this or any other aspect.

   22. Contrary to the submissions on behalf of the appellants on this first
       ground we found that the Judge made adequate and express findings  so
       as to enable the appellants to know which  parts  of  each  of  their
       evidence were accepted and  which  were  not.   He  dealt  with  each
       appellant separately and then proceeded to consider  the  family  and
       private life situation.  He provided  an  explanation  for  rejecting
       their accounts which was the dearth of documentary  material.   On  a
       full and fair reading of the judgment it is quite clear  which  parts
       of the appellants' evidence the FtTJ accepted and which he  did  not.
       It was not incumbent on him to deal with each and every part of their
       evidence only those parts which were material to the issues which  he
       had to determine.  That he did in a way which we  find  is  perfectly
       clear and justifiable.

Ground Two

   23. Rule 400 of the Immigration Rules  in  force  at  the  relevant  time
       reads:
           "Where a person claims that their removal under paragraphs  8-10
           of schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971,  section  10  of  the
           Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  or  section   47   of   the
           Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 would  be  contrary
           to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
           Convention the Secretary of State  may  require  an  application
           under paragraph 276ADE (Private Life)  or  appendix  FN  (Family
           Life) of these rules.  Where an application is not required,  in
           assessing that  claim  Secretary  of  State  or  an  immigration
           officer will, subject  to  paragraph  353  consider  that  claim
           against the requirements to be met  under  paragraph  276ADE  or
           appendix FN and if appropriate  the  removal  decision  will  be
           cancelled."

   24. Mr Pennington-Benton accepted in reply that Mr Avery may have a  good
       point on rule 400. He did not, however, accept that  it  altered  the
       question of whether the "no  ties"  test  was  wrongly  applied.   He
       submitted that the question was still whether the Secretary of  State
       applied the right test.  If she did not the appeal should be  allowed
       because she should have applied the relevant rule  in  force  at  the
       time.

   25. We agree with both parties that  paragraph  400  of  the  Immigration
       Rules is a good point. We accept the submissions that Mr Avery  made.
       They make it clear that what is being appealed  is  the  decision  to
       remove. The clear language used means that, in  effect,  it  bypasses
       the argument as to the appropriate test.

   26. However, given the findings  on  credibility  which  the  Immigration
       Judge made, and which we find to be  lawful  and  justified,  we  are
       satisfied that it would make no material difference as  to  which  of
       the tests the Immigration Judge did apply because of his findings  in
       relation to the evidence as a whole.  It follows  that  even  if  the
       Secretary of State applied the "no  ties  to  the  country"  test  as
       opposed  to  the  "very  significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
       integration test" her decision inevitably would have been  the  same,
       applying the approach of Nicol J in the case of Singh.

   27. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does  not  disclose  any  material
       error of law and shall stand. This appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction has been made.




                               Signed   Date


                               The Honourable Mrs Justice Patterson DBE






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



                               Signed   Date


                               The Honourable Mrs Justice Patterson DBE
-----------------------
[1] At the date of decision, the rules stated as follows:


    "276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
    on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:
    ...
    (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
    less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no
    ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which
    he would have to go if required to leave the UK."
2    "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:
    ...
    (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
    continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any  period
    of imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the UK."
[2]  "EX.1. This paragraph applies if
    (a)  (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
relationship with a child who-
         (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years
         when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis  that  this
         paragraph applied;
         (bb) is in the UK;
         (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously  for
         at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of  application
         ;and
    (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK; or
    ..."

