
[pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17564/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                             Ms JENNIFER ANDRURU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Lanlehin
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Uganda  born  in  1984.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 3  April  2014  to
    curtail her leave to remain under paragraph 323(ii) of the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. The history is that she was granted leave to remain from 7 October 2013
    to 7 October 2015 as the spouse of Mr Alex Andabati  Agotre,  a  person
    present and settled in the UK. He has ILR.

 3. On 7 January 2014 solicitors instructed by Mr Agotre wrote to the  Home
    Office to request the annulment of the Appellant's immigration  status.
    It was stated that she had obtained her entry  by  deception  and  that
    they had only stayed together peacefully for two  months.   The  couple
    have a son, AD who was born on  17  May  2012  in  Uganda.   Mr  Agotre
    represented to the Home Office that he wanted the Appellant  and  their
    child to return to Uganda as the child could continue to live with  the
    Appellant's parents.  He stated that he considered the Appellant should
    be removed from the UK as the reason for which leave was granted to her
    no longer existed as they were no longer living together and he did not
    want to continue to be a Sponsor.

 4. As indicated the Respondent on 3 April 2014 curtailed  the  Appellant's
    leave from that date.

 5. She appealed.

 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12 May 2015 Judge of the  First-
    tier Watt dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human
    rights grounds.

 7. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant.  His  conclusions  are  at
    paragraph 13 ff of his decision.

 8. It was accepted that the Appellant and Mr  Agotre  had  stopped  living
    together from, at the latest, January 2014.

 9. Further, the Appellant was convicted at South London Magistrates' Court
    on 23 December 2014 of battery of her husband and having been  remanded
    in custody until 21 January 2015 received a restraining order.  She had
    subsequently been charged with a breach of that order and was  awaiting
    trial.

10. The judge (at [17]) found that the "split up of the marriage  had  been
    unpleasant and spiteful on both sides.  Both parties did not  speak  to
    each other.  The child is with the Appellant, but Mr Agotre has a court
    order granting contact with the child."

11. The judge went on to note a claim by the Appellant that she had been  a
    victim of domestic violence at the hands of Mr Agotre but found that he
    was not satisfied on the evidence  that  such  was  so.   In  fact  "it
    appears the reverse is true", namely, the assault by the  Appellant  on
    Mr Agotre.

12. The judge concluded that the appeal failed under the Rules.

13. As for Article 8 the judge considered the matter "under Appendix FM and
    under paragraph 276ADE.  The child was not 3 years of age at  the  date
    of hearing.  He is very young and lives with his mother.  If his mother
    was to return to  Uganda  then  it  would  obviously  be  in  the  best
    interests of the child to return with her." [24]

14. Finally, the judge considered s117B noting that the  Appellant  is  not
    working and is only in receipt of benefits.  Further,  her  status  has
    been precarious.  He concluded that  the  public  interest  in  removal
    outweighed the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

15. Permission to appeal was sought.  The grounds, in  essence,  were  that
    the judge failed to give adequate consideration  to  the  child's  best
    interests.  He had been mistaken as  to  the  child's  age.   Also  the
    father had obtained a Contact Order.  Further, the judge was  wrong  to
    find that Mr Agotre had been the aggressor in the  relationship.   Post
    hearing she had been acquitted of breaching the restraining order.

16. In granting permission on 18 August 2015 a judge stated:
         "...
         2.   It is not arguable that the judge's findings as to the age  of
             the child (which was correct at the date of hearing)  and  the
             fact that the outcome  of  criminal  proceedings  against  the
             Appellant was not known until after the date  of  the  hearing
             can be arguable errors of law.
         3.   However, I am satisfied that it is an arguable  error  of  law
             that the judge did not consider,  when  considering  the  best
             interests of the child, the Order granting the child's  father
             contact with the child and the effect that the child's removal
             from the United  Kingdom  would  have  on  the  child  as,  of
             necessity, the contact would have to come to an end."

17. At the error of law hearing Ms Lanlehin sought to rely on the  grounds.
    The child's best interests under Article  8  had  not  been  adequately
    assessed.

18. In response Ms Sreeraman's position  was  that  although  succinct  the
    judge's reasoning was adequate and open to him.  The  judge  had  noted
    that the Appellant has made an application for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of domestic violence.  A decision is pending.

19. In considering this matter  there  was  no  dispute  that  the  judge's
    decision under the Rules was unassailable. It  was  accepted  that  the
    marriage was no longer subsisting.  Accordingly the Appellant no longer
    met the requirements of the Rules under which her leave was granted.

20. However, I considered that the decision under Article 8 was flawed.  As
    the judge granting permission stated, the First-tier Judge in his brief
    assessment of the child's best interests had  failed  to  consider  the
    existence of the Contact Order and the effect that removal  might  have
    on the child and his father.

21. I set aside the decision and proceeded  to  remake  it.   Parties  were
    content to make submissions.  Ms  Sreeraman's  position  was  that  the
    Contact Order allowed for visitation and access rights for  the  father
    to his child who is living with his mother,  the  Appellant.   However,
    the father's evidence in a statement is that  he  is  content  for  the
    child to live in Uganda with the Appellant.  He will support his  child
    financially.  Such indicated that it  would  be  in  the  child's  best
    interests to go with his mother to Uganda.

22. Ms Lanlehin submitted that it is in the best interests of the child  to
    have a relationship with his mother and his father.   At  present  with
    the Order the father has the child  alternate  weekends  and  alternate
    holidays.

23. The child, Ms Lanlehin continued, has had instability.  The father took
    him away at about 20 months.  He kept him for about 4 months.  She  got
    him back.  But on return he had a speech  impediment.   He  is  now  at
    nursery.  He  has  regular  contact  with  his  father.   There  is  no
    restraining order now in force.  She was found not guilty of  breaching
    the order.  The child has been through a lot.  He  gets  on  well  with
    both his parents.  The father has ILR.  He is a teacher and it  is  not
    reasonable for him to relocate.

24. Ms Lanlehin submitted that the father's actions had been contradictory.
     He had been concerned to keep contact with his child in the UK but had
    also become more concerned with the removal of the Appellant.

25. In considering this matter under Article 8 I find that there is clearly
    family life between the Appellant and  her  child.   Also  between  the
    child and his father, Mr Agotre.  It seems  that  there  is  no  longer
    family life between the Appellant and Mr Agotre.

26. It is clear also that removal of the Appellant who is the primary carer
    of the child and  would  take  the  child  with  her  would  amount  to
    interference with the right to family life in respect of the father who
    has a Contact Order and visitation rights in respect of his child.

27. Such interference in respect of the father (and indeed of his  son)  is
    sufficiently serious to engage Article 8.

28. The decision to remove is in accordance with the law and  is  necessary
    in a democratic society in the interests of the economic  wellbeing  of
    society.

29. The issue is proportionality.  I consider first the best  interests  of
    the child.

30. In EV (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  it  was  held
    that the best interests of the child were to be determined by reference
    to the child alone without reference  to  the  immigration  history  or
    status of either parent.  In then determining whether or not  the  need
    for immigration control outweighed the best interests of the child,  it
    was necessary to determine the relative strengths of the factors  which
    made it their best interests to remain in the  UK;  and  also  to  take
    account of any factors that pointed the other way.

31. At [35] of EV (Philippines) it was stated that the  best  interests  of
    children will depend on a number of factors including  their  age,  the
    length of time they have been in the UK, how long  they  have  been  in
    education, the stage that their education has reached, to  what  extent
    they have been distanced from the country  to  which  they  are  to  be
    returned, how renewable their connection with it  may  be,  the  extent
    that they will  have  linguistic,  medical  or  other  difficulties  in
    adapting to life there and the extent to which the course proposed will
    interfere with their family life or other rights in this country.

32. The longer the child had been in the UK, the more advanced or  critical
    the stage of his education, the looser his ties  with  the  country  in
    question, and the more deleterious the consequences of his return,  the
    greater the weight that fell into one side of the scales.

33. If it was overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that  he  should
    not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well  not  tip
    the balance.  By contrast if it was in the child's  best  interests  to
    remain, but only on balance with some factors pointing the  other  way,
    the result may be the opposite.  In the balance on the other side there
    fell to be taken into account the strong weight to be given to the need
    to maintain immigration control in pursuit of the economic wellbeing of
    the country and  the  fact  that  ex  hypothesi  the  claimant  had  no
    entitlement to remain.

34. In considering this case the starting point must be that it is  in  the
    best interests of the  child  to  be  with  both  his  parents.   Here,
    however, the parents have irrevocably separated.  By  court  order  the
    primary carer is the mother, the Appellant. The father's involvement is
    more limited.  He has contact alternate weekends from Friday evening to
    Sunday  evening.   The  father  also   has   the   child,   essentially
    alternately, during holidays.

35. I look at other factors.  The child is not a British  citizen.   Indeed
    he was born in Uganda and is a Ugandan citizen.  He is also very  young
    having been born in May 2012.  He is thus  not  in  education  and  has
    spent a relatively brief time in the  UK  thusfar.  Whilst  he  has  no
    knowledge of Uganda by dint of his young age, it can scarcely  be  said
    that he has any significant knowledge of this country.  I  do  not  see
    there to be linguistic, medical or other difficulties  in  adapting  to
    life in Uganda.  English is an official language of Uganda; it was  not
    suggested that the child has any health issues.

36. I note the Tribunal's comment in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  197  that  the  seven
    years from age four is likely to be more significant to  a  child  than
    the first seven years of life.  Very  young  children  are  focused  on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.  As  indicated
    in this case the primary carer is the Appellant.

37. I note and find significant the letter from the father stating that  he
    has no difficulty with his son going to  live  with  the  Appellant  in
    Uganda where there is a "great extended family support where the  child
    will experience love and nurture in our culture and cultural values".

38. Also, that he will support his child and "give him  the  best  possible
    education while I work here to help  him  and  my  family  back  home."
    Indeed, it will be "better for him to be taken back to Uganda  so  that
    his development is not affected."

39. Ms Lanlehin submitted that  the  father's  position  had  changed  from
    seeking by court order to prevent the removal of the child from the  UK
    to this later position.  She questioned his motives.  However I see  no
    reason to doubt the genuineness of what is stated  in  his  letter.   I
    note that the father is a secondary school teacher.  It  is  reasonable
    to conclude that he has the funds to continue to support  his  son  and
    would do so.  Nor is there any indication that he would not be able and
    willing to visit his child and otherwise to keep in touch by the  usual
    modern methods. There is no suggestion that he is anything  other  than
    devoted to his child.

40. On the evidence before me I do not see  there  to  be  any  significant
    detriment to the child returning to Uganda. I conclude  that  the  best
    interests of the child do not require him to  remain  in  the  UK,  but
    rather to live in Uganda with his primary carer. It is clear  from  the
    evidence that the Appellant will herself be able to rely on the support
    of the extended  family.  Also,  according  to  her  statement  she  is
    educated to degree level and was in work before she came to the  UK.  I
    bear in mind further that she only arrived in the UK in  2013  and  has
    spent almost all her life in Uganda a country with which  she  is  thus
    clearly familiar.

41. The Appellant alleges that she was the victim of domestic  violence  at
    the hands of her husband.  I find this matter to be of no assistance to
    the Appellant.   It  is  merely  an  allegation,  there  is  simply  no
    evidence to support the allegation.  Indeed, albeit it appears that she
    was subsequently acquitted of breaching a restraining order, it was she
    who was convicted of battery against him.

42. As for the s117B factors the Appellant speaks English.  However she  is
    not financially independent.  Her income is from public benefits.   The
    child, being neither a British citizen or a person who has lived in the
    UK for a continuous period of seven years or more is not a  "qualifying
    child".

43. In the circumstances of this case noting the strong weight to be  given
    to immigration control in pursuit of  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country and seeking to balance the factors, I conclude for the  reasons
    given that the decision to remove is not disproportionate.  The  appeal
    fails.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
It is set aside and remade as follows.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


