

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17818/2013
                                                               IA/20032/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 February 2014                           |On 22 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                               MR VIVEK KUMAR
                             MR MANEESH VARSHNEY
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Duheric, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by Designated  Judge
   J G Macdonald dismissing these conjoined  appeals.   The  appellants  had
   made a combined application for leave to remain as Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
   Migrants but their applications were  refused  by  the  respondent  in  a
   decision dated 20 May 2013.

2)  Prior  to  the  hearing  before  me  an  application  was  made  for  an
   adjournment on the  basis  that  the  appellants  wished  to  instruct  a
   representative with specialisation in the field of entrepreneur cases and
   on the same basis a request was also made for a transfer from Glasgow  to
   London.  This application was refused on the grounds that the  appellants
   had known since early January 2014 that permission  to  appeal  had  been
   granted  and  had  had  an  adequate  opportunity  to  seek   alternative
   representation since then.

3) The basis of the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  that  the  Designated
   Judge decided the appeal in reliance upon factors which did not form part
   of the original refusal decisions but which were raised on behalf of  the
   respondent during  the  course  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  In the application for permission to appeal it  was  contended
   that the appellants had met every adverse point raised by the  respondent
   in the refusal decisions.  It was submitted that if a ground  of  refusal
   was not cited in the notice of decision  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
   assume that this was not at issue.  If the respondent sought to  raise  a
   new issue relying on different provision then the appellants  had  to  be
   given a fair opportunity to address this.

4) The two new issues raised on behalf of  the  respondent  at  the  hearing
   before the First-tier Tribunal were these.   The  first  arose  from  the
   terms of paragraph 41-SD(b)(i)(4), which  requires  that  the  amount  of
   money available to the applicants from a third party must be expressed in
   pounds  Sterling.   In  relation  to  this  application  the  amount  was
   expressed in Indian Rupees.  The second issue arose under  paragraph  41-
   SD(b)(i)(3), which requires that a declaration from a  third  party  that
   they have made money available for the applicants to invest in a business
   in the UK must be signed not only by the third  party  but  also  by  the
   applicants themselves.  This document was not signed  by  the  appellants
   and the explanation was offered at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that, as the document in relation to  third  party  support  had
   been signed in India, it was not possible for the appellants to travel to
   India to sign it.  As the Designated Judge pointed out, however,  it  did
   not appear to be a requirement of the relevant  provision  that  all  the
   parties had to sign at the same time in the same place.

5) The Designated Judge concluded that the grounds of  refusal  set  out  in
   the decision of 20 May 2013 were met but the two additional issues raised
   by the respondent at the hearing, as set out above, were  not  satisfied.
   Accordingly the appeals were dismissed.

6) At the hearing before me, Mr Duheric submitted that the  two  issues  set
   out above, namely the absence of signatures on the Affidavit or  document
   regarding the availability of funds for investment, and the statement  of
   funds in Rupees, did not form part of the original refusal decisions.  Mr
   Duheric sought to rely on the case of RM (India) [2006] UKAIT  00039,  in
   terms of which, even though the facts could support a ground for  refusal
   not cited in the notice of decision, the Tribunal was entitled to  assume
   that this potential ground for refusal was not relied upon and was not at
   issue.  Mr Duheric submitted that the proper procedure for the respondent
   in the circumstances would have been to withdraw  the  refusal  decisions
   and issue new decisions or to allow the appellants to remedy the  defects
   in the documents they had submitted.  Mr Duheric acknowledged that he had
   not sought an adjournment or requested that the decisions be withdrawn at
   the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  He acknowledged that he  had
   been taken by surprise.

7) For the respondent  Mr  Matthews  submitted  that  the  decision  of  the
   Designated Judge was that these applications were genuine but  that  they
   failed on certain technical points.  It was possible for  the  appellants
   to have cured this by making a further application within 28  days  after
   their section 3C leave expired, in terms of  paragraph  245DD(g)  of  the
   Immigration Rules.  Mr Matthews acknowledged  that  such  an  application
   would have no right of appeal but if the  substantive  requirements  were
   met the application would be granted.  If the appellants had the evidence
   now then they could make a fresh application.

8) Mr Duheric submitted in response to this that this would take  some  time
   and the proper course would be for the refusal decisions to  be  remitted
   to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.

9) Mr Matthews further submitted that the case of  RM  (India)  concerned  a
   discretionary ground of refusal and sought instead to  rely  on  Kwok  on
   Tong [1981] Imm AR 214 and Hubbard [1985] Imm AR 110, in terms  of  which
   the respondent could raise additional grounds of refusal.   The  Tribunal
   needed to be satisfied that all the Rules were met.

10) I accept that there is merit in this contention by Mr Matthews but  both
   of the decisions to which he referred stated that  where  further  issues
   were raised to parties should have an adequate opportunity to respond  to
   them.  I am concerned that in the present appeals the appellants did  not
   have a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  Their  appeals  were
   dismissed not on the basis of  the  reasons  for  refusal  given  in  the
   decisions appealed against but were  dismissed  on  the  basis  of  fresh
   issues raised on behalf of the respondent at  the  hearing  itself.   The
   appellants did not have adequate notice of these issues and did not  have
   a proper opportunity of preparing a response to  them.   It  may  be,  of
   course, that given the evidential restrictions in section 85A of the 2002
   Act in respect of Points  Based  System  applications  that  even  having
   adequate notice of the new issues being taken against them will avail the
   appellants little.  Nevertheless, they should  have  the  opportunity  of
   considering what their response might be made.

11) I accept that the appellants were represented at the hearing before  the
   First-tier Tribunal by an experienced solicitor, but even he was taken by
   surprise in the circumstances of the hearing.  In view of the complicated
   nature of the Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  applications  of  this
   nature, the  appellants'  representative  could  hardly  be  expected  to
   respond adequately without notice of the issues raised.

12) I note further that although the judge who granted permission to  appeal
   referred to paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules in relation to  when
   further documentary evidence may be requested by  the  respondent,  since
   permission was  granted  the  scope  of  the  application  of  evidential
   flexibility has been considered by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rodriguez
   [2014] EWCA Civ 2.

13) Notwithstanding the difficulties the appellants may face  in  succeeding
   in their appeals, I am satisfied that the Designated Judge made an  error
   of law by dismissing the appeals on the basis of  matters  of  which  the
   appellants had no notice prior to the hearing.  The effect of this  error
   was to deprive the appellants before the First-tier Tribunal  of  a  fair
   hearing and of a full opportunity of putting their case for consideration
   by the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, in terms of Practice  Direction
   7.2 the proper course is to remit the appeals to the First-tier  Tribunal
   for the decisions to be re-made.

Conclusions

14) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

15) The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade  before
   a different judge.





Signed                                             Date


Judge of the Upper Tribunal


