
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/17541/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st July 2017                         |On 02nd August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     s s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammed Khan, Non-Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Swinnerton  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 11th October 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan  born  18th  April  1979.
    She entered the United Kingdom on 9th June 2002 with entry clearance as
    a spouse valid from 21st May 2002 until 21st May  2003.   The  marriage
    broke down and she subsequently applied for indefinite leave to  remain
    on 20th July 2006 which was refused on 20th November 2009.

 3. The Appellant was subsequently granted discretionary leave to remain on
    22nd November 2011 on the basis that she was  a  lone  disabled  female
    reliant upon her mother and sister in the UK, her leave was valid for a
    period of three years.

 4. Prior to the expiry of her leave, the Appellant on 20th  November  2014
    applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  using  form   FLR(O).    This
    application was refused on 21st April 2015, the Respondent finding that
    the Appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to family life, or paragraph 276ADE  in  relation  to  private
    life.   The  Respondent  considered  whether  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances outside the Immigration  Rules,  noting  the  Appellant's
    disability, and  the  fact  that  she  has  two  young  children.   The
    Respondent noted that the Appellant, since being granted  discretionary
    leave to remain, had formed a relationship with Mr K, who had no  leave
    to remain in the UK, and took the view that it would  be  proportionate
    for the Appellant, Mr K, and their two children to return  to  Pakistan
    together.

 5. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FTT  on  28th  September  2016.
    The FTT heard evidence from the Appellant, her mother, and her  sister.
    The FTT found that there had been a change of circumstances  since  the
    Appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain in 2011, and  found
    that the Appellant's removal from the UK  together  with  her  children
    would be proportionate and would not breach Article 8.

 6. The Appellant had been legally represented at the  hearing  before  the
    FTT but was unrepresented when making an application for permission  to
    appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Kimnell, who  found
    that the application for permission to appeal identified  no  error  of
    law, describing the FTT decision as "an unassailable decision  properly
    supported by reasons."

 8. The application for permission was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  took  into  account  that  the
    Appellant was unrepresented in making such an application, and found  a
    number of points within the FTT decision which gave  rise  to  arguable
    errors of law, and accordingly granted permission to  appeal.   I  will
    refer to the points made by Judge Chapman when I set out my conclusions
    and reasons.

 9. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law, such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. Mr K, who is the Appellant's husband, attended the hearing to represent
    the Appellant.  There was no need for an interpreter.

11. I explained to Mr K the purpose of the hearing,  which  was  to  decide
    whether the FTT had made a mistake of law.  Mr K confirmed that he  had
    seen the grant of permission to appeal.

12. Mr K submitted that the FTT was  mistaken  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appeal, and relied upon the reasons given in the grant of permission.

13. Mr K explained that although the FTT had referred to the fact  that  he
    had no leave to remain, which was  correct  at  the  date  of  the  FTT
    decision, he had subsequently been granted  leave  to  remain  on  23rd
    February 2017.  He described this  as  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    valid until 25th February 2019.  Mr K stated that this leave  had  been
    granted on the basis that he was needed to look after his children.  In
    addition to the two children who were born on 23rd September  2012  and
    6th April 2014, Mr K explained that he and the Appellant now have three
    children, their youngest having been born on 29th April 2017.

14. Mr K confirmed that he lives with his wife and children,  and  that  he
    did not intend to return to Pakistan.

15. Mr Mills expressed disagreement with the points raised in the grant  of
    permission.  In brief summary Mr Mills submitted that the FTT had  been
    correct  to  find  that  there  had  been  a  material  change  in  the
    Appellant's circumstances since she was granted leave to  remain.   The
    FTT had been correct to find that the Appellant no  longer  lived  with
    her mother and sister, but had formed her  own  family  unit  with  her
    husband and children.  Mr Mills had been unaware that  Mr  K  had  been
    granted leave to remain, but pointed out that at the date  of  the  FTT
    hearing he had not been granted leave to remain.

16. Mr Mills submitted that the FTT  had  considered  all  aspects  of  the
    appeal.   The  best  interests  of  the  children  were  considered  at
    paragraphs 33 - 36, 48 and 51. With reference  to  the  point  made  by
    Judge  Chapman  as  to  the  relationship  between  the  children   and
    grandmother, I was asked to note  that  the  grandmother  was  not  the
    primary carer of the children.

17. With reference  to  the  Appellant's  length  of  residence,  Mr  Mills
    submitted that the FTT was clearly aware of the  length  of  residence,
    and contended that the grant of permission amounted to  a  disagreement
    with findings properly made by the FTT.  I was asked to find  no  error
    of law, and therefore the decision of the FTT should stand.

18. I asked Mr K whether he  wished  to  respond,  and  he  reiterated  his
    agreement with  what  was  stated  in  the  grant  of  permission,  and
    contended the decision of the FTT should be set aside.

19. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

20. I will address the points made in the grant of permission in the  order
    in which they were made.   Firstly  it  was  found  that  the  FTT  had
    arguably failed  to  take  into  account  material  considerations,  by
    failing to consider whether the Appellant had retained family life with
    her mother and sister as well as forming a new  family  unit  with  her
    husband and children.  I do not find that the FTT erred on this  point.
    The FTT correctly found that  there  had  been  a  material  change  of
    circumstances since the Appellant was granted  discretionary  leave  in
    2011.

21. The change in circumstances was that  the  Appellant  had  married,  no
    longer lived with her mother and sister, but had formed an  independent
    family unit living with her husband, and they had  two  young  children
    who at the date of the FTT hearing were 4 and 2 years of age.  The  FTT
    considered at paragraph 48 that the Appellant's mother would be  deeply
    upset if the Appellant and her children were removed from the  UK,  and
    the Appellant and her children would lose the regular contact that they
    have with the Appellant's  mother  and  sister.   It  was  accepted  at
    paragraph 49 that the close relationship that the Appellant had enjoyed
    with her mother and sister "would probably be affected  as  they  would
    not live in close proximity and be able to see each other  as  they  do
    now."

22. The FTT was entitled to find at paragraph 50 that the Appellant did not
    remain as dependant on her  mother  and  sister  both  emotionally  and
    because of her disability as she did in 2011, noting that the Appellant
    now had a partner, two young children,  and  had  established  her  own
    family unit living independently of her mother and sister.

23.  The  FTT  comprehensively  considered  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and her mother and sister, made appropriate findings and gave
    sustainable and adequate reasons for those  findings,  and  this  point
    discloses no material error of law.

24. Secondly it was found arguable that in the absence of evidence from the
    Appellant's husband, it was speculative for the FTT  to  find  that  he
    would return to Pakistan with the  Appellant  and  children.   The  FTT
    correctly found that the Appellant's husband  did  not  have  leave  to
    remain in the UK.  It was not speculative at paragraph 46  to  find  in
    view of the fact that he had no leave that he could return to  Pakistan
    with his family.  This point discloses no material error of law.

25. Thirdly it was found arguable that in considering the best interests of
    the children the FTT had applied an incorrect test at paragraph 54,  or
    failed to take fully  into  account  material  considerations  and  had
    failed to consider the impact of separation on the children from  their
    grandmother.  The FTT did not err in considering the best interests  of
    the children.  At paragraph 33 there is reference to section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and the requirement upon
    the FTT to conduct "a scrupulous analysis to identify the child's  best
    interests and then balance them with other material considerations."

26. At paragraph 34 the FTT records that the  best  interests  of  the  two
    children are a primary consideration which must  be  considered  first,
    although they can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
    circumstances.  The  grandmother  is  not  the  primary  carer  of  the
    children.  At paragraph 51 the FTT notes the young age of the children,
    they have not yet begun formal education, and if they left the UK  with
    their parents, they would have continuity of care from  their  parents.
    Paragraph 54 is brief, the  FTT  simply  recording  that  there  is  no
    credible evidence that the Appellant would be unable  to  maintain  her
    children's welfare and safety in Pakistan.   That  paragraph  does  not
    contain the entirety of the FTT  reasoning  in  relation  to  the  best
    interests of the children.  The FTT did not fail to consider the impact
    on the children of separation from their relatives in the UK,  and  did
    not err in law in concluding that their best interests would be  served
    by living with their parents, taking into account their very young age,
    and the fact that they are citizens of Pakistan.

27. Fourthly it was found arguable in the grant of permission that although
    the Appellant had been an overstayer between  2004  and  2011  she  had
    entered the UK lawfully in 2002 and had been residing lawfully  in  the
    UK since 2011, the FTT had failed to consider the Appellant's length of
    residence as part of the proportionality exercise.  I  cannot  see  any
    error of law disclosed here.  The FTT at  paragraph  11  described  the
    Appellant as a national of Pakistan who had lived in the UK for  twelve
    years, entering on 9th June 2002.  At paragraph  37  it  is  reiterated
    that the Appellant arrived in the UK on 9th June 2002 lawfully  with  a
    valid visa as a spouse.  It is recorded that she became  an  overstayer
    and was in the UK unlawfully between 2004 and 21st November 2011.   The
    FTT was clearly aware of the length of residence, and which part of the
    residence was lawful and which part was unlawful.  I do not  find  that
    it can be said that the FTT failed to consider the length of  residence
    in the proportionality exercise.

28. For the reasons given above I find no material error of  law  disclosed
    in the FTT decision, and therefore the decision stands.  I  would  say,
    as was mentioned at the Upper Tribunal hearing, that if Mr  K  now  has
    discretionary  leave  to  remain,  and  there  has  been  a  change  of
    circumstances since the FTT decision was made, that it would be open to
    the Appellant to make  a  further  application  to  the  Respondent  in
    relation to leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
decision is not set aside and the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
This direction is made to continue the anonymity direction made by the FTT.


Signed                              Date 28th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award






Signed                              Date 28th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





