
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17159/2013
                                                               IA/17161/2013
                                                               IA/17167/2013
                                                               IA/17103/2013
                                                               IA/17107/2013
                                                               IA/17114/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2014                               |On 07th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                       MR AYUB KHAN (FIRST appellant)
                      MRS SARA NOOR (SECOND appellant)
               MASTER MUHAMMAD AHAGHAN KHAN (THIRD appellant)
                      MR JASEEM KHAN (FOURTH appellant)
                  MRS BUSHRA JASEEM KHAN (FIFTH appellant)
                   MR MUHAMMAD ABDULLAH (SIXTH appellant)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasir, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley promulgated  on  4  February  2014  in
    which he dismissed their appeals against the decision by the respondent
    to refuse to grant them further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The first and fourth appellants - Mr Ayub Khan and  Mr  Jaseem  Khan  -
    applied on 5 November 2012 for leave  to  remain  as  Tier  1  Migrants
    (Entrepreneurs), as an entrepreneurial  team.   The  second  and  third
    appellants - Mrs Sara Noor and  Master  Muhammad  Ahaghan  Khan  -  are
    dependants of the first appellant; the fifth and sixth appellants - Mrs
    Bushra Khan and Mr Muhammad Abdullah -  are  dependants  of  Mr  Jaseem
    Khan.   The  respondent  refused  the  applications  of  the  principal
    appellants on the basis that they had not provided any evidence that is
    required under Table 4 of Appendix A to show  evidence  of  job  title,
    Standard  Occupational  Classification  code  of  the  occupation;  or,
    advertising material,  articles,  links  to  a  newspaper  showing  the
    applicant's name and business activity, information  from  trade  fairs
    showing that he had had a stand or personal registration with  a  trade
    body; contracts showing trading.

 3. The second, third, fifth and sixth appellants  were  refused  leave  in
    line. While an attempt was made  to  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to Yaseenullah Muhammad, the son  of  the  fourth
    and fifth appellants, the First-tier Tribunal considered the notice  of
    appeal to be invalid as the  decision  made  on  his  case  was  not  a
    decision giving a right of appeal (IA/17120/2013).

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds that:-



      a) the appellants had provided the required documents but  that  these
         had been overlooked;

      b) that the respondent had failed to act in accordance with  paragraph
         245AA of the Immigration Rules in that  the  respondent  had  acted
         unfairly in not seeking further information from the appellants;

      c) that the respondent had acted otherwise than in accordance with the
         relevant evidential flexibility policy;

      d) that requiring the appellants now to leave the United Kingdom would
         be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article
         8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. On appeal, Judge Oakley found that:-

      a) in both applications from the first and fourth appellants they  had
         left blank the question "What is the applicant's job title" [12], a
         Companies House document giving no indication of the  positions  of
         the first and fourth appellants or the type of work provided [13];

      b) only two pieces of advertising literature had been produced at  the
         hearing and that this did not link the first or  fourth  appellants
         to their company [14];

      c) the applications had  been  submitted  at  the  same  time  by  the
         appellants' solicitors in one packet and it was apparent  that  the
         respondent had divided the  documents  and  applications  submitted
         into two files [16];

      d) it was asserted that the fact that the application referred to  the
         marketing material which had been enclosed, there were none  within
         the two packets containing the respective applicants' applications;

      e)  the  application  forms  were  deficient  given  the  omission  of
         information regarding job titles [19];

      f) there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  separate  pieces  of
         marketing material were sent as asserted to the respondent;

      g) this case could not be distinguished from Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ
         2.

 6.  The appellants sought leave to appeal on the basis that:-

      a) contrary to the assertion  of  the  Home  Office,  which  had  been
         accepted by Judge Oakley, the  appellants'  job  descriptions  were
         clearly mentioned in the business plan and advertising material and
         thus the conclusion flowing therefrom was unsafe;

      b) if the applications were uncompleted as averred by  the  Presenting
         Officer then pursuant to paragraph 34C of  the  Immigration  Rules,
         the respondent was obliged to return the application as  incomplete
         or invalid;

      c) in this case Rodriguez could be distinguished as the respondent had
         written to the appellant saying that he would write to them if  any
         further documents or information were required  and  in  this  case
         details  of  the  relevant  documents  had  been  set  out  in  the
         application form and there had been no query as  to  whether  these
         had been submitted in the letters sent  by  the  respondent  on  28
         November 2012 and 15 March 2013.

 7. On 27 March 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted  permission  noting
    that the judge had accepted in a  submission  by  the  respondent  that
    there was no evidence that the relevant documents had  been  submitted,
    contrary to what was set out in the application form that included  the
    list of five relevant documents.  She also  gave  directions  that  the
    respondent was to produce a schedule of documents that were sent by the
    appellants for the purposes of the application.

 8. In a response to the grant  of  permission  dated  11  April  2014  the
    respondent stated that the finding that the advertising materials  were
    not submitted was one open to the judge and that there was no  evidence
    produced at the hearing by way of illustration of what had  been  sent.
    It is also averred that in light of the decision in  Patel  and  Others
    [2013] UKSC 72, Nasim and Others [2014] UKUT 25 and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC
    74, this is not a case with any prospect of success and so any error in
    failing to consider Article 8 could not be material.

 9. We heard brief submissions from both representatives.

10. The omission of the job title from the application forms is not  raised
    in the refusal letter.   This  appears  to  have  been  raised  by  the
    Presenting Officer  only  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Oakley.   We
    consider that this issue raises  two  problems;  as  is  submitted  the
    omission of  mandatory  information  from  an  application  form  would
    ordinarily make the application invalid pursuant to  paragraph  34C  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Further, there is merit in the submission  that
    in any event the job titles and responsibilities were  referred  to  in
    the business plan which it is not in doubt was before the Secretary  of
    State.  We accept that ordinarily the failure to give information would
    result in the application being rejected as invalid but what appears to
    have occurred here is a decision by the Secretary  of  State  to  waive
    that  requirement  on  the  basis  that  the  information  was  readily
    available from the rest of the form.  There is no indication  that  the
    Secretary of State was unaware of her power reject the  application  as
    invalid; on the contrary, the application was pending before her for  a
    considerable period and was considered under the merits giving rise  to
    a right of appeal.

11. As is averred in the grounds of  appeal,  Judge  Oakley  was  wrong  to
    conclude that there was no evidence of the submissions of the Secretary
    of State of the relevant material; it  is  listed  in  the  application
    form.  The judge therefore fell into error in both  of  these  findings
    which underpin the whole of his decision.  We are  therefore  satisfied
    that these were material to the outcome and thus we are satisfied  that
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley did involve the making
    of an error of law.  We therefore set it aside.

12. It is our view, given that there will in the light of our  observations
    above need to be a full and fresh fact-finding exercise  undertaken  in
    this case, that it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to be heard
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.  None of the findings  of  fact  are
    preserved.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and we set it aside.

 2) We remit the determination to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision on all issues.  None of the findings of fact made by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oakley are preserved.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

