
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17895/2013
     IA/17896/2013
     IA/17897/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd October 2014                            |On 30th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               kenneth bowazi
                              tione dora bowazi
                            tadala chisomo bowazi
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr P Corben, Counsel instructed by Kolia Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants (noted above as the Respondents) are citizens of  Malawi
    whose appeal under the Immigration  Rules  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flynn in a determination promulgated on 15th July  2014.
    The Secretary of State lodged grounds of application stating  that  the
    judge had been wrong to rely on the Upper Tribunal decision of Ejifugha
    (Tier 4 - funds - credit) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00244 as this referred to
    whether or not funds were "available" whereas the test under Tier 2 was
    whether the funds were under  "his  own  control".   In  terms  of  the
    previous determination that was merely a starting point and  the  judge
    was therefore wrong to rely on Chomanga (binding effect  of  unappealed
    decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00312 (IAC).  Furthermore the judge had
    erred in accepting original documents.   Finally  the  funds  available
    fell below the required limits.

 2. For the Secretary of State, Mr Whitwell relied on the  grounds.   There
    was a marked difference on whether funds were available or under  one's
    own control.  The judge was not bound by a  factual  finding  of  Judge
    Flynn that the potential money under the Master  Card  could  be  taken
    into account as this was a matter of law.

 3. For the Appellants the fundamental submission from Mr Corben  was  that
    Judge Finch had dealt with all the material issues (except Article  8).
    Those findings were binding on the Secretary of State  unless  she  had
    elected to appeal that decision which she had not  done.   Accordingly,
    it mattered little what Judge Flynn said since he was also bound by the
    previous findings and he had been correct to allow the appeal  of  each
    Appellant under the Immigration Rules.  For that  proposition  reliance
    was placed on Chomanga and with reference to what was said in the Court
    of Appeal in SSHD v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA 977.  In that case Stanley
    Burnton LJ had summarised issues of principle by saying "it  cannot  be
    right for the Home Secretary to be able to circumvent the  decision  of
    the IAT by administrative decisions.  If she could do so, the statutory
    appeal  system would be undermined."

 4. Judge Finch had dealt with all the material issues by  concluding  that
    the Respondent's decisions were not in accordance with  the  law.   She
    had allowed the appeal on that basis and presumed that  the  Respondent
    would now reconsider the application and grant further leave to remain.



 5. The Secretary of State  had  not  appealed  that  decision.   Far  from
    following what Judge Finch had said the Secretary of State  had  issued
    a fresh decision dated 23rd April 2013.  Judge Flynn had  been  correct
    to say that because the Respondent had failed  to  appeal  the  judge's
    decision she was not entitled to differ from one of the  findings  made
    by the judge (paragraph 32).  In the event that I was  against  him  in
    his primary submission Mr Corben  made  further  detailed  observations
    based mainly on  the  proposition  that  having  funds  "available"  is
    essentially the same as having funds under one's "control".    I do not
    record the submissions here as it is not necessary to do so.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. I have come to the view that Mr Corben's primary submission is correct.
     Judge Finch made a number of findings in her determination  which,  if
    the Secretary of State was unhappy with, she  could  then  have  lodged
    grounds of application contending that the decision was wrong.

 8. The Secretary of State did not do that.   Rather  she  issued  a  fresh
    decision  refusing  the  application  on  various  grounds  which   the
    Appellant then appealed to Judge Flynn who,  essentially,  reverted  to
    the decision made by Judge Finch.

 9. The question before me is whether the Secretary of State is entitled to
    go behind the findings of Judge Finch in the manner she has, namely  by
    not appealing that decision but by making a fresh decision.

10. The answer to that question seems quite clearly to me to be  no  -  the
    approach of the Secretary  of  State  is  impermissible  in  law.   The
    reasons are obvious enough and as set out in Chomanga.  As was said  in
    TB (Jamaica) the principle that the decision of the Tribunal is binding
    on the parties and in  particular  on  the  Home  Secretary,  has  been
    "consistently upheld by the  courts".   It  was  said  there  that  the
    Secretary of State cannot  deliberately  delay  giving  effect  to  the
    ruling in that hope  that  something  might  turn  up  to  justify  not
    implementing it.

11. There might be exceptions to this Rule but it was  not  suggested  they
    apply in this case.

12. Accordingly, what we have is  a  clear  decision  of  Judge  Finch  who
    decided that the Secretary of State had not followed her own policy and
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the  Respondent  would  reconsider
    the application and "grant further leave to remain in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules".

13. Unless the Secretary of State appealed that decision that was what  she
    was bound to do.  She did not appeal the decision  and  is  now  barred
    from opening up arguments which might well have arisen had she  elected
    to appeal Judge Finch's determination.

14. In essence Judge Flynn did no more than make similar findings to  Judge
    Finch which in law he was bound to do.  There is therefore no error  of
    law in his determination which must stand.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.




Signed                              Date: 22nd October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
