
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17922/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2014                                |On 25 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            Mr MD Mizanur Rahman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Alice Holmes
For the Respondent:    Mr M Kalam


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   There is before the Tribunal  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  10  March
    2014 in which the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 21 May  2013.   In
    that  decision  the  Secretary  of  State  rejected   the   appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a student.

2.   The facts may be summarised shortly.   The  appellant  was  born  on  2
    April 1991.  He is a national of Bangladesh.  He originally came to the
    United Kingdom as a student with leave to  remain  until  20  September
    2011.  Subsequently the licence of the college that  he  was  attending
    was revoked.  He was given an extension of his visa for 60 days from 15
    August 2012.  He made an application on 10 October 2012  for  leave  to
    remain as a spouse of a British citizen.  This was upon the basis  that
    five days earlier, on 5 October 2012, he had concluded a civil marriage
    with Ms Farjana Begum, a British citizen.

3.   The Secretary of State was not convinced and she found first  that  she
    was not satisfied that the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting;  and,
    secondly that the sponsor, the wife, had failed to meet  evidence  that
    she could maintain  and  support  the  applicant.   In  particular  the
    appellant failed to produce evidence proving that the various  benefits
    paid to the wife were paid to her account.  In fact the wife  benefited
    from certain disability allowances.  Her financial affairs were managed
    by her mother but sadly this meant that the money was not paid into her
    account directly as the Rules required.  Thirdly the Secretary of State
    concluded that the appellant's private  life  claim  failed  given  his
    short period of stay in the United Kingdom and the continuation of  his
    ties back in Bangladesh.

4.   The appellant's appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  prevailed.   The
    Tribunal made detailed findings about the marriage  and,  having  heard
    evidence, came to the clear and  unequivocal  conclusion  that  it  was
    genuine and valid.

5.   In relation to the position adopted by the Secretary of  State  at  the
    hearing  the  Tribunal  stated  in  paragraphs  19  and   20   of   the
    determination as follows:

         "19. Ms Lambert emphasised that she had  looked  at  this  case  as
             carefully as possible, but there did appear  to  be  a  strict
             requirement of the Rules that the disability living  allowance
             (the benefit payable in this case) would have to be paid  into
             the named person's account.  The Rules did not provide  for  a
             situation which was obviously the one that  pertained  here  -
             that it would not have been appropriate (having regard to  the
             special needs of the recipient) for that money to go  directly
             into her own bank account.  Ms Lambert articulated the concern
             which is that there must be many cases in which people who are
             in receipt of some kind of living allowance and/or benefit  is
             clearly not able to property manage  their  affairs.   But  no
             provision is made for this in the Rules.

         20.  Ms Lambert did not have any other  comments  to  make,  either
             about the genuineness of the marriage or the circumstances  of
             their living arrangements."

6.   In paragraphs 23 to 25 of the  determination  the  Tribunal  stated  as
    follows:

         "23. So far as the requirements of the Rules are  concerned  it  is
             unfortunate that a full  report  was  not  included  with  the
             application which would have enabled, perhaps,  the  Secretary
             of State's representative to exercise discretion in respect of
             this particular point.  On the basis that the bank account  is
             not the correct one in accordance with the specified  evidence
             requirements it is argued  that  this  application  must  fail
             under the Rules.  I consider this to be a harsh outcome.

         24.   On  the  basis  that  the  application  does  not  meet   the
             requirements of the Rules I turn to consider  the  application
             of Article 8.  The cases of Gulshan  and  Nagre  provide  that
             normally the full consideration of a person's Article 8  human
             rights will be properly dealt with within the framework of the
             Rules.  There needs to  be  some  compelling  argument  for  a
             consideration of those Article 8 rights outside the Rules.  If
             ever there was a case (in my view) this is such a one.  A mere
             technicality  on  the  part  of  the  Rules  which  imposes  a
             requirement, which in this case the appellant was not able  to
             meet,  means  that  there   are   compelling   arguments   for
             considering this case under ordinary Article 8  jurisprudence.
             Applying the Razgar test, I am satisfied that family  life  is
             engaged in this case, and the proposed interference  would  be
             profound, but I recognise that proper immigration controls are
             to be applied in all such cases.

         25.  On the question of proportionality, I am quite satisfied  that
             it would be entirely disproportionate, on  the  basis  of  the
             material that I have reviewed above, to require the  appellant
             to leave the country and/or his wife to accompany him."

7.   The Secretary of State appeals upon a number of bases.  In  the  course
    of submissions before us today Ms Holmes, appearing for  the  Secretary
    of State, very helpfully narrowed the  areas  of  dispute  between  the
    parties.  Nonetheless there are a number of matters which  we  consider
    it appropriate to comment upon in relation to the Secretary of  State's
    grounds.

8.   The first matter that the Secretary of State  originally  advanced  was
    that the Tribunal erred in accepting that the marriage was genuine  and
    subsisting.  So far as the question of the marriage is concerned we can
    identify no error in the Tribunal's fact-finding.  It was the  task  of
    the Tribunal to investigate the facts  and,  if  needs  be,  to  dispel
    suspicions that might  have  lingered  about  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship.  In this case, as is clear from  the  determination,  the
    Tribunal conducted a detailed review of the evidence.  They heard  oral
    evidence from the parties concerned.  They dispelled  the  doubts  that
    existed  and  they  satisfied  themselves  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine.

9.   It is not for the Upper Tribunal to set aside findings of  fact  simply
    because the Secretary of State can point to  suspicious  circumstantial
    evidence that does not amount to an appealable point  of  law.   As  we
    have observed in the course of the hearing, Counsel for  the  Secretary
    of State candidly accepted that this Tribunal  was  now  bound  by  the
    findings of fact made by the lower Tribunal, and we therefore  turn  to
    what is in reality the crux of this case, which is the approach adopted
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal  towards  the  assessment  of  exceptional
    circumstances.

10.  The first point to note is that it is  now  to  be  treated  as  firmly
    settled that a miss is a miss and that there is no such doctrine  as  a
    near miss which amounts to compliance with the Rules.  In  the  present
    case the appellant failed to  adhere  to  the  Rules  by  virtue  of  a
    technicality.  The undeniable fact that  it  was  a  technicality  that
    resulted in the appellant failing to meet the  requirements  for  leave
    does not therefore mean that an appellant is to be treated as having de
    facto complied.  With respect to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the
    analysis in the determination gives every  appearance  of  having  been
    driven by a strong sense of injustice that the appellant's  application
    failed under the  Rules  by  reason  only  of  the  most  technical  of
    technicalities. With respect, this was not a correct approach to  take.
    In the case of an applicant who fails by whatever margin  to  meet  the
    Rules  the  Secretary  of  State  must  consider  whether   there   are
    exceptional or compelling circumstances relating to that individual and
    furthermore weigh those circumstances, assuming they are exceptional or
    compelling, against the objectives of the immigration system.

11.  In this connection it seems to us that the Secretary of State would  be
    entitled to take into account the fact that an applicant for  leave  to
    remain very nearly met the Rules.  This would in our  view  be  logical
    since, ex hypothesi, the presence in the United Kingdom of a person who
    fully meets the Rules is  conducive  to  a  fair,  firm  and  effective
    immigration system, and the extent to which a  person  falls  short  is
    therefore one piece of evidence that may  legitimately  be  taken  into
    consideration when determining  the  overall  proportionality  exercise
    which must occur outside of the Rules.  Hence, in principle, it is  not
    wrong to take into account as one part of the analysis  that  the  only
    explanation why a party  has  failed  to  meet  the  Rules  is  a  very
    technical one.  But it must also logically follow that in and of itself
    this can never be enough because otherwise it would offend the "miss is
    a miss" principle.  It is one piece of evidence but more is needed.

12.  In the present case in paragraph 24  of  the  determination  the  Judge
    states that the fact that the appellant failed on a "mere technicality"
    means that there are compelling reasons to  consider  this  case  under
    ordinary Article 8 jurisprudence and that family life  is  engaged  and
    that the  interference  is  "profound".   With  respect,  the  approach
    adopted is not consistent with the required approach, and in any  event
    the reasons are inadequate.

13.  The Judge was entitled to  find  that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  The Judge heard oral evidence upon this point including in
    private from the appellant's  wife.   Whilst  the  conclusions  reached
    might appear surprising it was a decision reached on  evidence  and  is
    not a finding we can disturb.  However that  can  amount  only  to  the
    starting point for the analysis.

14.  The mere fact that a genuine and subsisting private  life  relationship
    existed is not determinative.  There are other factors that  needed  to
    be considered including the undeniable fact that the appellant  entered
    into the marriage when his position was  precarious  and  when  he  was
    aware or must have been that he was at risk of removal.  There were  no
    children to consider.

15.  The Tribunal Judge did not find the marriage could not subsist back  in
    Bangladesh, we refer to paragraph 11 in this regard.  Nor was it  found
    that the appellant had lost  his  ties  with  Bangladesh.   These  were
    matters to be explored but they were not.   The  law  is  clear.   When
    Article 8 is considered outside of the Rules there must  be  compelling
    or exceptional circumstances pertaining  to  the  individual  and  very
    importantly there must be  a  balancing  of  the  private  interest  as
    against the public interest, which is a weighing exercise that must  be
    performed properly and not merely by  asserting  that  the  outcome  is
    proportionate.

16.  In this case, by way of illustration  only,  there  was  no  assessment
    whether, if this case were treated as a paradigm of exceptionality, how
    many other cases would by parity of reasoning have  to  be  treated  as
    exceptional also and whether this would imply granting leave to  remain
    to a large group of persons falling outside of the Rules.

17.  We have therefore come to the  conclusion  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    apply the proper test and failed to address relevant consideration  and
    failed to give full or adequate reasons for the ultimate decision.

18.  We now have to consider what we  should  do.   We  are  satisfied  that
    whilst we cannot agree with the reasons of the Judge below  we  do  not
    disturb the Judge's findings as to the genuineness of the  marriage  or
    the circumstances which prevail in the family life at the present time.
     We consider that the appropriate  course  is  for  us  to  remake  the
    decision.  We do not think the facts can or will will improve or alter.
     We therefore apply the Article 8 test outside of the Rules.   We  will
    express our conclusions on this relatively shortly.

19.  We start by concluding that the facts relating  to  the  appellant  are
    exceptional.  We take into account the proximity of the  appellant  and
    his spouse to meeting the Immigration Rules.  We take  account  of  the
    real effect on the wife of the marriage as set out  in  the  Tribunal's
    determination, in particular at paragraph 14.  We remind ourselves that
    undue harshness or compassion, to put it in another way, is a  relevant
    part of exceptionality.

20.  The evidence demonstrates that the effect  of  the  marriage  has  been
    transformative on the wife's personal, mental and social position.   If
    the appellant were removed on the basis of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    specific findings she would be restored to the state that  she  was  in
    prior to her marriage.  She suffers from a degree of mental  impairment
    such that she cannot manage her own affairs without a person to  depend
    upon.  Since the marriage that person is her husband.  We therefore, on
    very  particular  facts,  conclude  that  there  are  exceptional   and
    compelling circumstances.

21.  We now must consider the second aspect  of  the  proportionality  test,
    which is to measure those facts against the  public  interest  arising.
    In this regard two matters influence us.  First,  the  purpose  of  the
    Rules requiring direct payment of monies into the account of a  sponsor
    is not in our view thwarted on the very unusual facts of this case.  It
    was found by the First-tier Tribunal and is not disputed here that  the
    reasons for the money being paid into  the  sponsor's  account  in  the
    first instance were  entirely  genuine.   Secondly,  given  the  highly
    unusual circumstances of this case, we do not consider that  permitting
    the appellant to remain would create any form of a  precedent  or  open
    the door to any wide  category  of  persons  being  able  to  argue  by
    analogy.  We therefore conclude that  the  impact  upon  the  important
    public interest  objectives  pursued  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    extremely limited.

22.  For these reasons, and notwithstanding that  we  have  found  that  the
    Tribunal erred in law, we propose to uphold the final determination  of
    the Tribunal which was to permit the appeal of  the  appellant  against
    the Secretary of State's decision.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Green


