
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17842/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 18 March 2014                                |Promulgated on 25 March    |
|                                                |2014                       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

       WICKRAMANAYAKE PATHJIRENNEHELAGE DHARSHANAPRIYA WICKRAMANAYAKE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T. Murshed, Counsel, instructed by P. Krama &
Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  appeals  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Sullivan promulgated on 27
    January  2014  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 4 May 2013 to refuse him indefinite leave to
    remain on the basis of long residence.

 2. The appeal is now within a very limited compass.  It  is  centred  upon
    whether or not the requirement that the  appellant  had  to  provide  a
    knowledge of life certificate in order to support his claim  under  the
    provisions of the Rules.  The relevant Rule at the  material  time  was
    contained in paragraph 276B(iv).  The application was made  on  7  July
    2012 and decided, as I have said, on 4 May 2013.   During  that  period
    the relevant Rule was that "the applicant has sufficient  knowledge  of
    the English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
    Kingdom unless he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over at the time
    he makes his application."  The appellant was born on 26  October  1966
    and therefore was required to meet these obligations.

 3. The problem arose because, and it appears to be accepted, the appellant
    had submitted his original passport  to  the Home Office on 9  February
    2009 and it was then not returned to him.  He attempted in  March  2009
    to apply for his passport back by  which  time  it  was  expired.   The
    request was declined by the Home Office. He then sought to apply for  a
    fresh Sri Lankan passport at the High Commission  but  was  advised  by
    them that renewal of passports required a valid visa and that of course
    the appellant did not have.  It  follows  that  the  appellant  was  in
    something of a cleft stick.  He applied on one and indeed on  a  number
    of occasions to sit the relevant examination but on each  occasion  the
    test centre declined to provide him with  an  opportunity  to  sit  the
    examination because they were not satisfied about his identity, and the
    only means by which they would be satisfied about his identity  was  if
    he provided either a current or an expired passport, neither  of  which
    he had.

 4. The Secretary of State does not put forward any reason why the  expired
    passport was not provided to him.  Since it was a Sri Lankan  passport,
    (which must mean the respondent cannot claim to be entitled to it as he
    might do if it had been a United Kingdom passport), I do  not  know  on
    what basis it can be said that the Secretary of State was  entitled  to
    withhold returning it to the appellant.  So it was as a result  of  the
    respondent's failure to return it  (without  establishing  a  right  to
    possession) that the appellant failed to meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules.

 5. The matter becomes somewhat more ironic in that  when  a  decision  was
    made to refuse him the refusal decision was itself sufficient as a form
    of identity to enable him to sit the examination and  he  has  now  sat
    that examination and passed it.  As I will be re-making  the  decision,
    the fact that he has now passed  the  test  is  a  material  factor  in
    establishing not only that he meets the requirements of the  Rules  now
    but that he did so  at  the  time  the  decision  was  made  since  the
    acquisition of the skills required to pass the test are likely to  have
    been accumulated over a period of time.

 6. Accordingly it seems to me  that  the  issue  is  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's failure to provide a KOL, Knowledge  of  Life  Certificate,
    was a failure under the Rules.  In my judgement where  the  failure  is
    plainly attributable to the act of the respondent it cannot be for  the
    respondent to rely upon her own  default  in  order  to  say  that  the
    application fails.  It may be that there are only a very limited number
    of cases where one can directly attribute a failure of  an  application
    to the failure on the part of the respondent rather than on the part of
    appellant but in this case I am satisfied this was such a case.

 7. Accordingly, the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met and  the
    appellant is entitled to indefinite leave to remain.

 8. Were that not to be the case then he is undoubtedly permitted to obtain
    limited leave under the provisions of paragraph 276A1 and 276A2.   This
    provides for a two year period of leave if the  requirements  of  these
    Rules are met.  Once the two year period of leave has been applied  for
    and obtained, it would then be a springboard  by  which  the  appellant
    would in due course be able to meet  the  requirements  for  indefinite
    leave and it is clear from the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MU
    (Statement  of  additional  grounds  -  long-residence  -   discretion)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 that an application cannot be made under the
    long residence Rules for only limited  leave  to  remain.   Two  years'
    leave to remain may be granted under paragraphs  276A1-4  but  only  to
    people who have applied for indefinite leave who are ineligible for  it
    solely because their knowledge of English or life in the UK is not good
    enough.

 9. Consequently the appellant met  the  requirements  of  276A1  when  the
    decision was made.  At the material time those requirements  were  that
    the appellant must meet all the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the
    Rules save for the requirement of his having  sufficient  knowledge  of
    the English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
    Kingdom.  It follows that the failure to provide the  KOL  or  relevant
    certificate would not have debarred the appellant from  being  provided
    with limited leave.

10. For the reasons that I have given, however, I do not consider  that  my
    decision ought to confine itself to a finding that he  only  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for limited leave.   I  therefore
    allow the appeal under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  -  the
    long residence provisions.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a point  of  law  and  I
    substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal  under  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules.
                                    [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


