
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17138/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester, Piccadilly           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 November 2014                        |On 10 December 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               ELSAMMA JOSEPH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss B Hashmi, Solicitor, Ashwood Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a 68 year old national of India who has  suffered  two
    recent tragedies.  Her  husband  whom  she  had  been  caring  for  (he
    suffered dementia and kidney failure) died on 23  June  2013.   Two  of
    their three sons who attended the funeral were involved in  a  rickshaw
    accident.  One died and the other suffered serious injuries.   Although
    the circumstances of the son who died are not clear, the remaining sons
    are British nationals and live in this country with their families.

 2. Thereafter the appellant made a visit  to  the  United  Kingdom  during
    which she made application for discretionary leave outside the Rules on
    the basis of her health difficulties and the absence  of  any  relative
    she could turn to in India.  She relied on a letter from Dr Joseph from
    the Holy Ghost Mission Hospital who explained that she was

         "... on treatment for  osteoarthritis  of  knee  with  diffusion  -
         difficulty in walking; type 2  diabetes  mellitus  with  peripheral
         neuropathy;  systemic  hypertension;   dyslipidemia;   cataract   -
         immature  B/IIs;  early  Parkinson's  -   with   tremors;   patient
         difficulty in emulation and needs support of the family members for
         the day-to-day activities".

 3. It  was  conceded  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyd  that  the
    appellant was unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE.  He dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    and on Article 8 grounds.

 4. Miss Hashmi agreed that that it was possible to identify the  following
    from the somewhat discursive grounds of appeal:

    (i)  The judge had failed to consider Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -
         correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) properly as the appellant's
         "most  compassionate  circumstances"  had  not  been   taken   into
         consideration.

    (ii)      That  the   appellant's   circumstances   amounted   to   the
         exceptional; the judge had erred  in  considering  Razgar  and  the
         guidelines.

    (iii)    The judge had misunderstood the evidence regarding  the  basis
         on which the appellant had cared for  her  husband  whilst  he  was
         alive and had made no reference to the medical  evidence  that  the
         appellant had Parkinson's (disease).

 5. Miss Hashmi had no supplementary submissions to make.

 6. Before hearing Mr McVeety's submissions, I asked for clarification  why
    it had been conceded the Rules had not been met.  It appears that there
    are two stumbling blocks. The first is the absence of  entry  clearance
    and the second with regard to the issue whether the  appellant's  needs
    could be met by a carer funded from abroad.

 7. In essence, Mr McVeety argued that the grounds were  a  re-argument  of
    the case and did not identify error.  He made a number  of  submissions
    which I considered were to the point. Nothing emerged in Miss  Hashmi's
    response which is new to the argument set out in the grounds except the
    possibility that the appellant is  now  suffering  from  mental  health
    issues of a rather more serious kind than that presented to the judge.

 8. My conclusions are as follows.  It is correct that the  judge  did  not
    refer specifically to Gulshan  but,  in  substance,  she  followed  the
    principles of that case as indicated in her direction at paragraph 24:

         "As stated at the outset of this appeal, it  was  conceded  by  the
         appellant's representative  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
         requirements of either Appendix  FM  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules and that therefore here  application  and  appeal
         were restricted to consideration outwith the Immigration Rules.  In
         order to succeed therefore the appellant has to  establish  a  good
         arguable case for considering Article 8 outside of the  Immigration
         Rules, there has to be compelling or compassionate  or  exceptional
         circumstances for the appellant to  be  successful  in  her  appeal
         outside of the Immigration Rules."

 9. I do not consider the first ground has any merit.

10. I turn to the next ground.  This requires consideration  whether  there
    is a rational connection between the findings  of  fact  made  and  the
    judge's conclusions on the nature of the circumstances when  considered
    outside the Rules under Article 8.

11. At [25] the judge noted some confusion in the evidence.  The  appellant
    had stated that when her husband was alive they had lived together  and
    were the only persons living in the house and that she had looked after
    him.  According to the son who gave evidence (Suji Joseph)  she  had  a
    servant.  The judge could not see  why  there  would  be  any  inherent
    problems in employing that servant again.

12. At [26] the judge considered it clear that the family  home  was  still
    available to the appellant and rejected the evidence that it had ceased
    to be habitable, giving reasons for this conclusion.  She also observed
    that the appellant's son who was said to be the owner had recently gone
    there for two months and stayed in the house.  This led  the  judge  to
    conclude at [27] that were the appellant to return she would be able to
    live in the house which is habitable, that her son  could  continue  to
    support  her  financially  pending  any  application  to  return  as  a
    dependent relative under the Rules with the assistance of a servant.

13. The judge was clearly sympathetic to the circumstances, noting that she
    had before her a caring family who worried about their elderly  mother.
    The judge observed that the appellant had appeared lucid  and  answered
    questions clearly and furthermore had not  noticed  any  shaking.   Her
    daughter-in-law had confirmed she is able to do things for herself  and
    the judge observed that  the  care  required  seemed  to  be  extremely
    vaguely expressed.  As to her medical conditions,  the  judge  observed
    that there was no evidence that there had been a need for the appellant
    to attend the hospitals or a doctor in the United Kingdom.

14. At [31] the judge concluded that she was not satisfied there was a good
    arguable case for the matter to be considered  outside  the  Rules  and
    observed that if there were, she would have to consider Article 8.   In
    MM and Ors, Respondent (On the Application Of) v SSHD  [2014]  Civ  98,
    Aitkins LJ at [129] observed " Nagre  does  not  add  anything  to  the
    debate, save for the statement that if a particular person  is  outside
    the rule then he has to demonstrate as a preliminary to a consideration
    outside the rule, that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good
    grounds for granting leave I cannot see much utility in enclosing  this
    further, intermediary, test. If the applicant cannot satisfy the  rule,
    then there either is or there is not a further Article  8  claim.  That
    will have to be determined by the relevant decision-maker."

15. I do not consider that with the judge's approach resulted in  error  as
    the judge in fact addressed Article 8, in  particular  proportionality.
    In a sense this exercise had already been anticipated  in  the  enquiry
    into whether there were exceptional circumstances for the  case  to  be
    considered  outside  the  Rules.   The  proportionality  considerations
    encapsulate the essence of the matters the judge had in  mind  and  had
    previously addressed.  The judge concluded at [32]:

         "In essence, the question would be whether or not  the  refusal  of
         the appellant's appeal and the removal back to India at the age  of
         68 would be disproportionate.  I  am  not  satisfied  it  would  be
         disproportionate, essentially  for  the  reasons  given  aforesaid,
         namely that she is a 68 year old woman, whose health conditions are
         managed by medication, which medication is available in India.  She
         lived alone in India after the  death of  her  husband  before  she
         came to the United Kingdom. There is family home in India to  which
         she could return, a  servant  could   be  arranged  as  before  and
         despite the claims to the  contrary I am  satisfied  the  appellant
         has made friends  and  acquaintances  in  India  who  would  be  of
         assistance.  At the appellant's son's funeral, as she  herself  has
         stated, there were hundreds there.  While a number  may  well  have
         travelled from the United Kingdom, I  am  satisfied  that,  on  the
         balance of probabilities, the  vast  majority  of  those  attending
         would have been from the appellant's own area  and  were  therefore
         likely to be friends, acquaintances and perhaps  relatives  of  the
         appellant and her family."

16. I am unable to discern from the judge's approach any  irrationality  in
    the conclusions reached.  I consider that the  findings  of  fact  were
    open to her on the evidence and that  she  carried  out  a  correct  an
    analysis of the Article 8 criteria  she  was  required  to  apply.   As
    observed in the grant of permission, the judge  has  not  undertaken  a
    five stage Razgar test but  I  do  not  think  this  is  fatal  to  the
    determination.  The appellant had lived apart from her children for, it
    appears, a lengthy period and the evidence did not point to family life
    established in the United Kingdom of the kind that required protection.
    Nevertheless the judge considered proportionality  on  the  basis  that
    Article 8 was engaged and reached a conclusion on proportionality  that
    was rationally open to her.

17. The final ground argues the judge misunderstood the evidence  regarding
    the nature of the household and the way  in  which  the  appellant  had
    provided care to  her  husband  when  he  was  alive.   Furthermore  no
    reference had been made to the  medical  evidence.   In  my  view  this
    ground is misconceived.  The  judge  referred  at  [16]  to  the  son's
    evidence and reached her conclusions on how matters  had  been   before
    the appellant's husband's death at [25].  It is clear  that  the  judge
    had the medical evidence from Dr Joseph in  mind.   She  observed  that
    treatment  was  available  for  the  conditions  identified  noting  in
    particular the evidence that medication had been sent over to her  from
    India. Whilst the judge was not competent to give her own assessment of
    the progress of Parkinson's disease, the  evidence  by  Dr  Joseph  was
    limited to the observation that the appellant had "early Parkinsonism -
    with tremors" with no indication that this  required  care  or  special
    assistance. Any error by the judge was  not  material  and  could  have
    affected the outcome.

18. The appellant's case invokes sympathy. The revised Rules set  demanding
    criteria for dependent elderly relatives to settle with their family in
    the United Kingdom.  It was conceded in this case  that  the  appellant
    could not meet those requirements at the time she applied or indeed  at
    the hearing.  I find no material error in the judge's analysis of  that
    evidence in deciding whether the circumstances nevertheless warranted a
    grant of leave outside the Rules.  To the extent that  the  appellant's
    condition has deteriorated it will be  open  to  the  parties  to  make
    further submissions to the  Secretary  of  State  as  confirmed  by  Mr
    McVeety.

19. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed
         Date 9 December 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
