
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/17136/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 April 2015                               |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                           muhammad abbasi abbasi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs (Counsel instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision  promulgated  on  11  December2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mayall ("the judge") dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.

2.   In the course of  the  hearing  before  the  judge,  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative produced first one and then  a  second  document
    from his own file, neither having been disclosed to  the  appellant  or
    his representatives beforehand.   The  decision  contains  no  detailed
    description of either document.  So far as the first is concerned,  the
    appellant's Counsel took instructions, the judge having adjourned for a
    short while, and she returned to the hearing room  and  indicated  that
    she was prepared to  continue.   Following  production  of  the  second
    document, Counsel raised an objection.  The  judge  allowed  a  further
    short adjournment.  When the appellant's Counsel returned, she  applied
    for an adjournment of the appeal.  The Presenting Officer  objected  to
    the application, submitting that the appellant had been fully aware  of
    events on 30 November 2013, when he  was  stopped  by  the  police  and
    apparently questioned.  He pointed out that the appellant's bundle  had
    been received only immediately before the hearing.

3.    The  judge  refused  to  adjourn  to  another  date  but  allowed   an
    adjournment  from  the  late  morning  until  2:00pm,  so   that   full
    instructions could be taken.  At this point, Counsel told him that  she
    would withdraw from the case.  She told the judge that she felt  unable
    to take a statement as the appellant could not speak English  properly.
    The judge indicated that no witness statement would be required and the
    appellant could give oral evidence.

4.   Cross-examination by the Presenting Officer resumed at  2:00pm.   There
    was no re-examination.  The judge asked one or two questions by way  of
    clarification.  The appellant's Counsel then informed  the  judge  that
    the appellant's sister, who had intended to give evidence and  who  had
    been present earlier, had returned to her home because  her  child  was
    ill.  The judge recorded a submission from Counsel that there had  been
    unfairness as the  appellant  had  been  presented  with  documents  in
    English without any notice.

5.   An application for permission to appeal was made on the  single  ground
    that the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing as a  result  of  the
    refusal to  adjourn  in  the  light  of  the  very  late  adduction  of
    documentary evidence by  the  respondent.   The  documents  related  to
    alleged admissions made by the appellant to a police  officer.   Copies
    were not provided to the appellant's Counsel and were not served  after
    the hearing.  Guidance was given recently  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 and the refusal to adjourn led to a failure  to
    afford the appellant a minimum entitlement that he should know the case
    against him.  The appellant was unable to give  effective  instructions
    as he was not able to read English and did not have the benefit  of  an
    interpreter to translate the documents and assist  Counsel.   The  very
    late adduction deprived him  of  the  opportunity  of  considering  the
    documents in advance of the hearing,  so  that  he  might  take  proper
    advice.  He may have been aware of an allegation put to him  in  cross-
    examination, that he had told police officers that he worked  full-time
    as a builder, in contradiction of his case  that  he  was  a  full-time
    carer who gave assistance to his sister, but this did  not  reduce  the
    unfairness  caused  when  documents  in  support  of  the  respondent's
    position were relied upon without notice or proper disclosure.  It  was
    clear from the decision that the judge formed an adverse  view  of  the
    appellant's credibility, informed by the documents put to him  for  the
    first time in cross-examination.

6.   In a rule 24 response, the Secretary of State opposed  the  appeal  and
    submitted that the judge directed  himself  appropriately.   There  was
    late production of documents on both sides and  the  judge  gave  ample
    time to the appellant and his  Counsel  to  discuss  the  issues.   The
    document (it is not clear from the grounds which one the author had  in
    mind here) was confirmed by the appellant as having been signed by him.
     He denied that he had ever worked as a builder or told police officers
    this.  If the matter were to be reheard, the result would be the  same.
    Refusing an adjournment did not cause unfairness.

Submissions on error of law

7.   Mr Biggs said that  the  documents  put  to  the  appellant  in  cross-
    examination were not disclosed, as they should have  been.   Unfairness
    had been the result.

8.   In seeking to identify which documents were produced by the  Presenting
    Officer in the course of the hearing, Mr  Walker  identified  from  his
    file a detention review summary and a booklet (it appeared to  be  blue
    in colour) recording action  by  a  police  officer  at  the  time  the
    appellant was stopped in November 2013.  The detention  review  summary
    was passed to Mr Biggs.  He said that the document referred to  by  the
    judge might have been the original notebook.   The  item  he  had  been
    passed by Mr Walker consisted of one page from a total of four.

9.   Mr Biggs said that the appellant had not received a fair  hearing.   He
    might have obtained a witness summons to secure the attendance  of  the
    maker of the documents produced in the course of  the  hearing  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  He was deprived of  such  an  opportunity  by  the
    judge's decision to refuse an adjournment.   The  appellant  could  not
    read or write English, a fact which was admitted by  the  Secretary  of
    State and used against him.  He gave evidence with the assistance of an
    Urdu interpreter supplied by the Tribunal.  This person was clearly not
    available to assist with taking instructions on the  written  documents
    produced by the  Presenting  Officer.   The  appellant  was  unable  to
    consider those documents or  give  instructions  himself.   It  was  no
    answer that the gravamen of the complaint was known in advance.  It was
    one thing to know an allegation but quite another to know the  evidence
    sought to be relied upon in relation to it.  This was all the  more  so
    where the evidence was in documentary form.  Again, the  appellant  was
    deprived of steps he might  have  taken  to  challenge  the  documents,
    including seeking a witness  summons  so  that  the  maker  could  give
    evidence which might be tested.

10.  The judge  correctly  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's  bundle  was
    produced on the morning of the hearing but it  was  apparent  that  the
    respondent had possession of it and there was  no  suggestion  anywhere
    that late production gave rise to any prejudice.  It was irrelevant  to
    the application for an adjournment, which was based on the prejudice to
    the appellant caused by the failure to serve the  documentary  evidence
    in any reasonable  time.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  guidance  given
    recently by the President in Nwaigwe.

11.  The specific evidence was not disclosed in advance  and  the  appellant
    could  not  consider  what  the  documents  contained  or  give  proper
    instructions.   If  an  interpreter  had  been  present  to  give   him
    assistance, this  might  have  weakened  his  case  but,  in  fact,  no
    interpreter was available and his solicitors had no reason  to  suppose
    that the Presenting Officer would produce the items from his own  file,
    in the course of the hearing.

12.  Moreover, the reasons given by the judge for refusing  the  application
    for an adjournment were  inadequate.   Paragraphs  18  and  19  of  the
    decision were relevant here.  There was no recognition of the prejudice
    caused to the appellant, notwithstanding  the  short  adjournments  the
    judge in fact gave on the  day.   The  appellant's  inability  to  read
    English, relied upon in submissions by the Presenting Officer, was  not
    properly taken into account.  At paragraph 43, in relation  to  section
    117 of the 2002 Act, the judge appeared to accept  that  the  appellant
    could not speak English.

13.  Mr Walker said that it was clear from  paragraph  38  of  the  decision
    that one of the documents produced by the Presenting Officer was  known
    to the appellant, at  least  in  substance.   The  Pre-Action  Protocol
    letter preceding his judicial review showed this.  This aspect was  not
    a surprise to the appellant.  The judge gave his Counsel over two hours
    to take instructions, so that the appellant could deal with the  point.
    This was ample time to consider the documents.  The appellant must have
    been aware of the contents of them  in  the  light  of  his  Pre-Action
    Protocol letter.  Although it was not entirely clear  whether  evidence
    was taken from the appellant in English or through an interpreter,  the
    judge's conclusions were open to him.

14.  In a short reply, Mr  Biggs  said  that  it  was  not  clear  from  the
    decision what the documents in issue were.  Mere mention of  them,  for
    example at paragraph 16, was insufficient.  One  might  speculate  that
    the document referred to in that  particular  paragraph  was  the  blue
    notebook but even this was not clear from the decision.  The  reference
    to a bundle in  paragraph  16  probably  referred  to  the  appellant's
    bundle.

Conclusion on error of law

15.  The Presenting Officer's action in  producing  first  one  and  then  a
    second document in the course of cross-examination,  to  undermine  the
    appellant's case that he was a full-time carer and to  add  support  to
    the Secretary of State's case that he told the police in November  2013
    that he was, on the contrary, in full-time employment as a builder,  is
    very difficult to reconcile with the overriding objective and the  duty
    of the parties to assist the Tribunal,  contained  in  rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. The Presenting Officer felt able to draw
    attention to service of the appellant's bundle only on the  morning  of
    the hearing, albeit before the hearing began,  and  there  was  clearly
    ample opportunity  at  that  point  for  him  to  disclose  documentary
    evidence relevant to the issues.   The  decision  does  not  contain  a
    precise description of the documents produced in the course  of  cross-
    examination but it appears  that  one  of  them  was  a  blue  notebook
    completed by a police officer following an encounter with the appellant
    in November 2013.   Paragraph 39 of the Secretary of  State's  decision
    letter records that the appellant apparently claimed to be in work as a
    builder and so it should have been perfectly clear  to  the  Presenting
    Officer that this was part of the Secretary of State's case.  As  such,
    the contents of the notebook and any document bearing on the matters in
    issue between the parties ought to have been  disclosed  at  the  first
    opportunity.

16.   There  clearly  was  no  compliance  with  standard  Case   Management
    Directions sent out with the notice of hearing.  The Presenting Officer
    was, nonetheless, in a position on the morning of the  hearing,  having
    received the appellant's bundle, to  take  a  sensible  view  regarding
    relevant documentary evidence in his possession.  It  was  no  adequate
    answer to point to late service of the appellant's bundle,  to  deflect
    attention from the respondent's own failure.

17.  The critical question is, of  course,  whether  the  short  adjournment
    given by the judge was sufficient to meet the requirements of  fairness
    and the overriding objective.  If it were the  case  that  Counsel  had
    sufficient opportunity to take full  instructions  on  the  documentary
    evidence produced in the course of cross-examination, an adjournment of
    two  hours  might  well  have  been  sufficient.   In  the   particular
    circumstances of  this  appeal,  however,  I  conclude  that  more  was
    required.   The  appellant's  evidence  was  given  through   an   Urdu
    interpreter whose duty was to the Tribunal.  The decision records  that
    Counsel expressly stated that she was unable to take full  instructions
    (at paragraphs 20 and 33).  The decision  also  shows  that  the  judge
    carefully recorded the appellant's denial  that  he  had  worked  as  a
    builder and his denial that he had told  the  police  any  such  thing.
    That denial was, by reason of the  refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment,
    wholly  unsupported  by  evidence  which  might  otherwise  have   been
    available from the maker of the documents produced  by  the  Presenting
    Officer.  As Mr Biggs submitted, an adjournment would have enabled  the
    appellant to take proper advice, through an interpreter, on the merits,
    if any, of a witness summons to secure the  attendance  of  the  police
    officer or other author of the documents.  The judge went  on  to  make
    adverse credibility findings which took into  account  the  appellant's
    denial of matters relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  but  in  the
    absence of any considered response from the appellant that  might  have
    been identified following a consultation with Counsel, assisted  by  an
    interpreter.

18.  In these circumstances,  I  conclude  that  the  refusal  to  grant  an
    adjournment to another day resulted in procedural unfairness, such that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside and remade.

19.  Both representatives suggested, in the light of paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement  and  taking  into  account  also
    paragraph  2150  of  the  current  edition  of  Macdonald,   that   the
    appropriate venue for remaking the decision  would  be  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a judge other than  Judge  Mayall.   I
    agree with that suggestion.  Mr Biggs  raised  the  question  of  costs
    incurred in the Upper Tribunal, by reason of the Secretary  of  State's
    unreasonable conduct in the course of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

20.  Fairness requires that the potential payer of costs must  be  given  an
    opportunity to make representations.  It was clear that Mr  Walker  was
    not in a position to make representations, without  an  opportunity  to
    take full instructions from the  case  owner  and,  perhaps,  from  the
    Presenting Officer with conduct of the appeal  before  the  judge.   It
    seemed to me that it would be appropriate for  the  application  to  be
    made at the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal hearing  as  findings
    of fact made on that occasion might  well  be  relevant  to  the  costs
    assessment.  Mr Biggs suggested that the application ought to  be  made
    to the Upper Tribunal at the  conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, as in issue were the  costs  incurred  in  the  error  of  law
    hearing.  I agreed to include a direction that an application should be
    made to the Upper  Tribunal  in  relation  to  costs.   Directions  are
    attached to this short decision.

NOTICE OF DECISION

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will  be  re-
    made in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                           muhammad abbasi abbasi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                 DIRECTIONS


1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  will  be  re-
    made at Hatton Cross before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mayall.

2.   To assist the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal directs that:

    (a)  the respondent shall  make  copies  of  and  file  and  serve  the
         documents in her possession made on the occasion of the appellant's
         arrest by police officers in November 2013 (to include the notebook
         recording the appellant's answers to questions) and


    (b)  the appellant shall file and serve copies of the statement of case
         and  supporting  documents  in  the  appellant's  judicial   review
         proceedings in early 2014.


   3. The documents set out above shall be filed and served no later than 10
      working days before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant has permission to apply to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  an
      order for costs under rule 10(3)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008, within 14 days of  promulgation  of  the  remade
      decision by the First-tier Tribunal,  the  application  to  be  listed
      before Deputy Upper Tribunal R C Campbell if he is available,  with  a
      time estimate of 1.5 hours.


Signed:                                 Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
