
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17165/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2014                                |On 11th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                bongani nkomo
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Allison of Allison Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Paul promulgated following  a  hearing  on  4th  February
    2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zimbabwe born 5th October  1984  who
    on 27th March 2013 applied for further leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, outside the immigration rules.  The application was based upon
    the Appellant's family and private life in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was refused on 16th May 2013, the Respondent  making  a
    combined decision to refuse to vary  leave  to  remain,  and  making  a
    decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

 4. The reasons for refusal are contained in a letter dated 16th May  2013.
    In summary the Respondent contended  that  the  family  life  that  the
    Appellant claimed to have with his mother and other family  members  in
    the United Kingdom did not constitute family life under Appendix FM  of
    the immigration rules, and therefore  the  application  was  considered
    under paragraph 276ADE which sets out the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life.

 5. The Respondent noted that the Appellant had entered the United  Kingdom
    on 4th August 2006 and therefore he had not lived continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom for at least 20 years.  He was not under the age  of  18
    years, nor was he aged between 18 and 25 years, and therefore the  only
    provision that might  apply  to  him  was  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  which
    requires that an applicant;

    Is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less
    than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with the  country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.

 6. The Respondent asserted that the Appellant had spent 22  years  in  his
    home country of Zimbabwe, although  the  evidence  indicates  that  the
    Appellant left Zimbabwe at 18 years of age.   The  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the period of time that the  Appellant  had  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom since 4th August 2006, meant that he had  lost  ties  to
    Zimbabwe.  Therefore it was not accepted that the  Appellant  satisfied
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi).

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, and the  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Paul (the judge) on 4th February 2014.  It was confirmed
    to the judge on behalf of the Appellant, that although  there  appeared
    to be reference in the grounds of appeal, to asylum and  Article  3  of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), the
    appeal was only being pursued under Article 8 on the  basis  of  family
    and private life in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  found  that  the
    immigration rules provide a framework for an assessment of  family  and
    private life and if the Appellant failed to  meet  those  rules,  there
    must be  some  special  factors  which  can  give  rise  to  a  further
    consideration.  The judge found that the Appellant did not satisfy  the
    immigration rules, and found that there were  no  special  factors  and
    therefore did not consider Article 8 outside the rules.  The appeal was
    dismissed.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had made no findings  as  to
    whether the Appellant had ties with Zimbabwe and had made  no  findings
    as to whether the Respondent's decision was in accordance with the law.
     It had been contended that the decision was not in accordance with the
    law because the Respondent's decision  maker  had  failed  to  consider
    whether there were any exceptional  circumstances  in  the  Appellant's
    case and had therefore failed to follow the  Respondent's  policy.   It
    was contended that the Respondent should have considered in addition to
    the Appellant's private life, the family life the Appellant has in  the
    United Kingdom, and the judge had erred by  not  making  findings  upon
    this.

 9. It was contended  that  the  judge  had  made  a  perverse  finding  by
    concluding that the Appellant's case was not exceptional and had  given
    inadequate weight to the fact that the Appellant had been  living  with
    his mother and formed part of her household since his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2006.  It was contended that the judge  in  paragraph
    30 of the determination had made reference to the wrong legal test,  by
    referring to "an insurmountable obstacle".

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pooler in the following terms;

    1.   Judge Paul dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
         of the Respondent to refuse to grant leave to remain in the UK  and
         to remove him  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
         Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    2.   The application for permission submits that the judge erred in law
         by failing to make findings on whether the Appellant had ties  with
         Zimbabwe; whether the decision was  in  accordance  with  the  law;
         failing to adopt the structured approach set out in  R  (Razgar)  v
         SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27;  reaching  the  perverse  finding  that  the
         Appellant's case was not exceptional; failing to  take  a  relevant
         factor into account; and applying the wrong test of 'insurmountable
         obstacles'.

    3.   Arguably the judge, who dismissed the appeal by reference  to  the
         immigration rules, erred in law in relation to para  276ADE(vi)  by
         failing to find whether the Appellant had no ties to Zimbabwe.

    4.   There is less force in the remaining grounds; the judge approached
         the Article 8 appeal bearing in mind Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules
         - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), a decision of  the  UT
         which was binding on him; but since permission is to be granted all
         grounds may be argued.

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  did  not
    disclose a material error of law, as it was clear that the  Appellant's
    case was primarily advanced on the basis of his relationship  with  his
    mother.  The Appellant had only been in the United Kingdom  since  2006
    and maintained family links with Zimbabwe.

12. Directions were subsequently issued that  there  should  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Submissions

13. Mr Allison relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal, and his skeleton argument, in submitting that the
    judge had erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

14. Mr Duffy accepted that the judge had not made findings on the issue  of
    whether the Appellant had ties to Zimbabwe and that was an  error,  but
    he submitted it was not material.  This was because it was  clear  that
    the Appellant did have ties to Zimbabwe, for  example  his  grandmother
    still lived there, and the Appellant had spent the greater part of  his
    life in Zimbabwe, and the longer an individual spent in a country,  the
    longer it takes to lose ties.  I was asked to take  into  account  that
    the Appellant grew up in Zimbabwe and spent his formative years  there.
    Mr Duffy submitted that if the judge had made findings on this issue he
    would have had to find that the Appellant had ties to Zimbabwe.

15. Mr Duffy submitted that the contention that the  Respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law had no merit as it  was  clear  that
    there were no exceptional factors, and if the Respondent had considered
    that there were such factors, these would have been  mentioned  in  the
    refusal letter.  The Respondent's decision that the Appellant  did  not
    have family life that engaged either Appendix FM, or Article 8,  was  a
    decision that was open to the Respondent.  The family  life  claim  was
    between an adult and his mother, and although there may be family  life
    in such circumstances, that was not always the case, and it was not the
    case in this appeal.

16. I was asked  to  accept  that  there  is  a  very  high  threshold  for
    perversity, and there was nothing in the First-tier Tribunal to suggest
    that a  perverse  decision  had  been  taken.   The  grounds  disclosed
    disagreement with the findings made by the judge but did  not  disclose
    material errors.

17. Mr Duffy accepted that in paragraph 30 the judge had  referred  to  "an
    insurmountable obstacle" and this was not  the  appropriate  test,  but
    submitted  that  the  judge  meant  to  record  that  removal  was  not
    disproportionate.

18. Mr Allison responded by contending that the  determination  was  unsafe
    and that the judge should  have  made  a  finding  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant had ties to Zimbabwe.  Mr  Allison  pointed  out  that  these
    issues were raised in  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

19. Mr Allison referred to the Respondent's guidance on long residence  and
    private life, valid from 11th November 2013, a copy of which  had  been
    provided to the judge.  Mr Allison submitted  there  was  reference  in
    that guidance to  granting  leave  outside  the  rules  if  exceptional
    circumstances applied, and that caseworkers must consider whether there
    are exceptional circumstances in every case where  an  applicant  falls
    for refusal under the rules.  There was no  evidence  that  exceptional
    circumstances had been considered  in  this  case,  and  therefore  the
    Respondent had not followed the policy, and the judge should have  made
    findings upon this.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I  indicated  that  I  wished  to
    consider what had been put before me before making  a  decision.   Both
    representatives indicated that if an error of law  was  found  and  the
    decision needed to be re-made, there would be no further submissions to
    be made, nor any further evidence to be called and the  decision  could
    be re-made on the basis of the evidence that was before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I therefore reserved my decision.

Error of Law

21. In my view the judge erred by not making findings  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant had ties to Zimbabwe.   This  was  an  issue  raised  by  the
    Appellant, and therefore needed to be determined.  In my view this  was
    a material issue, and a material error of law in  failing  to  consider
    the issue of ties.

22. In addition the judge erred in making reference to  "an  insurmountable
    obstacle" in paragraph 30  of  the  determination.   That  is  not  the
    appropriate test in this appeal.  I  conclude  that  these  errors  are
    material, and mean that the determination is unsafe  and  is  therefore
    set aside.

Re-Making the Decision

23.  In  re-making  the  decision  I  take  into  account   the   following
    documentation;

      i) Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-C;

     ii) Appellant's bundle comprising 34 pages;

    iii) Home Office guidance on long residence and private life valid  from
         11th November 2013;

     iv) two skeleton arguments submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

The Appellant's Case

24. In summary the Appellant's case is that he was born in  Harare  on  5th
    October 1984 and was educated in Zimbabwe until 2003 when  he  left  to
    study in Australia for three years.  He never knew his father  and  was
    raised by his mother.  The Appellant's mother migrated  to  the  United
    Kingdom in  2003  after  the  Appellant  left  Zimbabwe  to  travel  to
    Australia.  The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4th August 2006
    with leave as a student which was subsequently extended.  He thereafter
    had leave as a post-study worker from 14th April 2011 until 14th  April
    2013.  The Appellant's life in the United Kingdom  is  centred  on  his
    relationship with his mother and her friends and church activities.

25. The Appellant's mother came to the United Kingdom as a  Highly  Skilled
    Migrant in March 2003.  She is now a naturalised British citizen.   The
    Appellant's extended family includes his mother's aunt  and  niece  who
    are both British citizens.  The Appellant has  an  aunt  who  lives  in
    Canada and an uncle who lives in South Africa.

26. The only family that the Appellant has  in  Zimbabwe  is  his  maternal
    grandmother who lives in the family home and with whom  the  Appellant,
    according to his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  is  still  in
    contact.  The Appellant's grandmother is frail and has  a  carer.   The
    Appellant and his mother gave evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    that the Appellant's grandmother would not be able to provide him  with
    emotional support.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. I have taken into account  all  the  evidence  placed  before  me.   In
    relation to the immigration  rules  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant, and the standard is a balance of probability.

28. I must firstly consider whether  this  appeal  can  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules.

29. Appendix FM sets out the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an  individual
    wishing to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  based  upon  family
    life.  But there are no  provisions  within  Appendix  FM  which  would
    entitle the Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom.   This  has  not
    been disputed on behalf of the Appellant.  Therefore the appeal  cannot
    succeed with reference to Appendix FM.

30. I therefore move on to consider paragraph 276ADE.  It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of the Appellant that the only  provision  under  which  he  can
    succeed, is (vi).  The issue that I have to  consider  is  whether  the
    Appellant has no ties to Zimbabwe.   I  have  taken  into  account  the
    guidance in Ogundimu Nigeria [2013] UKUT  00060  (IAC)  in  considering
    this issue.  It was recognised in paragraph 124  that  the  test  under
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) is an exacting one,  and  that  there  must  be  a
    rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant  circumstances,   and   the
    assessment should not be  limited  to  "social,  cultural  and  family"
    circumstances when considering whether a person has 'no ties'.

31. I set out below paragraphs 123 and 125;

         123.   The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports,
         we think, a concept involving something more than merely remote and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin.  If this were not the case then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         125. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
         relevant to the assessment of whether a  person  has  ties  to  the
         country to which they would have to go if  they  were  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not limited to:  the
         length of time a person has spent in the country to which he  would
         have to go if he were required to leave the United Kingdom; the age
         that the person left that country, the exposure that person has had
         to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person  speaks
         the language of the country, the extent of the family  and  friends
         that person has in the country to which he  is  being  deported  or
         removed and the quality of the relationships that person  has  with
         those friends and family members.

32. The Appellant has spent the greater part of his life in  Zimbabwe.   He
    was born there and spent his formative years  there  and  was  educated
    until the age of 18 in Zimbabwe.  He was  an  adult  when  he  left  to
    travel to Australia where he lived for three years.

33. It is  not  contended  that  the  Appellant  would  have  any  language
    difficulties in Zimbabwe.  I accept that the Appellant  does  not  have
    friends in Zimbabwe, and I also accept that the only family  member  is
    his elderly grandmother with whom he  has  remained  in  contact.   The
    Appellant's grandmother lives in the family home in Zimbabwe.

34. Taking the above into account, it is my conclusion that  it  cannot  be
    said that the Appellant has no ties to Zimbabwe.  Therefore  he  cannot
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE(vi).

35. I next address Mr Allison's submission that the  Respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law as the guidance  on  long  residence
    and private life had not been followed.

36. The guidance does indicate that a caseworker can grant leave to  remain
    outside the immigration rules if exceptional circumstances  apply,  and
    the  caseworker   must   consider   whether   there   are   exceptional
    circumstances in every case where the application is refused under  the
    rules.   Guidance  is  given  on  the  meaning  of   exceptional,   the
    Respondent's view is that exceptional means that removal  would  result
    in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual so that  refusal
    of the application would not be proportionate under Article 8, and  the
    view is expressed that this is likely to be the case only very rarely.

37. Guidance is also given that the caseworker  should  take  into  account
    cumulative factors, such as where an applicant has  family  members  in
    the United Kingdom but the family life does  not  provide  a  basis  to
    remain, and they also have a significant private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom for example an adult child and parent relationship  which  does
    not normally qualify as family life under Article  8.   In  considering
    whether there are exceptional circumstances, a caseworker  should  take
    both family and private life into account.

38. There is no reference  to  exceptional  circumstances  in  the  refusal
    letter, and it might have been helpful if  there  had  been  some  such
    reference.  However there is reference in the letter to the Appellant's
    claimed family life with his mother and her family members  and  it  is
    evident that this was considered by the decision maker,  who  concluded
    that such family life did not fall within Appendix  FM.   The  decision
    maker was therefore aware of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    mother, and apparently the  decision  maker  took  into  account  other
    factors listed in the  guidance,  such  as  length  of  time  that  the
    Appellant has been in the United Kingdom, and  the  fact  that  he  had
    always been in the United Kingdom legally.

39. The fact that  the  refusal  letter  does  not  refer  specifically  to
    exceptional  circumstances  does  not  mean,  without  more,  that  the
    guidance has not been followed, and in  my  view  the  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law, and the decision maker has taken into  account
    all the relevant factors in the Appellant's application, and considered
    them cumulatively, and concluded there are no exceptional circumstances
    that would justify allowing the  application  outside  the  immigration
    rules.  The decision letter could have been more comprehensive, but  it
    is not unlawful.

40. Having decided that this appeal cannot succeed  under  the  immigration
    rules, I have to  consider  whether  Article  8  should  be  considered
    outside the rules.  I set out below paragraph 24(b) of Gulshan;

    (b)  after applying the requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may
         arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them
         is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether
         there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under them: Nagre;

41. In my view there are no arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain  outside  the   immigration   rules,   having   considered   the
    circumstances of this appeal, but if I am wrong about that, I have gone
    on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the rules.

42. In considering Article 8 I take into account that it is now established
    by case law that there is no "near miss" principle under Article 8, and
    as was stated in paragraph 57 of Patel & Others [2013] UKSC 72;

    It is important to remember that Article 8 is not a general  dispensing
    power.  It is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion to allow leave to remain outside the  rules,  which  may  be
    unrelated to any protected human rights.

43. I have considered the five stage approach advocated  by  Razgar.   Very
    often the relationship between an adult child and  a  parent  will  not
    amount to family life.  That is not always the case.  It was decided in
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160  (IAC)
    that each case should be analysed on its own facts to decide whether or
    not family life exists within the meaning of  Article  8(1),  and  that
    whilst some generalisations are possible each case  is  fact-sensitive.
    In order for a parent and an adult child to establish family life under
    Article 8, there must be further elements of dependency, involving more
    than the normal emotional ties.  In this case  the  Appellant  and  his
    mother lived apart for approximately three years, while  the  Appellant
    studied in Australia, although  they  have  lived  together  since  the
    Appellant arrived in this country in 2006.  At present it appears  that
    the Appellant is financially supported by his mother in addition to the
    emotional support that they give each  other.   I  am  satisfied  on  a
    balance of probabilities that they have established family life.

44. The decision to remove the Appellant would be an interference with  his
    family and private life, and I then have to  consider  the  fourth  and
    fifth questions posed in Razgar, and that is whether  the  interference
    is necessary in the interests of national security,  public  safety  or
    the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
    or crime, for the protection of health or morals or for the  protection
    of the rights and freedoms of others, and if the decision is  necessary
    for one of those reasons, whether the decision is proportionate to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

45. I also bear in mind that the decision in  Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39
    means that I have to  consider  the  rights  of  other  family  members
    affected by the decision not only the Appellant.  In this case  I  have
    to consider the Appellant's mother.  I do not find  the  Appellant  has
    established a family life  with  his  other  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

46. I take into account the Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since
    2006 and that he and his  mother  both  wish  him  to  remain  in  this
    country, as do their extended family members here.

47. However Article 8 does not bestow  upon  an  individual  the  automatic
    right to choose in which country he wishes to live.  I  have  to  place
    substantial weight on the fact  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  I also place great weight  upon
    the need to maintain effective immigration control, which is  necessary
    in this case in  the  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the
    country.

48. In considering proportionality  I  also  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant spent the greater part of his life in Zimbabwe, and  that  he
    spent his formative years there.   The  Appellant  has  only  ever  had
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom, and he has never had any
    legitimate expectation that he would be allowed to settle here.

49. I also take into account that the Appellant is 29  years  of  age,  and
    that there are no relevant health or medical issues.   This  is  not  a
    case where the interests of children are involved.

50. The Appellant would have no language difficulties in Zimbabwe and would
    have accommodation.  He  is  highly  educated  which  would  assist  in
    finding employment.  Family members, including his mother, could  visit
    him  in  Zimbabwe  if  they  wished.   The  Appellant  and  his  mother
    previously lived apart for a substantial period of time, and did so  on
    a voluntary basis.  They could do so again and keep in touch by  modern
    methods of communication and visits.  Although both the  Appellant  and
    his mother would be disappointed if he had to leave the United Kingdom,
    there is in my view nothing to prevent them from carrying on with their
    lives, and it is not the case that they  are  so  dependent  upon  each
    other that they could not live apart.



51. I therefore conclude the Respondent's decision is necessary, and it  is
    proportionate in that there are no compelling circumstances to indicate
    that the Appellant's removal would be unjustifiably harsh.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed under the immigration  rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.






Signed                              Date: 5th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 5th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


