








UPPER Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17354/2014
                                                               IA/17356/2014
                                                               IA/17358/2014
                                                               IA/17359/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On: 13 January 2015                  |On: 4 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mrs Majlinda Sykaj
                             Master Sedjan Sykaj
                             Master Aravis Sykaj
                            Master Melison Sykaj
                        no anonymity directions made
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Harris, counsel (instructed by M and K
Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
    secretary of state and the respondents as "the claimants."

 2. The claimants are mother and three sons, all citizens of Albania.

 3. They originally appealed against the decision of the secretary of state
    refusing their applications for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
    pursuant to the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM EX.1.

 4. The reasons for  refusal  letter  took  into  account  that  the  three
    children, then aged 12, 10 and 7, had lived in the UK for seven  years.
    They were however not British citizens. It was  accordingly  considered
    reasonable to expect them to be removed to Albania as a family unit.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had no sympathy for the  first  claimant,
    the mother. He referred to her previous  history  as  a  concerted  and
    contrived effort to defeat the immigration controls of a country  by  a
    determined effort to remain here even after she had once been  removed.
    To enable such a person to remain here, even in the face of  Article  8
    considerations,  would  require  much  more  than  simply  the  routine
    reference to Article 8 interests [15].

 6. The  position  with  regard  to  the  children  claimants  however  was
    different. The errors and mistakes of the mother are not to be  visited
    on them. Their interests are  considered  pursuant  to  s.55  BCIA.  He
    directed himself in accordance with  the  Supreme  Court  judgement  in
    Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

 7. He noted that the application was made on 19 September 2012. As  at  13
    December  2012,  when  the  rules  were  amended,  the  requirement  of
    "reasonableness" was added by  HC760.  That  contained  a  transitional
    provision.  Where the application for leave was made before 13 December
    2012 and the application has not been decided before that date, it will
    be decided in accordance with the Rules in force on  12  December  2012
    [18].

 8. In this case the application was decided on 21 March 2014. Accordingly,
    the "position must be taken" as at the time  of  the  rules  before  13
    December 2012  where  there  was  no  "reasonableness"  requirement  to
    satisfy [19].

 9. This meant that the children satisfied the seven year  rule  and  could
    not be removed. That had the effect of strengthening  the  position  of
    their mother, the first claimant. He  directed  himself  in  accordance
    with Razgar and allowed her appeal as well.

10. On 2  December  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  the
    secretary of state permission  to  appeal.  The  first  ground  of  the
    application contended that in holding that  paragraph  276ADE  did  not
    contain  a  test  of  "reasonableness",  the   Judge   misapplied   the
    immigration rules to the facts of the second claimant's appeal. Even if
    the second claimant did benefit, this did not 'inherently' preclude the
    family from relocating to Albania. It was also argued that the Tribunal
    misdirected itself in relation to  its  consideration  of  the  appeals
    under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

11. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 13 January 2015, Mr  Harris
    on behalf of the claimants accepted that the statement  of  changes  in
    the immigration rules, HC820, amended HC 760.  Changes  implemented  by
    HC 760 would apply.

12.  In  paragraph  1  of  the  "changes"  it  is  provided  that  in   the
    implementation section of the statement of changes in immigration  rule
    HC760, the changes in paragraphs 201 (where paragraph 276ADE  (iv)  was
    amended by inserting "and it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK" shall apply to all applications  decided  on
    or after 13 December 2012 regardless of the date  the  application  was
    made.

13. Accordingly, the issue as to whether or not it would be  reasonable  to
    expect the applicant to leave the UK was a relevant  requirement  under
    the rules before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14. Both representatives therefore accepted that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge involved the making of an error on a point  of  law
    and that it would have to be set aside and re-made.

15. Both representatives submitted that in the circumstances, it  would  be
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision.

16. Mr Harris requested that for the  sake  of  finances  and  convenience,
    namely, that there would be several witnesses attending the hearing  to
    give evidence that the hearing should be heard at  Taylor  House  which
    afforded them easy access from where they lived.

    Assessment

17. It is unfortunate that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  not  referred
    to the statement of changes in the immigration rules effected by  HC820
    of 12 December 2012. Although the date of application  was  before  the
    implementation  of  the  statement  of  changes,  it  was  nevertheless
    provided that changes in paragraph 201 in Immigration Rules HC760 shall
    apply to  all  applications  decided  on  or  after  13  December  2012
    regardless of the date  the  application  was  made.  That  meant  that
    paragraph 276ADE (iv) required that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the applicant to leave the UK.

18. I find that this is an appropriate case for remitting the appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal in conformity with the Presidential  Guidelines.  I
    find that it is in the circumstances appropriate for the appeal  to  be
    transferred from the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Taylor  House,  London.   There  is  no
    opposition to the transfer sought.

    Notice of Decisions

    The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. The decision is accordingly set aside  and  will
    be re-made.

    I direct in the circumstances that it  would  be  appropriate  for  the
    appeal to be  transferred  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Birmingham to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House, London.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed




                                                             Dated: 2/3/2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


