
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: iA/17939/2014
     ia/17943/2014

                                                iA/17948/2014
                                  ia/17956/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                    Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 17 December 2015                   |                    On 18 January 2016  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    G M P
                                     T P
                                     K P
                                     T P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.   However
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.
 2. The Appellants were born on 17 March 1969, 18 January 1966, 10  January
    2000 and 3 January 2008 respectively.  The first and  third  Appellants
    are Mauritian nationals.  The second and fourth  Appellants  are  South
    African nationals.  The first and second  Appellants  are  husband  and
    wife.  The fourth Appellant is their daughter.  The third Appellant  is
    the first appellant's daughter  from  a  previous  relationship.   They
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  31  March  2014
    refusing their applications for further leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 of ECHR taking into account section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Their appeals were heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Blundell and he allowed the third Appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph
    276 ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and allowed the first,  second  and
    fourth Appellants' appeals under  Article  8  of  ECHR  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 March 2015.  An application for permission to  appeal
    was lodged and permission  was  refused  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Davidge on 11 May 2015.  Permission was then granted by Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 24 July  2015.   The  permission  states
    that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing
    to consider the possibility of the Appellants  (2  of  them  are  South
    African nationals) residing in South Africa.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

 4. The error of law hearing took place on 18 November  2015  and  I  found
    there to be  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision, as although he properly considered all the evidence  relating
    to Mauritius in detail and gave this anxious scrutiny, he did not  give
    the same anxious scrutiny to the return  of  the  appellants  to  South
    Africa.  I found this to be a material error of law  finding  that  the
    issues relating to  the  family  returning  to  South  Africa  and  the
    education and medical treatment available there had not  been  properly
    considered.

 5. This is the second stage of that error of law hearing.   An  email  was
    sent to the Tribunal dated 16 December 2015 from  Chambers  Solicitors,
    London, who act for the Appellants.  It states that Chambers are not in
    funds for this hearing and will not be attending. The email states that
    the Appellants will not be attending either. The email asked  that  the
    case be dealt with on the papers.

 6. Written submissions were received on behalf of  the  Appellants  on  17
    December 2015, the date of the hearing.

 7. I heard submissions from the Presenting Officer who submitted that  the
    Appellants have not discharged the burden of proof  as  they  have  not
    shown they are unable to go to live in South Africa.  He submitted that
    one of the parents and one daughter have South  African  passports  and
    the burden of proof lies on  the  Appellants.   He  submitted  that  no
    reasons have been put forward to show that  they  are  unable  to  live
    there.  He submitted that although the education and medical facilities
    may not be free in South Africa that is not a reason for the Appellants
    remaining in the United Kingdom.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is  nothing  compelling  or
    exceptional in this case.  He submitted that one adult  and  one  child
    are citizens of Mauritius and the other adult and the other  child  are
    citizens of South Africa.  He submitted that the burden of proof is  on
    the Appellants and it has not  been  discharged  and  I  was  asked  to
    dismiss the appeal.

 9.  I  considered   the   written   submissions   from   the   Appellants`
    representatives.  The history of this case is that on 9 August 2003 the
    first Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  with  valid  leave  as  a
    visitor and switched his status to that of a student.  This was granted
    until 31 October 2004. The third Appellant joined him  in  April  2005.
    The second Appellant came to the United Kingdom on 18 January 2006. The
    second and third Appellants were the first Appellant's dependants.  The
    fourth Appellant was born in the United Kingdom. On 11 August 2011  the
    first Appellant  submitted  an  application  seeking  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules which was refused.  The  appeal  was  refused  on  25
    January 2012 but the family remained in the United Kingdom and  made  a
    further application on 13 March 2013 which was refused. The appeal  was
    dismissed on and appealed.  It is this appeal that I am  dealing  with.
    The only issue which I have to make  my  decision  on  is  whether  the
    Appellants can go to live in South Africa.  Two of them are citizens of
    South Africa.  At the error of law hearing  on  18  November  2015  the
    second stage hearing did not go ahead.  It was stated  that  additional
    evidence  on  South  Africa  was  required,  including   the   family's
    connections to South Africa and the  education  and  medical  treatment
    available there.

10. The Appellants` submissions refer to the issues as being:-

    (a)  The third Appellant going to a country  she  has  never  lived  in
         before,  in  consideration  of  the  Immigration  Rules   paragraph
         276ADE(iv).   In  the  alternative  to  this  is   the   Tribunal's
         consideration of Article 8 ECHR (if relevant).


    (b)  The fourth Appellant going to a country she  has  never  lived  in
         before where she does not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  and
         thus, should be considered under Article 8 ECHR.


    (c)  The first Appellant going to live in a country he has visited  but
         never lived in before where he does not meet  the  requirements  of
         the Rules and thus should be considered under Article 8 ECHR.


    (d)  The second Appellant returning to a country  of  which  she  is  a
         national where she does not meet the requirements of the Rules  and
         thus should be considered under Article 8 of ECHR.

11. The submissions state that the third Appellant has accrued more than  7
    years residence in the UK.  She has been in full  time  education.  The
    submissions refer to problems the third Appellant had relating  to  her
    history in Mauritius.   I  was  asked  to  consider  the  psychological
    reports on the third Appellant.   The submissions state that the  third
    Appellant has complications regarding her physical health and has  been
    receiving support from the NHS.  The submissions state that  the  third
    Appellant's claim meets the terms of the Immigration  Rules,  paragraph
    276ADE(iv)  and  that  reasonableness  should  be  considered.   I  was
    referred to the case of EV Philippines and Others [2014] EWCA  Civ  874
    relating to the best interests of the child.

12. The submissions go on to deal with the fourth Appellant and put forward
    a similar argument.  The issue in her claim is that of  proportionality
    and I was referred to Razgar (2004) UKHL 27.

13. The submissions state that neither child has had  any  connection  with
    South Africa apart from the second  Appellant  being  a  South  African
    national. (The fourth Appellant is also a South African national).

14. The submissions state that the second Appellant owns a property in  the
    UK and the entire family resides there.  The first Appellant  has  been
    studying in the UK and has had health issues.   The  submissions  state
    that both children have spent a  significant  amount  of  time  in  the
    United Kingdom and although there is no evidence that there may or  may
    not be the opportunity for the third Appellant to go to  South  Africa,
    she has had most of her education in the United  Kingdom,  as  has  the
    fourth Appellant.  This is the only country they have ever known.

15. The points raised in the submissions  of  the  Appellants  relating  to
    Mauritius have  all  been  dealt  with  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination promulgated on 16 March 2015.   As I stated in  my  error
    of law decision on 18 November 2015 I accept that anxious scrutiny  has
    been given  to  the  Appellant's  situation  were  they  to  return  to
    Mauritius.  In particular, weight was given to  the  third  Appellant's
    history in Mauritius.  I find that had  the  third  Appellant  not  had
    these issues relating to Mauritius the judge might well have reached  a
    different decision on Article 8 of ECHR relating  to  the  other  three
    Appellants.

16. There was however a material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision as the return of  the  Appellants  to  South  Africa  was  not
    considered.  The second stage hearing was adjourned to enable  evidence
    to be provided by  the  Appellants  about  the  education  and  medical
    treatment available in South Africa and  the  family's  connections  to
    South Africa.

17. I accept that the firm  of  solicitors  was  unable  to  represent  the
    Appellants because of lack of funds but  had  the  Appellants  attended
    this hearing I find that questions could  have  been  asked  about  the
    family's connections to South  Africa  and  research  could  have  been
    carried out by the Appellants  about  the  education  and  the  medical
    facilities available there. As it is I have considered the  COI  report
    on South Africa which is in the public domain.

18. As the Appellants did not appear for the hearing they  have  not  shown
    that they are unable to go, as a family, to live in South Africa.   The
    burden of proof is on the Appellants.  The second and fourth Appellants
    are South African.  The fact that education and medical facilities  are
    not free there does not go to the  core  of  this  claim.   Nothing  is
    before  me  to  show  that  there  are   compelling   and   exceptional
    circumstances in this case.  The Appellants  have  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof.

19. Based on what I have before me I find that the Appellants, as a family,
    can go to South Africa.  Nothing has been provided to show that  family
    reunion there would not be possible. Two of the  Appellants  are  South
    African nationals.

20. With regard to the best interests of the children  I  have  noted  that
    they have been educated in the  United  Kingdom.   Although  the  third
    Appellant's application can meet the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    none of the other Appellants' claims can satisfy the Rules and  I  have
    to consider Article 8 outside the Rules relating to Appellants one, two
    and four. The third Appellant cannot remain on her own  in  the  United
    Kingdom as she is a minor.

21. The best interests of  the  children  must  be  to  remain  with  their
    parents.   I  have  considered  the  terms  of  the  said  case  of  EV
    (Philippines) and the  other  cases  referred  to  in  the  appellants'
    written submissions.  The fourth appellant is only 7 years old.  It  is
    true that she and her sister have always been educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom but the objective evidence on South Africa makes it clear  that
    there is a satisfactory education system there. If  they  go  to  South
    Africa as a family I find that the interference with their rights  will
    not breach Article 8.  Neither of the children is  British.   There  is
    nothing before me to indicate that the third appellant  does  not  have
    the opportunity to go to South Africa.

22. Proportionality has to be assessed.  The fact that these 3  Appellants'
    applications cannot meet the terms of the Rules has  to  weigh  against
    them.  I have to  consider  the  necessity  for  effective  immigration
    control.  None of these 3 Appellants have any right to be in the United
    Kingdom.  They have overstayed and were aware of this.  They waited for
    the third Appellant to have been in the United Kingdom for more than  7
    years before their application was made.

23. The best interests of the children is a primary  consideration  but  is
    not the primary consideration.

24. I have  noted  the  first  Appellant's  health  issues  and  the  third
    Appellant's health issues but there  are  good  medical  facilities  in
    South Africa and I find they will be able to access treatment there.

25. It is unfortunate that the Appellants did  not  attend  court  to  give
    evidence of their family connections to South Africa but based on  what
    is before me, when proportionality is assessed,  public  interest  must
    succeed when weighed against the first, second and  fourth  Appellants`
    human rights.  These are Appellants who are in the United  Kingdom  and
    are accessing the National Health Service  and  the  education  system.
    They have no right to be here and this must be against public interest.

26. The Appellants have not discharged the burden of proof.  It  would  not
    be unreasonable for the children to  go  to  South  Africa  with  their
    parents as a family.

27.  I  have  to  consider  the  said  case  of  Razgar  and  consider  the
    Appellants' family life. They can all  be  removed  together  to  South
    Africa so their family life will not be breached. With regard to  their
    private life I have to consider Part 5A of the Nationality  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and Sections 117A-D. The fourth Appellant was  born
    in the United Kingdom at a time when the first and  second  appellants'
    leave was precarious. For the same reasons as in paragraph  25  hereof,
    when proportionality is assessed public interest  must  succeed.  There
    will be an interference with their private  life  but  because  of  the
    public interest considerations there will be no breach of Article 8  of
    ECHR. It is not engaged.


DECISION

28. I dismiss the appeals  of  Appellants  one,  two  and  four  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

29. I dismiss the human rights appeals of Appellants one, two and four.

30. The appeal of the third Appellant under the Immigration Rules  succeeds
    but I find it would not be unreasonable to expect her to  go  with  her
    family members to South Africa.

31. Anonymity has been directed.



Signed                                  Date



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



