
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17709/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2014                           |On 28 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                mr Ejaz Akbar
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether or not  the
    determination discloses a material error of law.   In  a  determination
    before First-tier Tribunal (Judge K E Gordon) promulgated  on  16  June
    2014, she dismissed the appellant's appeal on the papers.

2.   The appellant and his wife Tasneem Zehra Zaidi  are  husband  and  wife
    and are nationals of Pakistan.

Background

3.   The respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain
    in the UK as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  The grounds for refusal  were
    that  the  certificate  of  sponsorship  stated  that  the  prospective
    employment most closely corresponding to occupation code 7220  was  not
    on the list of NQF level 6 occupations and  accordingly  the  appellant
    did not qualify for the relevant points under Appendix A.

4.   In a determination the Tribunal observed at  [3]  that  the  notice  of
    appeal stated that the appellant's employer made an error in  providing
    the code and had since provided an explanation for that  error.   There
    was  no  further  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to  show  that   the
    certificate of sponsorship was incorrect and/or any explanation of  any
    error.

Grounds for Application

5.   Ground 1 - the Tribunal erred by failing to consider documents  and  a
    statement from the appellant's employer filed with the notice of appeal
    and which the Tribunal did not have before it.

6.   Ground 2 - the judge failed to consider Article 8 ECHR at all.

Permission to Appeal

7.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 2 September 2014 on  the  grounds  that  not  all  the
    relevant material had been made available to the  Tribunal  determining
    the appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

8.   The appellant appeared in person  and  submitted  that  his  solicitors
    sent a letter to the Tribunal from his  employers  explaining  how  the
    error arose.  He  submitted  documents  in  the  form  of  contract  of
    employment  and  letter  dated  December  2013.   He  could   give   no
    explanation for why such documentation did not appear in the bundle for
    the hearing at the First-tier Tribunal or in the file.

9.   Mr Avery confirmed that there was no evidence to this  effect  provided
    to the respondent and there was no real indication in  any  event  that
    such evidence had in fact been forwarded.

10.  He submitted that the CAS provided a valid code for the employer  which
    was submitted with the application.  There was no scope for that to  be
    amended even in the event of an error by the employer.

Discussion and Decision

11.  At the end of the hearing I announced my decision  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the determination.  I now give my reasons.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal determined  the  appeal  on  the  papers.   The
    application form was supported with a certificate of sponsorship giving
    the code 7220 as skilled  to  NQF  level  4.   The  Immigration  Rules,
    Appendix  A,  Section  74B(1)  state  that  for  the   certificate   of
    sponsorship to be valid it must relate to a job that is in the code  of
    practice, Appendix J, as NQF level 6 or above.

13.  I am satisfied that  the  Tribunal  considered  all  of  the  available
    evidence submitted in support of the appeal.  I am not  satisfied  that
    further evidence was ever obtained or  provided  by  the  appellant  as
    stated in his grounds for  permission.   In  any  event  there  was  no
    further  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  who  reached  a   clear   and
    sustainable decision which discloses no error of law whatsoever.

Decision

14.  There is no material error of law.
15.     The determination shall stand.


     No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Dated 27.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.


Signed                                  Dated 27.10.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
