
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17586/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2017                      |On 15 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                         Ms Jocylene Laroya Gonzales
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Basharat Ali
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas


                             DECISION AND REASON

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born in 1978.

    2. Her immigration history is that she came to the UK from Hong Kong  on
       14 July 2007 in possession of a visa to accompany her employer  as  a
       domestic worker.  The visa was valid until 1  January  2008.   On  28
       October 2011 she was encountered by Immigration  Officers.   She  was
       served with removal  directions  as  an  overstayer.   She  initiated
       judicial review proceedings against the removal directions but  these
       were  withdrawn  after  the  Respondent  agreed  to  reconsider   the
       decision.  On 26 September 2012  she  submitted  an  application  for
       leave to remain under Article 8 outside the Rules on the  basis  that
       she had been in a relationship with  a  Polish  national.   This  was
       refused on 17 October 2013 with no right of appeal.

    3. On 19 February 2014 it was accepted by the Competent  Authority  that
       there were reasonable grounds to  think  that  the  Appellant  was  a
       potential victim of trafficking.  However, a decision  was  taken  by
       the Respondent on 23 July 2014 that she was nonetheless to be refused
       leave to remain.  The decision was reconsidered  on  7  January  2015
       following the submission of further evidence but was maintained.   On
       5 March 2015 she was issued with removal directions.  She  was  given
       the opportunity to raise any additional grounds.  On  20  March  2015
       further submissions  were  raised  on  her  behalf.   However,  in  a
       decision dated 27 April 2015 she was again refused a grant of  leave.
       It is against that decision that she appeals.

    4. The summary of her claim is that she was born and brought up  in  the
       Philippines.  At the age of 19 she gave  birth  to  her  son  out  of
       wedlock.  She was in an abusive relationship with the father  of  her
       son and they separated soon after the birth.  The Appellant  went  to
       live with her grandmother.

    5. Between 1999 and 2003 she travelled backwards and  forwards  to  Hong
       Kong with leave to remain there as a domestic worker.  This continued
       between 2003 and 2007 with a different employer.  Her family  in  the
       Philippines became dependent on her earnings.

    6. The family she was working for in Hong Kong did not  treat  her  well
       but she felt she had no alternative but to work for them.

    7. In 2007 she came with the family to the  UK.   She  continued  to  be
       badly treated.  She was not paid and was not fed properly.   She  was
       locked in the house when the family went out.

    8. After a while she managed to escape.  She  met  other  Filipinos  who
       said they would help her.  She was taken to a coffee shop  where  she
       was again mistreated and sexually abused.  She was made to  sleep  on
       the floor.  She remained at the coffee shop for about a  year  and  a
       half.

    9. In 2009 she managed to escape and went to a church.   There  she  met
       someone who introduced her to Mrs Alhaidary and her family who agreed
       to accommodate and maintain her.  She has been with them ever  since.
       She would be unable to integrate into the Philippines now due to  her
       lack of family support there.  Also, she has mental health  problems.
       Further, her removal would amount to a disproportionate  interference
       with the family life she enjoys with the Alhaidary family.

   10. The application for leave was refused on the basis that she  did  not
       satisfy the private and family life requirements of Appendix  FM  and
       paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and her personal circumstances were not
       considered to be sufficiently compelling to justify a grant of  leave
       under Article 8 outside the Rules.  Although it was accepted that she
       had been the victim of trafficking in the past it was not  considered
       to be unreasonably harsh to expect her to return to  the  Philippines
       where she has relatives  to  whom  she  could  return.   It  was  not
       accepted that there was a further risk of trafficking it being  noted
       that such had occurred while she was in Hong Kong and not  while  she
       was living in the Philippines.  The Respondent also decided that  her
       return to the Philippines would not breach her rights under  Articles
       3 and 8 of the ECHR on the basis of her mental health problems.

    First tier decision

   11. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 2 September 2016 Judge of  the
       First-tier A Kelly dismissed the appeal under the Rules and on  human
       rights grounds.

   12. Her reasons are at paragraph [17ff].

   13. Dealing first with the Rules she notes that the issue  was  paragraph
       276ADE(vi) "very significant obstacles to her  integration  into  the
       Philippines".

   14. She found that the Appellant spent her childhood and early  years  in
       the Philippines before going back and forth to Hong  Kong  for  work.
       She keeps in touch with relatives in the Philippines and is  familiar
       with its culture and traditions and can speak her native tongue [18].

   15. Further, she has close family there,  namely,  her  mother,  son  and
       siblings.  The judge did not believe evidence that her son  contacted
       her in June 2015 to tell her that he had re-established contact  with
       his father and no longer wanted to have contact with her.  The  judge
       also did not believe that the Appellant had  lost  contact  with  her
       mother [19].

   16. In addition, the judge found that if returned to the  Philippines  it
       was "highly likely" that the Alhaidary family  who  have  significant
       means, would continue to offer  financial,  practical  and  emotional
       support to the Appellant as she sought to re-establish herself in her
       home country [20].

   17. The judge then went on  to  consider  the  Appellant's  health.   She
       accepted that she has mental health problems but found that they were
       not so severe as to amount  to  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
       integration.  She functions reasonably well at present.  She would be
       able, financially, to access treatment in the Philippines [21].

   18. The judge accepted that  the  Appellant  "would  miss  the  emotional
       comfort and social interaction that  comes  from  living  in  a  busy
       family home" but did not see why she would  be  unable  to  form  new
       friendships in the Philippines as she had done in the UK [22].

   19. The judge considered that the Appellant's comments in  her  statement
       that if returned she might feel driven to take her own  life  was  an
       exaggeration by her [23].  A letter from a  Consultant,  Dr  Shanahan
       was noted.  He stated that the Appellant is not  currently  suicidal.
       As for her talk of committing suicide if returned he  is  "unable  to
       say whether or not she would act on her intentions" [24].

   20. Finally, in respect of the Rules the judge considered the contents of
       an expert report by Professor Sidel.   She  rejected  his  conclusion
       that the Appellant would be at significant  risk  of  trafficking  if
       returned to the Philippines where it is a significant  problem.   The
       judge found that the professor's conclusion was based on the  premise
       that she would be returning as a lone female  with  no  financial  or
       other support.  The judge again noted her finding that Mrs  Alhaidary
       would continue to support the Appellant financially and  emotionally.
       Also that her son, mother and other family  members  would  be  there
       [26].

   21. The judge concluded, taking "all  of  the  Appellant's  circumstances
       into account... that notwithstanding the  trafficking  that  she  has
       suffered in the past, there are no very significant obstacles to  her
       reintegration into the Philippines."

   22. Judge Kelly then went on to consider Article  8  outside  the  Rules.
       Although she accepted that the Appellant enjoyed a close relationship
       with the Alhaidary family she found  that  such  did  not  amount  to
       family life although it was a significant part of her private life.

   23. In  considering  proportionality  the  judge  found  the  Appellant's
       failure to meet the Rules and her poor  immigration  history  counted
       against her.  She gave little weight to private life established when
       her status was precarious.  She considered the best interests of  the
       Alhaidary's children and concluded  that  their  best  interests  are
       served by their continued residence with their parents.  As  for  her
       own child it was in his best interest to re-establish a  relationship
       with her in the Philippines.

   24. The judge ended by considering the Appellant's mental health  in  the
       context of Articles 3 and 8 and concluded that  the  Appellant  could
       not succeed on either.

   25. She sought permission to appeal which was granted on 25 January 2017.

    Error of law hearing

   26. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Ali's first point was one of
       procedural unfairness.  The judge erred in finding (at [19]) that the
       Appellant had misrepresented her family links and (at [28]) that  she
       continues to maintain contact with her  family  in  the  Philippines.
       The unfairness was that the  oral  evidence  on  this  point  by  the
       Appellant was never directly challenged in cross-examination and  the
       judge did not ask her any questions about this.  If she had  concerns
       about that evidence she ought to have clarified it.

   27. I do not agree with that submission.  The  Respondent's  reasons  for
       decision notes the claim that if removed  she  would  lose  the  only
       family she has.   Such  was  not  accepted  it  being  noted  by  the
       Respondent that she has immediate family living  in  the  Philippines
       including her son, her mother, and siblings.

   28. The oral evidence was that, subsequently, her son had dropped contact
       with her and re-established a relationship with his father.  The fact
       that the Presenting Officer may  not  have  challenged  her  on  that
       matter is irrelevant. It is clear from the record of proceedings that
       there was no concession on that matter.  It  was  for  the  judge  to
       assess the new evidence given at the hearing.  She did not believe it
       and gave cogent reasons for reaching that conclusion.  There  was  no
       procedural unfairness.

   29. Ground 2 was that the judge failed to make a clear finding of fact in
       respect of the Appellant having been trafficked.  Such undermined the
       decision as a whole.  I do not find merit in that submission  either.
       At [26] she found that "notwithstanding the trafficking that she  has
       suffered in the past..."  At [30] "Whilst it is accepted that she may
       have been the victim of past trafficking..." At [32] "... even making
       due allowance for the fact that the Appellant appears to have been  a
       victim of trafficking in the past..."  Whilst the phrasing  may  vary
       slightly it cannot be read that the judge doubted that the  Appellant
       had been trafficked. It is  in  any  event  in  light  of  her  other
       findings, immaterial.

   30. Mr Ali's next point was that  the  judge  had  erred  by  considering
       separately the mental health problems [at (21)] and the emotional and
       social support (at [22]).  It was, in his submission, a  mechanistic,
       artificial approach, compounded by  taking  the  Appellant's  current
       status in a safe and  loving  environment  as  being  a  factor  that
       supported the decision to remove. Being torn  from  that  environment
       needed careful assessment which was not carried out.

   31.  I disagree.   It is a complaint of form  not  substance.  The  judge
       dealt with all relevant issues. She accepted that the Appellant would
       "miss the emotional comfort and social interaction  that  comes  from
       living in a busy family home" but found she had grown  in  confidence
       and that with financial and  emotional  support  from  the  Alhaidary
       family and support from her family in  the  Philippines,  such  would
       help her reintegration including  accessing  medical  treatment.  Her
       approach to the evidence shows no error of  law.  She  gave  adequate
       reasons for her findings.

   32. Mr Ali's remaining points in respect of assessment  under  the  Rules
       relate to the judge's treatment of the medical and  country  experts.
       On the medical evidence she had  not  taken  proper  account  of  the
       assessments and had "put the cart  before  the  horse"  by  making  a
       finding of fact about the  suicide  risk  before  analysing  all  the
       medical evidence.

   33. Again I do not agree. It is  clear  that  the  judge  looked  at  the
       medical evidence in the round and not as an afterthought.  The  judge
       accepted that the Appellant has mental health problems. There was  no
       requirement to refer to every medical item. She referred to the  most
       recent, the two page letter by  Dr  Shanahan  where  he  states  that
       although she talks of suicide he could not say whether she would  act
       on it.  The judge also made findings that she would be able to access
       and afford appropriate medical treatment.  Whilst  the  comment  that
       the judge suspected the Appellant to be exaggerating her suicide risk
       seems to me to be speculative it does not detract from  the  doctor's
       comments. In any event, as the  judge  noted,  a  high  threshold  is
       needed to establish a breach of her human rights. There is nothing in
       any of the comments of the doctor including  those  not  specifically
       referred to by the judge which come  anywhere  near  satisfying  that
       threshold.

   34. Nor do I find merit in criticism of the judge's consideration of  the
       country expert's report.  She made findings which were  open  to  her
       noting that the report  indicating  a  risk  of  re  trafficking  was
       premised on the basis that the Appellant would be returning as a lone
       female with no emotional or financial support, she having found  that
       such would not be so.

   35. Turning to Article 8 outside the Rules, I do not  see  merit  in  the
       submission that the judge failed to consider and to make findings  of
       fact in relation to emotional dependency between  the  Appellant  and
       the Alhaidary family.  Having  found  for  cogent  reasons  that  the
       relationship did not amount to family life she went on to  find  that
       there was a close relationship  and  that  the  bonds  were  a  "very
       significant part of the private life" that she had  established,  and
       that her removal would interfere with that private life.

   36. As for criticism of an incorrect approach to Section 117B in that she
       should have given greater than "little  weight"  to  a  private  life
       established when the Appellant's status was precarious (per  Rhuppiah
       v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803), the judge did not find that, apart  from
       the emotional bonds, these were particular  strong  features  of  the
       private life to make this an exceptional case  such  that  giving  it
       little weight should be overridden.  Such a conclusion  was  open  to
       her.

   37. A further criticism that the judge should have  considered  the  best
       interests of the Alhaidary  children  at  an  earlier  stage  in  her
       analysis under Article 8 has no merit.  The judge clearly  looked  at
       the issue as a primary consideration. She gave detailed  analysis  of
       that matter and reached conclusions which, again, were open to her.

   38. Looked at as a  whole  the  judge's  consideration  shows  a  careful
       analysis of material matters and her conclusions were  ones  she  was
       entitled to reach on the evidence for  the  reasons  she  gave.   The
       submissions amount to little more than a disagreement.  The  decision
       shows no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision dismissing the appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
