
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17172/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 12th May 2015                   |On the 28th May 2015                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                            Mr Muhammad Ali Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Muhammad Ali Khan, who was born on the 21st
    November 1983 and is a national of Pakistan.  He was granted leave to
    enter the UK under Tier 4 of the points-based system as a student on
    the 23rd September 2008.  He arrived in the UK on the 4th October 2008
    and at the time the intention was that he would study at the University
    of Northampton.  The finding made by the First-tier Tribunal in this
    case is that he studied there for a year before transferring to a
    college in Holborn to achieve a degree from the University of Wales.
    In due course the Appellant applied for further leave under Tier 4 but
    the application was refused by the Secretary of State in a refusal
    letter of the 24th March 2014, the reason being given as follows.

         "You have previously been granted leave to study courses at degree
         level or above for four years and six months.  Your current
         application is to study Pearson BTEC level 7 extended diploma in
         strategic management and leadership, an NQF level 7 course, until
         the 30th October 2014.  A grant of leave to study this course would
         result in you having spent more than five years in the UK as a Tier
         4 (General) Student studying courses that consist of degree level
         study or above, therefore you fail to meet the requirements of
         paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules."

 2. That short paragraph states precisely that, that if the course is at
    degree level or above the grant of leave to remain the applicant is
    seeking does not lead to the applicant having spent more than five
    years in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant or as a student studying
    courses at degree level or above.  There then follow a succession of
    exceptions none of which apply in this case.

 3. The Appellant appealed that decision.  That was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Afako at Taylor House on the 23rd December 2014 and his
    appeal was dismissed for reasons given in a decision promulgated on the
    15th January this year.  At that appeal the Appellant did not attend.
    The Judge, having considered the evidence and having heard submissions
    from the Secretary of State's representative, concluded that the
    Appellant had entered the UK as a student, he took the date as the 23rd
    September, which is a slight error but nothing really turned on that,
    that he had changed after a year to study at Holborn College, there had
    been no breaks in his leave to remain and he was at all times issued
    with further leave to study at degree level.

 4. On that basis, having amassed more than five years, the appeal was
    dismissed.  The Appellant in lengthy grounds sought to challenge that
    decision although his complaint carries less weight given that he chose
    not to attend and indeed has not attended before the Upper Tribunal
    today.

 5. The position is not correctly stated in his skeleton argument.  The
    skeleton argument that he provided, which largely deals with matters
    which are not relevant, at page 11 gives a table for his study dates.
    The dates are incorrect and mention studying at level 6 between January
    2011 and September 2012, level 7 between the 7th January 2013 and the
    11th December 2013 and again at level 7 from the 17th February 2014 to
    the 30th October 2014.  The table is inaccurate for two reasons.  The
    first is that it omits any reference to his period of study at
    Northampton, a period we know to have been found to be a year by the
    Judge, and he misstates his time at Holborn College, which we know
    began in fact in May 2009 because that is the date given in the
    transcript which appears at page 25 in that bundle.  If you add up
    those periods of time they come to well over five years, even allowing
    for an overlap of a few months in 2009,  and the Appellant, on whom the
    burden would rest to show that he has not spent that period of
    studying, has manifestly failed to show that the Judge was wrong in
    that regard.

 6. There is a complaint also that the Judge did not have regard to
    appropriate Immigration Directorate Instructions.  It is correct that
    the determination of Judge Afako makes no reference to those.  That,
    however, is not an error because a correct and fuller analysis of the
    dates involved clearly shows that the Appellant cannot meet the
    provisions of 245ZX(ha).  Accordingly there is no material error or no
    error in the decision of Judge Afako and that decision shall stand.

 7. Perhaps we ought to add by way of clarification that the Northampton
    date must have started sometime after his arrival in October 2008, that
    is more or less consistent with the start of the academic year, and his
    change date and the start date on the transcript at Holborn is May
    2009.  The clear implication and indeed the finding made by the Judge
    was that he was studying during that time.  We also give the Appellant
    the benefit of the doubt because if he was not studying he would have
    been in breach of his visa conditions at that stage.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law, the
Appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 27th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes



In dismissing the appeal we make no fee award.

