
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/17890/2015
                                                IA/17891/2015, IA/17892/2015
                                                IA/17893/2015, IA/17894/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Determination Promulgated   |
|On September 30, 2016                |On October 4, 2016          |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE alis


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  alice [a]
                                 simeon [o]
                                    [k o]
                                    [j o]
                                    [c o]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Ms Warren, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the parties as they  were
    in the First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  for  example  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.


 2. The appellants, citizens of Nigeria, applied for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom. The respondent refused their applications on April  28,
    2015 and issued removal directions.


 3. The appellants appealed on May 12, 2015  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parker
    (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on March  3,  2016  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on March 17, 2016 she allowed their appeals as set
    out in her decision.


 5. The respondent appealed those decisions on the  ground  the  Judge  had
    materially misdirected herself in law. The grounds were  based  on  the
    Judge's approach to reasonableness of return and how  she  treated  the
    third appellant's stay in the United Kingdom. Permission to appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen on August 4, 2016.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE


 7. Mr Bates indicated he wished to argue a fresh ground albeit it had  not
    been one raised in the grounds of appeal or in any  additional  letter.
    He said the respondent should have appealed the decision to  allow  the
    first-named appellant's appeal because by not doing so  the  respondent
    had a problem due to  the  fact  the  first-named  appellant  had  been
    allowed under paragraph 276ADE(vi) HC 395 which is a higher  test  than
    either paragraph 276ADE(iv) or article 8 ECHR. He submitted  the  Judge
    had erred and it was a Robinson obvious error  because  the  Judge  had
    erroneously stated that the mother had spent all her life  here  except
    for four years.


 8. Ms Warren opposed the application and stated that  the  respondent  was
    not entitled to add grounds to the appeal at this stage. Case  law  was
    clear in that grounds of appeal had to be submitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and today's hearing was based on the grant of permission.  She
    further submitted the error, if there was one, was not Robinson obvious
    as the Judge clearly was aware of all the facts as they were  contained
    in the decision. The reference to four years was a poorly worded phrase
    and there was no basis to expand the grounds of appeal.

 9. Having heard submissions I refused Mr Bates's application.


10. In EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]
    UKUT 143 (IAC) the Tribunal held that a party that  seeks  to  persuade
    the Upper Tribunal to replace a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with a decision that would make a material difference  to  one  of  the
    parties needs permission to appeal. The Upper Tribunal cannot entertain
    an application purporting to be made under rule 24  for  permission  to
    appeal until the First-tier Tribunal has  been  asked  in  writing  for
    permission to appeal and has either refused it or declined to admit the
    application.


11. In Nixon (permission to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT  00368  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal said that "Whilst making due allowance where an applicant  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  unrepresented  and  in
    respect of the requirement to consider obvious points arising under the
    Refugee Convention or ECHR (R v SSHD ex parte  Robinson  [1997]  3  WLR
    1162), the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal can  be  expected
    to deal brusquely and robustly with any application for permission that
    does not specify clearly and coherently, with appropriate  particulars,
    the error(s) of law said to contaminate the decision  under  challenge.
    Besides placing unnecessary demands upon the judiciary, poorly compiled
    applications risk undermining the important value  of  legal  certainty
    and causing unfairness to the other party."


12. The respondent has a team that deals with permissions to  appeal.  This
    application for permission to appeal was dealt with by the team and was
    typed out and lodged in time. Nothing I heard from Mr  Bates  persuaded
    me that leave should be extended. The decision when taken  as  a  whole
    demonstrated full engagement in the facts. Whilst the decision could be
    viewed as generous that was not the preliminary issue being  raised  by
    Mr Bates. I am satisfied that there is no basis to extend  the  grounds
    available to Mr Bates.


13. In light of my decision Mr Bates indicated that  he  was  now  in  some
    difficulty arguing the grounds he had been given permission on  because
    the Judge had found there were very significant obstacles to the first-
    named appellant's re-integration into Nigeria the tests  applied  under
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) HC 395 and article 8 ECHR  were  less  onerous  as
    they were based on a reasonableness on return test.


14. I indicated to Mr Bates that I agreed with his assessment of  the  case
    and that as the first-named appellant had been granted leave  it  would
    be both unreasonable and  disproportionate  to  require  the  remaining
    family members to leave.


15. I invited comments from Ms Warren but she  agreed  with  what  both  Mr
    Bates and I had said.


16. I therefore found no error in law.


    DECISION


17. There was no material error. I uphold the Judge's original decision  to
    allow  the  first  and  third-named  appellants'  appeals   under   the
    Immigration Rules and the second, fourth  and  fifth-named  appellants'
    appeals under article 8 ECHR.


Signed:                                            Dated: October 4, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I uphold the original fee award.


Signed                                       Dated: October 4, 2016

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
