
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17253/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 27 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr manash dhar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Haque & Hausman
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of birth  is  30
    December 1977.  I shall refer to the respondent as "the  appellant"  as
    he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant made an application on 28 July 2014 for leave  to  remain
    under Article 8 and that application was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision of 23 April 2015.  The  decision  maker  considered
    the application under the Immigration Rules, specifically the five year
    route, and the application was refused because it was not accepted that
    the appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    British citizen.  The appellant appealed against that decision and  his
    appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N M K  Lawrence.
    Following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  8  July  2016  Judge  Lawrence
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  8  August  2016.   The
    appeal was allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

3.        The  judge  made  a  number  of  findings   including   that   the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting.  The Secretary  of  State  was
    granted permission to appeal by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Macdonald in a decision on 2 December  2016.   Permission  was
    granted on the basis that the judge considered  the  application  under
    the 2006 Regulations when the appeal was under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8.

3.   The matter came before me on 11 January 2017.  The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that the judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations when the appeal was against refusal to  grant  leave  as  a
    spouse under the Immigration Rules.

4.   I heard oral submissions from the parties.  Mr  Clarke  indicated  that
    paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal, namely that the judge's  findings
    at paragraph 8 should not be preserved is not to be pursued as  it  was
    conceded no reasons were given for this. Mr Clarke  indicated  that  he
    had had the opportunity to speak with the  appellant's  representative,
    Mr Karim, prior to the hearing and Mr Clarke conceded that on the basis
    of  the  finding  of  the  judge  that  the  marriage  is  genuine  and
    subsisting, the appeal should have been allowed under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Karim conceded that there  was  an  error  of  law  for  the
    reasons identified in the grounds of appeal and this  was  material  to
    the extent that the wrong provision  was  applied  by  the  judge,  but
    confirmed that in his view the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the
    Rules.  The judge materially erred in applying the 2006 Regulations and
    I set aside the decision to allow the appeal on this  basis.  I  remake
    the appeal and allow it under the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

5.   The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision of the FtT  is
    set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

6.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 27.01.17

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
