
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd December 2015                 |On 7th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                             Ms Judith Dapa Nor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Magsino, Stanford Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of the Philippines, appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 12th
    March 2014 to refuse her application for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mozolowski in a decision dated 17th  April  2015.   The  Appellant  now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.



Background

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant came to the  United
    Kingdom on 21st August 2007 as an overseas domestic worker  on  a  visa
    valid from 5th August 2007 to 2nd February 2008.  Her visa was extended
    on three occasions until 29th March 2011 after which  her  applications
    were rejected on four occasions until she was granted leave  to  remain
    as a domestic worker from 28th October 2011 until  28th  October  2012.
    This was extended until 4th March  2014.   On  24th  October  2013  she
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  five  years'
    continuous lawful residence as an overseas  domestic  worker  but  that
    application was refused on 12th March 2014.

 3. At the hearing  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant's representative accepted that the Appellant could  not  meet
    paragraph 159G of the Immigration Rules as she had not established five
    years' continuous  lawful  residence.   However,  he  argued  that  the
    immigration decision would breach the UK's obligations under the  Human
    Rights Convention.

 4. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and from her  partner.
    The evidence was that the Appellant's partner is a British national and
    that the couple have two daughters, one born on 13th November 2008  and
    the other on 12th January 2011.  The judge considered Article 8  within
    the Rules and decided that the Appellant did not meet the provisions of
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life. The  judge
    went on to consider the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  judge
    took into account Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and weighed up various factors and  concluded  that  it
    would not be harsh or unreasonable for the Appellant's family to return
    to the Philippines [30].  She found that the Appellant could return  to
    the Philippines alone, allowing  the  children  to  remain  with  their
    father or that the father could choose to accompany the family  to  the
    Philippines.  The judge decided that the best interests of the children
    would be for them to be with both of their parents but  that  this  was
    not inevitably a trump card. The judge concluded that  the  immigration
    decision appealed against is proportionate and would not cause  the  UK
    to be in breach of the law or of its obligations under the Human Rights
    Convention.

 5. In her Grounds of Appeal the Appellant contends that the judge erred in
    reaching  a  decision  without  adequate  consideration  of  the   best
    interests of the children as required by Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  It is  secondly  contended  that
    the judge undertook an erroneous approach to Article 8  in  failing  to
    give adequate assessment of the Appellant's right to respect for family
    life in accordance with the five stage test set out in the case of R  v
    SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    an  overall  analysis  of  the  relevant  factors  together  with   the
    conclusions to be drawn from such analysis had not  been  furnished  in
    the decision in relation to Section 55 and that an  arguable  error  of
    law had arisen in relation to the consideration of Article  8  in  that
    the criteria in Razgar had not been applied or set out.

Error of Law

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas accepted that there has been an error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in relation  to  the
    Section 55 considerations.  Mr Kotas pointed out that Appendix FM Ex  1
    and paragraph 276ADE had been considered in relation to a consideration
    within the Rules and that involved an assessment as to whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.   He  said  that  he
    would not be submitting that it is reasonable to expect the children to
    leave the UK in light of the Respondent's policy and in  light  of  the
    fact that there is no evidence of criminality or other negative factors
    in this case.

 8. In light of Mr Kotas' concession and considering the determination as a
    whole I accept that the judge did not give  adequate  consideration  to
    the best interests of the children and I set the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal aside.  Mr Kotas confirmed that there was no challenge to
    the findings of fact made by the judge and I preserve those findings.

 9. Mr Magsino submitted an additional bundle for consideration in terms of
    remaking the decision.  He pointed out that  there  was  a  significant
    change of circumstances in this case in that there has been an incident
    of domestic  violence  and  the  Appellant  and  her  partner  are  now
    separated and living in separate accommodation.  The Appellant and  her
    children are living in accommodation provided for by the council and is
    no longer in contact with her partner and it appears  that  the  couple
    are likely to be separated.

Remaking the Decision

10. I remake the decision in accordance with the findings of fact  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the new  evidence  submitted  in  the
    Appellant's bundle in the context of Mr Kotas' concession.

11. I firstly consider the provisions of the Immigration Rules.   In  terms
    of Appendix FM I note that the judge found at paragraph 16 that it  had
    not been demonstrated that the Appellant and her partner could meet the
    requirements of the Rules for a spouse to enter  the  UK.   However,  I
    note that Ex 1(a) of Appendix FM applies where there is a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with children who  would  not  be  expected  to
    leave the UK. Ex 1  of  Appendix  FM  provides  exceptions  to  certain
    eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a parent or partner.

12. The judge accepted that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship
    between the Appellant and her children.  I note that the  children  are
    British nationals and I accept that because they are British  nationals
    born in the UK one of whom is now 7 years old that it is not reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK. I also take account of the fact
    that the children's father is receiving treatment  for  cancer  and  is
    therefore unlikely to be able to travel with them or visit them if they
    were to leave the UK.

13. As she and her partner are no longer together the Appellant cannot meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM for  leave  to  remain  as  a  partner.
    However the Appellant appears to meet the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a parent as her daughters are living with her and their other
    parent is a British Citizen and paragraph Ex 1 applies. On this basis I
    am satisfied that the Appellant has demonstrated  that  she  meets  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  I note the change  of  circumstances  and
    note that Mr Kotas had no submissions  to  make  in  relation  to  that
    change of circumstances and I  consider  that  the  separation  of  the
    Appellant and her former partner do not affect the  core  issue  to  be
    determined in this case.

14. I further consider paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   I  note
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which considers whether  there  would  be  very
    significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's   integration   into   the
    Philippines if she was required to leave  the  UK.   I  note  that  the
    Appellant has much of her family in the Philippines but take account of
    the fact that her daughters are British citizens and her former partner
    is a British citizen too.

15. Although I do not need to in light of my findings  above  I  go  on  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights in accordance with the guidance in R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  I firstly accept that there is a family  life  between
    the Appellant and her daughters.   As  the  Appellant's  daughters  are
    British citizens and cannot be removed from the UK I  accept  that  the
    decision may interfere with the Appellant's family life if she were  to
    be removed from the UK and her children were to remain here.

16. Although that decision may be lawful I consider whether or  not  it  is
    proportionate.  In considering proportionality I take  account  of  the
    change of circumstances between the Appellant and her  former  partner.
    Although there is no contact  between  the  Appellant  and  her  former
    partner right now it may well be that the former partner  seeks  access
    to the children and that is likely to be facilitated by the courts.

17. I take into account the fact that the children  are  British  nationals
    and have resided in the UK since birth. The children are aged 7 and 4.

18. I take into account Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.  I note in accordance with Section  117B(2)  that  the
    Appellant speaks English.  There is no evidence in relation to  whether
    she is financially independent.  However, Section 117B(6) states that:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

19. Section 117D defines a qualifying child as a person who  is  under  the
    age of 18 and who is a British citizen or has lived in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of seven years or more. I take into account Mr Kotas'
    concession, in accordance with Home  Office  policy,  that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the British citizen children to leave the UK.

20. Taking all of these factors  into  account  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has a family life in the UK along with her children and  that
    it is not in the public interest to seek to remove her from the UK.   I
    therefore  conclude  that  the  decision  appealed   against   is   not
    proportionate to the Respondent's legitimate aim.   I  therefore  allow
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 5th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 5th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

