
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17950/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2017                            |On 08 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MISS S L D R
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  is  Miss  R  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Moran  promulgated  on  4  August  2016  whereby   the
    appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 28 April 2015 refusing her application dated 20 February
    2015 for leave to remain on private life grounds.

 3. The appellant is a Brazilian national born on 11 June 1990 and  is  now
    26 years old.  She was born in the UK and states she moved to  Portugal
    in 1996 but then returned to the United  Kingdom  with  her  mother  in
    2003.  Her understanding for the  move  to  Portugal  was  because  her
    parents did not qualify for work in the UK and went to Portugal to find
    work.  In total she has lived in the United Kingdom for 19 years.

 4. The appellant made an application for leave to remain on  private  life
    grounds only.

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds for an application for permission were
    as follows:

      1) The judge made a material misdirection of law.  The  Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal found the appellant could not satisfy paragraph
         276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules as  there  would  not  be  very
         significant  obstacles  to  her  relocation   to   Brazil.   Having
         considered the appellant's relationship with  her  British  partner
         and their child the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found it would
         be disproportionate to expect the appellant  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds outside  the
         Immigration Rules.  It is the Secretary of State's contention  that
         the First-tier Tribunal failed to  identify  any  circumstances  so
         compelling as to justify a grant of leave outside  the  Rule.   The
         judge erred in approach to the public interest consideration  under
         Section 117B Immigration  Act  2014  as  little  weight  should  be
         attached to the private life and family  life  established  when  a
         person's immigration status was unlawful; the appellant had been an
         overstayer since 2003.

      2) The judge failed to give adequate reasons for findings on  material
         matters.  It  was  submitted  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had not taken into account  that  the  appellant  and  her
         partner had not discussed what they would do if she was removed  to
         Brazil and failed to consider whether it would be  disproportionate
         to expect  her  to  go  to  Brazil  and  make  an  entry  clearance
         application where 100% of  settlement  applications  are  processed
         within 30 days.

         Having found at paragraph [27] that it was clearly  vital  for  the
         child to remain with the appellant the child was so young she would
         not have any awareness of which  country  she  was  in,  the  judge
         failed to give consideration whether it would be reasonable  to  go
         to Brazil with the child accompanied by the partner or supported by
         him for a  short  period  required  to  make  the  entry  clearance
         application.

 6. At the hearing the appellant attended  in  person.   Mr  Armstrong,  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, submitted that the judge  had  failed
    to give adequate reasons for his decision and he  referred  me  to  the
    relevant paragraphs  of  MA  Pakistan  v  SSSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    including paragraph 114.  All the  circumstances  in  relation  to  the
    reasonableness of requiring the appellant to return to Brazil should be
    taken into account.  He accepted that the prospective  success  of  any
    future application under the Immigration Rules  to  return  to  the  UK
    could not be predicted.  In effect it was not  possible  to  guess  the
    success of any particular future application.  In  essence  he  submits
    that the judge failed to consider the public  interest  grounds  having
    considered there were no very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
    relocation to Brazil.

 Conclusions

 7. As can be seen from paragraph [26] and paragraph [27] of the First-tier
    Tribunal decision there is no explanation by the judge as  to  why  she
    proceeded to consider the matter under Article 8 having considered  the
    appeal with reference to the Immigration Rules.

 8. The judge set out the following:

         "25.      In  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(v)  as  a  matter  of
             statutory construction I find that the  period  of  continuous
             residence cannot include the total of two separate periods  of
             continuous residence separated by a period of  several  years.
             Therefore SR does not meet subsection (v) because  neither  of
             the continuous periods of residence were for at least half  of
             her life.

         26.      In respect of 276ADE(vi) the key issue is whether  or  not
             there would be very significant obstacles to SR's  integration
             into Brazil if she was to be removed there.   The  wording  of
             this test indicates that it is a  high  threshold  for  SR  to
             meet.  There undoubtedly would be serious challenges to SR  in
             relocating to a country that she has never  even  visited  and
             where her first language of English is not widely  spoken.   I
             find however that she falls narrowly short of this strict test
             because  she  does  speak  some  Portuguese  and  despite  her
             strained relationship with her father  could  be  expected  to
             receive some assistance from him if she was removed to Brazil.
               Accordingly,  whilst  she  faces  significant  obstacles  in
             relocating to Brazil I cannot go as far as to find them to  be
             very significant obstacles.

         27.      I go on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  In doing
             so I consider the Article 8 rights of Ca and  Mr  C  as  well.
             They are both British citizens.  Ca is  8  days  old.   It  is
             clearly vital that the child remains with SR.  The child is so
             young that he will not have any awareness of which country  he
             is in.  His British citizenship still has a value however that
             is  to  be  respected  notwithstanding  his  current  lack  of
             awareness of it.  In addition Mr C is a British citizen who  I
             am satisfied wishes to continue as a family unit with  SR  and
             their child.  If SR is removed therefore it would require  two
             British citizens to move to Brazil if their family life is  to
             continue in any meaningful way.

         28.      It is in the best interests of the child to be brought  up
             by both parents when both are willing and able  to  do  so  as
             they are here.  This will be achieved if the child remains  in
             the UK.  It is less clear that this will be  achieved  if  the
             child goes to Brazil with SR.  It was apparent that SR and  Mr
             C had not discussed what they would do as a couple if she  was
             removed to Brazil.  I cannot be sure whether Ca  would  remain
             in the UK with Mr C, whether he would go with  SR  or  whether
             they would all go together.

         29.      Applying section 117B(6) I find that Ca  is  a  qualifying
             child.  I then consider whether it would not be reasonable  to
             expect him to leave the UK.  This is  not  the  same  test  as
             whether there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  SR
             integrating in Brazil.  I remind myself of the  principles  in
             MA (Pakistan), ante.  In considering what is reasonable I must
             take the 'wider' approach  so  that  in  considering  what  is
             reasonable  the  test  is  not  solely  child-focussed.    The
             circumstances and behaviour of SR in particular  can  properly
             have a bearing on whether it is reasonable for Ca to leave the
             UK.  His best interests are a primary  consideration  but  are
             not in themselves necessarily determinative.   The  respondent
             therefore has various factors in her favour on  the  issue  of
             reasonableness including:

             -   The child is so young that he can be expected to adapt  to
                  wherever he goes.

             -   His mother speaks  some  Portuguese  and  therefore  could
                  assist him in learning the language in Brazil.

             -   He may be able to establish a relationship in Brazil  with
                  his maternal grandfather.

             -   SR is an overstayer in the UK and  has  been  for  several
                  years, this diminishes the weight to be  attached  to  her
                  family life established in the UK  -  Rajendran  (s117B  -
                  family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC).

             -   The private  life  that  she  has  carries  little  weight
                  because of her precarious immigration status - s117B.

         30.      In my judgment however these considerations are outweighed
             by the countervailing arguments for SR.  In particular;

             -   Mr C and Ca are British citizens and will be  required  to
                  leave their country of citizenship.

             -   Mr C would lose the employment that currently will help to
                  provide for  his  family.   His  employment  prospects  in
                  Brazil would be poor due to the language barrier.

             -   Whilst SR is an overstayer she began that period  in  2003
                  when she was a child brought here by her parents.  She has
                  also only 'failed' to return to a  country  that  she  has
                  never in fact been to.  The public interest in her removal
                  therefore is not as strong as it is in many cases where  a
                  parent overstays in a country and has a child  in  the  UK
                  during the period in which they have overstayed.

         31.      Applying the Razgar test therefore I conclude that SR  has
             established that Article 8 is engaged and that respondent  has
             not shown that the decision is necessary and proportionate  in
             a democratic society."

 9. Since the application the appellant had  given  birth  to  a  child  of
    British citizenship.  Although the decision letter had  considered  the
    fact that the appellant was in a relationship with a  British  citizen,
    and, it was argued in the decision letter that the relationship was not
    genuine and subsisting, that  conclusion  would  appear  to  have  been
    undermined by the fact that the appellant has subsequently  produced  a
    child. The judge does weigh  relevant  factors  and  adopts  the  wider
    approach referred to in  MA  Pakistan  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,
    identifying that if SR were removed then it would require  two  British
    citizens to move to Brazil if their family life was to continue in  any
    meaningful way, but there was a failure to  spell  out  the  compelling
    circumstances for further consideration in relation to Article 8,  when
    the judge had found no significant obstacles to  relocation  to  Brazil
    under the Rules.  It is the  Rules  which  are  said  to  set  out  the
    position of the Secretary of State and strike the balance  between  the
    Secretary of State's position  and  the  rights  of  the  Appellant  in
    relation to family or private life. Having found  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her return to Brazil under the Immigration Rules, in  line
    with SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317 it was important for the judge
    to explain why there is a requirement for the  assessment  outside  the
    Rules and see Nagre [2013] EWHC 720.  There  was  a  lack  of  adequate
    reasoning in this respect and that was an error of law.

10. I preserve, however, the finding that the British citizen child of  the
    appellant is so young that it is vital that she remain with her mother.
    I also preserve the finding that the appellant was brought to the UK as
    a child when she had no control over her immigration status.   She  has
    received much of her  education  in  the  United  Kingdom  which  would
    indicate significant levels of integration.

11. On a re-making further evidence was supplied by the appellant  who  has
    now separated from her partner owing to domestic  violence.   Documents
    were produced to me showing  that  there  is  a  non-molestation  order
    issued on 1 December 2016 against the appellant's former partner  by  a
    County Court District Judge.  That  non-molestation  order  was  issued
    under Section 42 of  the  SLA  in  1996.  Not  only  is  there  a  non-
    molestation order but it would also appear  that  the  appellant's  ex-
    partner has obtained a prohibitive steps order  forbidding  the  mother
    from removing the child from the  jurisdiction  of  England  and  Wales
    without further order of the court.

12. These constitute compelling circumstances for consideration outside the
    Immigration Rules. Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74  opines  that  the
    critical factor is whether all the relevant factors  or  evidence  have
    been taken into account.  Adopting the five stage approach in Razgar  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, the appellant has family life and private life  in
    the UK and her removal would interfere with her family life  such  that
    her Article 8 rights are engaged.  The decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was on the face of it in accordance with the law and required for
    immigration control in order to protect  the  rights  and  freedoms  of
    others.

13. SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317 holds that the relevant Immigration
    Rules  should  be  the   starting   point   and   factored   into   any
    proportionality assessment.   The  Immigration  Rules  which  might  be
    applicable to the circumstances of  the  appellant  and  those  are  R-
    LTRPT1.1 under Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE.   Both  the  applicant
    and the child are in the  UK.   Although  she  has  not  made  a  valid
    application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  parent,  she  did  make  an
    application for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE and  further  to
    GEN1.9 a requirement to make a valid application does not apply when an
    Article 8 claim is raised.  There were no challenges by  the  Secretary
    of State on suitability grounds.  The child is now under the age of 18,
    is a British citizen and living in the UK and the applicant clearly now
    has sole responsibility for the child and is taking an active  role  in
    the child's upbringing. Further to EX.1 the applicant fulfils  (a)  and
    further to (a)(ii) it would not in the circumstances be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.   Under Paragraph 276ADE  (vi)  there
    would appear to be very significant obstacles to the appellant's return
    to Brazil in the light of the court proceedings.

14. The child, however, was not in existence at the date of the application
    and although the remainder of the Immigration Rules might be  fulfilled
    now they could  not  be  fulfilled  at  the  date  of  application  and
    therefore the appellant cannot fulfil the Immigration  Rules  under  R-
    LTPT or Paragraph 276ADE.

15. The child is a  British  citizen  and   ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4
    highlighted  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  is  a  primary
    consideration although not a 'trump' card and that British  citizenship
    is a significant factor although  not  necessarily  determinative.  The
    parents would not appear to be married and parental responsibility lies
    at present with the mother but  contact  with  the  child's  father  is
    subject to court proceedings.   There  is  no  indication  of  parental
    responsibility on behalf of the father (they  are  unmarried),  and  in
    view of the proceedings that have been issued it is unlikely this child
    will be allowed to leave the jurisdiction;  the  father  is  a  British
    citizen.  Although this is a very young child,  the  child's  interests
    are to remain with the mother and as a British citizen the  child  also
    has the right to remain in the UK.  I  acknowledge  that  this  is  one
    factor but I drew the attention of Mr Armstrong  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's current guidance  in  relation  to  family  migration  entitled
    Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration  Appendix   FM
    Section 1.0(b) Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and  Private  Life:
    10 Year Routes confirm at 11.2.3 that:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano."

16. Mr Armstrong submitted that  this  had  to  be  read  in  light  of  MA
    (Pakistan), and  the  wider  circumstances.   Nonetheless  the  current
    circumstances before me are that the appellant has a very  young  child
    (and I would not expect a  child  of  8  days  old  to  be  removed  by
    aeroplane on a long flight to Brazil) and she has  now  separated  from
    her partner and is clearly the primary carer  of  a  child  whose  best
    interests will be to remain with her mother and in the United  Kingdom.
    There is a non-molestation against  the  former  partner  and  secondly
    there is a prohibited steps order against the  appellant  removing  the
    child from the jurisdiction.

17. I have taken into account the wider circumstances including Section 117
    of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the  public
    interest considerations applicable in all cases


    (1)    The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
    (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (4)    Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.
    (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.
    (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

18. The appellant speaks English although there is no evidence that she  is
    independent financially.  The conduct  of  the  parent  is  a  relevant
    consideration,  under  EV  Philippines,  and  the   appellant   is   an
    overstayer, but, as identified by the First-tier Tribunal she has  only
    failed to return to a country she has never been to and was brought  to
    the UK as a child where she has been educated  both  at  secondary  and
    university level.  She has lived in total in the United Kingdom for  19
    years, albeit not continuously, and is only 26 years old.  I understand
    her mother remains in the UK and the appellant is  estranged  from  her
    father in Brazil. There was no issue taken with the credibility of  the
    appellant in this regard. I  take  this  into  account  when  according
    weight to her private and family life in relation to Section 117B. As I
    have indicated above, but for the fact that the child did not exist  at
    the date of application (there was no objection  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that this fact should be considered) I find the  appellant  would
    have succeeded under both Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE. Ultimately,
    the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child (British citizen) and not only is it  unreasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom  but  at  present  it  is
    unlikely that the child can leave the jurisdiction.

19. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  I preserve the sections of the First-
    tier Tribunal judgment as indicated. I set aside the decision  pursuant
    to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    (TCE 2007) and remake the decision under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of  the
    TCE 2007

Notice of Decision

20. The appeal of Miss R is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  is
because the matter involves a minor.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 7th February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the developing nature and complexity of the case.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 7th February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


