
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17058/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2013                           |On 28 November 2013          |
|Prepared 25 November 2013                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                mohamed jamal

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  10  April  1974,
    appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Eldridge who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  30  August
    2013, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse him indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of long residence here.

2.   It was the appellant's claim that he entered Britain with the  help  of
    an agent on 14 January 1997 using a Bangladeshi passport which had been
    organised by the agent and which contained a visa  for   Britain.    He
    asserted that he had lived and worked in Britain since that date.

3.   In refusing the application the Secretary of State  stated  that  there
    was no record of the appellant  having entered Britain legally  and  it
    was concluded that he had therefore entered illegally and had  remained
    here without leave to remain and as such was liable  for  removal.   It
    was stated that the evidence submitted  by  the  appellant  -  personal
    references from friends  and an NHS card dated November 2001   -  could
    not be accepted as it was not independent and that the NHS card did not
    show fourteen years' continuous residence.

4.   The grounds of appeal lodged by the  appellant  asserted  that  he  had
    lived in Britain for over fifteen years and also that when he had  left
    Bangladesh he had been an active member  of  the  Jamat-e-Islami  party
    which is now targeted  by the present government,  and  that  therefore
    his life would be at risk if he had to return.

5.   The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Eldridge on 16  August  2013.
    He noted that the grounds of appeal made reference to what he  referred
    to as a ground engaging the Refugee Convention but stated that  at  the
    appeal no reference was made to an asylum claim, that he had never been
    addressed on the Refugee Convention and that it had not been  mentioned
    in the skeleton argument put forward on behalf of the appellant.

6.   The judge noted the appellant's evidence that he had worked in  Britain
    at a number of places and that he had been a member  of  Jamat-e-Islami
    between 1995 and 1997 when the authorities had targeted active  members
    and his father had decided that he should go to Britain as he would  be
    safe here.  The judge heard evidence from five witnesses who  submitted
    that they had known the appellant for some time.

7.   Those witnesses included a Luftur Rahman who said  that  he  had  known
    the appellant for almost fifteen years and Luftur  Rahman's  wife,  Mrs
    Nandaben Rahman, who said that she known  the  appellant  for  fourteen
    years.

8.   Having been addressed by both representatives the  judge  set  out  his
    findings of fact and  conclusions  in  paragraphs  53  onwards  of  the
    determination. The judge dealt first with  the  issue  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and the Article 3 rights of the appellant.   He  noted  that
    the appellant had not claimed asylum in his notice of appeal  and  said
    that none of the issues raised had arisen since he had been in  Britain
    and therefore he found that the Refugee Convention was not  engaged  in
    the appeal although he went on to state that he was aware that  in  the
    notice of appeal the appellant had stated that he had  been  an  active
    member of Jamat-e-Islami and his life would be at  risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.

9.   He then considered the  terms  of  the  appellant's  application  which
    stated that his father had told him to come  to  Britain  to  save  his
    life.  He placed weight on the fact that the appellant had not  made  a
    prompt application for asylum when he had arrived in Britain  and  that
    none of his witnesses had said that he had any fears of persecution  on
    return to Bangladesh.  He noted that the appellant's parents were still
    living in Bangladesh and stated that if he had been politically  active
    he would have some documentary evidence of  his membership of the party
    or similar, or at least the ability to obtain  some confirmation of the
    party as to his  previous  involvement.   He  emphasised  that  he  was
    applying a low standard of proof and found that the appellant  had  not
    begin to demonstrate even to that low standard that there was any  real
    risk of ill-treatment upon return to Bangladesh for the reasons he  had
    claimed.

10.  The judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  rights  under
    paragraph 276B of HC 395 - his claim  that  he  had  lived  in  Britain
    illegally for fourteen years continuously.

11.  He referred to the medical card  issued  in  November  2001  and  to  a
    Tenancy agreement, noting that the tenancy agreement had been  dated  1
    February 1998 but that the appellant in his oral evidence had said that
    he had not arrived in Britain until 14  February  1998.  He  contrasted
    this with the appellant's statement in which he had said he had entered
    Britain on 14 January 1998.

12.  When it had been put to the appellant that he had changed  his  account
    the appellant had said that he had signed the agreement on  1  February
    and that he had got into a muddle when he said that he had  arrived  on
    14 February.

13.  The judge's comment in paragraph 65 was:

         "65.  I was of the opinion that the appellant  was  not  telling  a
             consistent  story  about  when  he  arrived  because  he   had
             forgotten the account that he was to give. I  am  strengthened
             in this conclusion by  his  comments  in  the  foot  [sic]  is
             witness statement concerning his NHS card.  The document  (see
             page 61) is dated 2 November 2001.  In his statement  he  said
             that he had registered with his GP in that year but he went on
             to say 'I did not register with my GP until two years after my
             arrival'.  Even if I accepted the NHS card was  genuine,  that
             would have placed his arrival in late 1999 or early 1998."

14.  The judge then went on to comment on the evidence  of  the  appellant's
    friends. He stated:

         "66.     I have no doubt that  the  appellant's  friends  who  gave
             evidence and wished to do their best by  him.   That  is  only
             natural. I do find, however, that there are very  considerable
             discrepancies that cannot easily be explained in  the  account
             that he gives and that which many of them give. He  says,  for
             instance, that he has known  Mr  Choudhury  for  nine  or  ten
             years, whereas Mr Choudhury believes it was  during  his  GCSE
             year, which he says was  1998.  These  two  statements  cannot
             easily be reconciled."

15.  Having commented that the appellant had  told  him  that  he  had  been
    unable to hold down any job for more than a few weeks the judge  stated
    that that was in sharp contrast with evidence of the witness, Mr  Uddin
    who said he had worked with the appellant for about a year in  2004  in
    Cambridge and then for about two years between 2005 and 2007  in  Bath,
    and for a period of about eight months with him  in  Bristol  in  2009.
    The judge  pointed out that the account given by Mr Uddin differed from
    that of the appellant in that:-

         "The appellant gave the evidence  he  was  living  and  working  in
         Cambridge between 1999 and 2006, whereas Mr Uddin says that he  was
         in Bath in 2005 and 2006 (as well as 2007)."

16.  The judge stated that there were discrepancies in  the  accounts  given
    by the appellant and some of the witnesses about when they  had  become
    aware of his illegal status. He concluded in paragraph 71 that:-

         "71.  I have no doubt that the appellant  has lived for a number of
             years in this country. The medical card  produced  is  in  his
             name. Even if I accept that  document,  it  does  not  support
             residence for as long as twelve years.  I do not find that the
             oral evidence given to me by the appellant and  his  witnesses
             is consistent or reliable and I am not satisfied that  he  has
             shown residence in this country since early 1998  or,  on  any
             basis, for fourteen years.  He cannot succeed under  paragraph
             276B."

17.  The judge then went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    private life under the Immigration Rules  finding  that  the  appellant
    could not qualify under the Rules, not only because he had not been  in
    Britain for twenty years but, when considering the appellant's  private
    life under Article 8 of the ECHR  separately  the  appellant's  removal
    would not be disproportionate.

18.  In reaching that conclusion the judge set out in paragraphs 76  onwards
    the relevant five stage test  in  Lord  Bingham's  judgment  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL in the House of Lords finding firstly, that  the  appellant
    had  established  private  life,  secondly,  that  there  would  be  an
    interference with that private life so that the Article was potentially
    engaged, thirdly that the decision was lawful, fourthly,  that  it  was
    justified and, having applied the terms of the judgment in Huang [2007]
    UKHL 11 that he considered that the removal of the appellant  would  be
    proportionate. In this regard he wrote:-

         "83. This test [the test set out in Huang]  remains  apposite.   In
             this case it must be noted that the appellant  has  no  family
             life here. Indeed, his family - in the form of his  parents  -
             is in Bangladesh.  He lived in that country for the first two-
             thirds of  his  life  or  longer.   Living  in  a  Bangladeshi
             community here he has no culture issues to face on return.   I
             have found he has no political problems or  other  reasons  to
             fear  ill-treatment  upon  return.  His  stay  here  has  been
             characterised by illegal work and little contribution  to  the
             wider community.  He has been  content  to  draw  upon  public
             services - such as the NHS - without  making   a  contribution
             through direct taxation or national insurance.  He has been an
              economic migrant.


         84.   I accept he has friends her and some of them  will  be  close
             friends.  He may not find it  easy  to  readjust  to  life  in
             Bangladesh.  It may be harder for him.   I  do  not  find  the
             limited private interests he  has  begin  [sic],  however,  to
             outweigh the interests of  the   State  in  his  removal.  The
             decision is entirely proportionate."

19.  The judge therefore dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  immigration  and
    human rights grounds.

20.  The grounds of appeal refer to the apparent contradiction  between  the
    comment by the judge that the Refugee Convention was  not  engaged  and
    his reference to what was stated in the grounds  of  appeal  where  the
    appellant had said that he would be at risk on return to Bangladesh.

21.  The grounds then went on to state that  the  judge's  comments  on  the
    tenancy agreement were flawed before making references to what  appears
    to be the case law relating to how a Tribunal should assess credibility
    in asylum claims.  The grounds then asserted that "on the lower balance
    of probability" there were  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  the
    appellant  would be ill-treated on return to Bangladesh.  It  was  then
    asserted that it would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    rights of the appellant under Article 8 for him to be  removed.

22.  In his submissions Mr Ahmed referred to the issue  of  the  appellant's
    claim to asylum. He accepted that the issue  of  asylum  had  not  been
    raised in the skeleton argument but nevertheless stressed that  it  had
    been raised before the judge.  He also went on to claim that the rights
    of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR had  not  been   correctly
    considered by the judge referring to a "Nigerian case" which he did not
    submit but said in any event related to criminal offences.  It appeared
    that he was asserting that in considering the Article 8 rights  of  the
    appellant the judge had been  applying  a  proportionality  test  which
    would have been more suitable in a deportation appeal.

23.  With regard to the length of time  which  the  appellant  had  been  in
    Britain he referred to the appellant's NHS card before stating that the
    judge had not stated whether the tenancy document was not genuine.   He
    emphasised that the appellant was  suffering  from  depression  and  he
    stated that that was the cause of his mistakes regarding  when  he  had
    arrived and the date of the document.  He  asserted  that  the  tenancy
    agreement was genuine. He further argued that the judge should not have
     referred to the fact that the application had been  submitted  only  a
    few days before the Rules changed as it was , in any event  ,  made  in
    time.

24.  I told Miss Everett that for the reasons  which I have set out below  I
    did not wish her to address me on the  issues  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR nor the Refugee Convention but  I
    was concerned about the issues relating to the  tenancy  agreement  and
    indeed the evidence of Mrs Nandaben Rahman who had said  that  she  had
    known the appellant for at least fourteen years and she had  seen   him
    with her husband whom she had married in  1995.   Miss  Everett  stated
    that while she accepted that the findings of the judge could have  been
    more specific, he had given sufficient findings to show that he did not
    accept that the tenancy agreement showed that the appellant had been in
    Britain in February 1998 because of  the  discrepancies  regarding  the
    appellant's claim as to when he arrived here.

25.  Looking at the determination as a  whole,  she  argued,  it  was  clear
    that the  judge had not found the appellant to be credible.   Moreover,
    with regard  to  the  witnesses,  it  was  clear  that  the  judge  had
    considered their evidence but found that that was  not  persuasive  and
    that he could not accept their assertions of when they  had  first  met
    the appellant.

26.  In reply, Mr Ahmed referred  to  the  evidence  of  Mr  Choudhury,  the
    witness who had said that he had met the appellant in 1998 when he  was
    sitting his GCSEs and to the tenancy agreement, and repeated  that  the
    appellant had been  confused in his evidence because he was unwell.

27.  I find that there are no material errors of law in  the  determination.



28.  I first consider  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  possible  claim  to
    asylum.  The reality is that in his letter  of  application  he  merely
    stated that he had been involved with Jamat-e-Islami and could not stay
    in Bangladesh.  He has never at  any  time  amplified  that  assertion.
    There is nothing in his statement apart from a  brief  assertion   that
    when he left Bangladesh he had been an active member of  Jamat-e-Islami
    in Sylhet and that the party was targeted by the current  ruling  Awami
    League who are arresting and killing party members in Bangladesh.   The
    appellant had an opportunity to  give  evidence  stating  what  he  had
    actually done in Jamat-e-Islami, whether or not he had  been   targeted
    and why he would now be  in  danger.  His  representatives  put  in  no
    background documentation to indicate that the  appellant  might  be  in
    danger because he had been  a supporter of Jamat-e-Islami over  fifteen
    years ago and there was no evidence  of  any  attempts  being  made  to
    threaten the appellant or harm him should he return.

29.  While the judge did state in paragraph 53 that  he  found  the  Refugee
    Convention was not engaged, he did properly go on to consider  the  way
    in which the appellant had put his claim that he might not be  safe  on
    return to Bangladesh.  He placed weight on the fact that  none  of  the
    appellant's supporting witnesses said that he had ever mentioned  being
    fearful of returning, moreover that he  had  never  made  a  claim  for
    asylum, and concluded that the appellant did not  have  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution on return.

30.  In reaching that conclusion he applied the correct  lower  standard  of
    proof and his conclusions cannot be faulted.  There is simply no  merit
    in the claim that there is any material error of  law  in  the  way  in
    which the judge approached the issue of the  appellant's  rights  under
    the Refugee Convention.

31.  With regard the appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, the reality is that the judge did  approach
    those rights in a properly structured way, finding that Article  8  was
    engaged and then dealing properly with the  issue  of  proportionality.
    His conclusions were entirely  open  to  him.   Nothing  was  been  put
    forward to me to show that the judge  had  missed  any  aspect  of  the
    appellant's  private  life  which  would  mean   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate for him to be removed.  Mr Ahmed's reference to issues
    that  might  be  relevant  in  a  deportation  appeal  was   completely
    irrelevant.  The judge did not  treat  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights as if this was a deportation case.

32.  Turning to the central issue in this appeal which  is  whether  or  not
    the judge was correct to find that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(b) of the Rules, it is the  case,  as
    Miss Everett accepted, that the judge could have  been  more  specific.
    However, he did consider both the documentary evidence and the evidence
    of the appellant's  supporting  witnesses  in  some  detail.   He  gave
    reasons as to why he did not accept  that  the  tenancy  agreement  was
    genuine.  Not only because he found that the date of the agreement  did
    not coincide with the appellant's evidence as to when he  arrived,  but
    he was entitled to place weight, as  he  did,  on  the  fact  that  the
    landlord who issued the agreement did not appear  at  the  hearing  and
    that there were various spelling mistakes  in  the   agreement.  It  is
    indeed telling that the only  tenancy  agreement  which  the  appellant
    produced was  an  agreement  which  appeared  to  relate  to  a  period
    immediately after the appellant claimed to have arrived in Britain  and
    that he had no further tenancy agreements for  the  rest  of  his  stay
    here.

33.  I also note that Mr Ahmed appeared to state that the  judge  was  wrong
    to observe that the appellant's application was made only  a  few  days
    before the Rules changed after which the appellant would  have  had  to
    have shown that he had lived in Britain for twenty years.

34.  It was Mr Ahmed's point that the fact that the application was made  in
    time was all  that  was  relevant.   I  consider  that  the  judge  was
    justified in pointing to the fact that the application was made only  a
    few days before the qualifying period changed and that that should mean
    that particular scrutiny should be  given  to  evidence  that  the  the
    appellant had arrived in Britain before  July  1998  rather  than,  for
    example, in 1999.

35.  In any event, I consider that the judge  gave  sufficient  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant was not entitled  to  rely  on  the  Tenancy
    agreement.

36.  Similarly, when considering the evidence of the  witnesses,  the  judge
    gave sufficient and clear reasons for finding that their evidence could
    not be relied on.  When he wrote in paragraph 66 that he accepted  that
    the appellant's friends wished to do their best for him,  that  was,  I
    consider, fair comment but it is equally relevant that  the  judge  was
    entitled to state that there were very considerable discrepancies  that
    could not easily be explained between the account  that  the  appellant
    gave and the evidence of the other witnesses.

37.  The judge  referred in  particular  to  the  discrepancies  between  Mr
    Choudhury's claim that he had met the appellant during his  GCSE  year,
    1998, when the appellant had said that he had met him only nine or  ten
    years ago.  Moreover, the evidence of Mr Uddin was in contrast to  that
    of the appellant with regard to as to where the appellant was living at
    any particular time.  While it is correct that the judge did not  refer
    to the evidence of Mrs Nandaben Rahman that she had known the appellant
    for fourteen years, the reality is that  she  did  not  state  anything
    specific about when she had met the appellant and it is  certainly  not
    the case that she was saying that she had known the appellant in 1995 -
    the year she had married her husband.

38.  I consider that the judge  was  correct  to  weigh  up  their  evidence
    together with the discrepancies which arose and was in  effect  looking
    at all the evidence  in  the  round.  His  conclusions  were,  I  find,
    entirely open to him.

39.  I therefore find  that  the  determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge
    dismissing this appeal on asylum, human rights and immigration  grounds
    shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


