
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17671/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th April 2016                             |On 18th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                              mrs samia mahmud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene, Counsel instructed by Waterfields
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh  whose  application  for
    variation of leave to remain here was refused by the Secretary of State
    and a subsequent  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 23rd September 2015.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    allowed the appeal in open court only to then dismiss  it  without  any
    reference  to  why  he  changed  his  mind  in  his  written  decision.
    Furthermore, the decision wrongly stated that  the  Appellant  required
    the English language requirement and that was the whole  basis  of  her
    applying for an extension and not indefinite leave to remain.

 3. Permission  to  appeal  was  duly  granted.   The  Secretary  of  State
    responded under Rule 24 stating inter alia that it was unfortunate  the
    judge stated  that  he  was  allowing  the  appeal  which  was  not  in
    accordance with the Procedure Rules but in any event  the  requirements
    of the Rules must be met.

 4. Before me Mr Rene relied on his grounds and various  documentation  was
    produced which persuaded Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the  Home  office  to
    accept that in fact the provisions of paragraph 284 of  the  Rules  had
    been met and, if there was an  error  of  law,  the  appeal  should  be
    upheld.

Conclusions

 5. There is guidance in Macdonald's Immigration  Law  and  Practice  Ninth
    edition Volume 1 at paragraph 20.129 on page 1884 that in  a  situation
    such as happened in this case (namely when a judge allows an appeal  in
    open court but later changes his mind and dismisses it) he  is  obliged
    to allow further evidence or submissions in  such  circumstances.   The
    judge did neither.  Mr Rene had appeared at the First-tier hearing  and
    was able to confirm that the judge had indeed  said  he  was  going  to
    allow the appeal.

 6. In my view and following the jurisprudence mentioned in  Macdonald  the
    judge erred in law in not giving the Appellant further time to consider
    his position given what he had said in open court namely  that  he  was
    going to allow the appeal. I might add that it is  concerning  to  note
    that there is no Record of proceedings attached to the file.

 7. Because I consider the judge fell into making a material error of law I
    set the decision aside and in light of the proper concession  from  the
    Home Office this appeal must be allowed.   There  is  no  need  for  an
    anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed                                      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

