
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/17815/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2014                         |On 5 August 2014          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                           Mr SUFYAN RIAZ BHINDER
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel
      (instructed by Khans Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  Designated
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on 18  June  2014  against  the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brennalls  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a determination  promulgated
           on 6 May 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 8 August  1983,
           who had sought leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human
           rights grounds, which was refused by the Secretary of  State  on
           30  April  2014.   The  Appellant  had  not  made   an   asylum,
           humanitarian protection or human rights (Article 3  ECHR)  claim
           but asserted that his life would be at risk  in  Pakistan.   His
           father now deceased had  been  supporting  his  studies  in  the
           United Kingdom but his  uncles  in  Pakistan  had  made  threats
           against the Appellant.  The Appellant  wished  to  continue  his
           studies in the United Kingdom.  The judge found that  Article  8
           ECHR was not engaged on the facts.


      3.    Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by
           Designated First-tier Tribunal Zucker because he considered that
           it was arguable that the judge had (a) misunderstood  the  basis
           of the appeal and (b) had not applied Edgehill [2014]  EWCA  Civ
           402, the relevant application having been made prior to  9  July
           2014.  The Respondent indicated by a rule  24  notice  that  the
           appeal was opposed.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mr Balroop for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal on which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   The
           application had been made on 14 April 2012.  The  Appellant  was
           not seeking settlement but merely wished to continue his studies
           in the United Kingdom.  He sought discretionary leave  for  that
           purpose.  There   were   exceptional   circumstances.    Counsel
           confirmed that the Appellant had not made any form of protection
           claim to the Secretary of State.


      5.    The tribunal did not need to call on Mrs Kenny.




      No material error of law finding


      6.    The tribunal indicated that it found  that  the  judge  had  not
           fallen into material error of law.  The  experienced  judge  had
           heard and seen the Appellant, and reached conclusions which were
           open to him.   The tribunal reserved its determination which now
           follows.


      7.    It is the case that the judge had not  applied  Edgehill  [2014]
           EWCA Civ 402, but no such submission had been made to him at the
           hearing.  Edgehill was handed down on 2 April 2014. It was up to
           the Appellant to ensure that it  was  cited,  if  the  Appellant
           contended that it conferred any advantage on him.  That said, of
           course Edgehill states or clarifies the law and it  should  have
           been applied.  But Mr  Balroop  was  unable  to  show  that  its
           application could have made any difference to the outcome in the
           present appeal.  The judge's reference to  paragraph  276ADE  of
           the Immigration Rules was to the change in  the  long  residence
           rules, but he explained that these made  no  difference  as  the
           Appellant did not qualify under either  regime.   The  structure
           the judge then followed was based on Razgar [2004] UKHL 27:  see
           [8] to [9] of the determination.  Thus  there  was  no  material
           error of law in failing to apply Edgehill.


      8.    The determination was succinct. It was plain that the judge  had
           properly weighed and considered all of  the  evidence  produced,
           and had given sufficient reasons to  support  his  findings  and
           decision.   There  was  no  suggestion  that   the   judge   had
           misunderstood the facts.  The judge examined the evidence of the
           Appellant's private life, such as it was.  The  judge  correctly
           applied Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014]  UKUT  00025  (IAC),
           although there was no need for him to cite  the  case  by  name.
           The Appellant was in the United Kingdom for a temporary  purpose
           and if he could no longer afford to study in the United  Kingdom
           and had no viable protection claim he was bound to  depart.   It
           would obviously remain open to the Appellant  to  make  a  fresh
           application to enter as a student when his  finances  permitted.
           The tribunal had no power to review  the  Secretary  of  State's
           refusal to exercise her discretion outside the Immigration Rules
           where Article 8 ECHR was not engaged, as  it  was  open  to  the
           judge to find.


      9.    There was no material error of  law  in  the  determination  and
           there is no basis for interfering with the judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
