
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/17849/2014
                                                               ia/17767/2014
                                                               ia/19981/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 13th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Salma Shameena Vayikilery (first appellant)
                          a b i (second appellant)
                            a i (third appellant)
  (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made in respect of second and third appellants only)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenter
For the Respondents:   Ms N Bustani instructed by Paul John & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I am referring to the Respondents  as  the  Claimants.   They  are  all
    citizens of India who applied for residence cards on  the  basis  of  a
    derivative right of residence, the first Claimant being a  third  party
    national upon whom a British citizen was dependent in the  UK  and  the
    second  and  third  Claimants  as  her   dependent   children.    Their
    applications  were  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and   their
    subsequent appeal allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  and  on  human
    rights grounds.  The Secretary of State lodged grounds  of  application
    on three grounds.

 2. Firstly, it was said that the judge had allowed the appeal on the basis
    that the first Claimant was the primary carer of a  British  child  and
    that the child would be required to leave the UK if she  were  removed.
    However that was not made out and the first Claimant could not  benefit
    from the Zambrano judgment as she was not the primary carer - she was a
    primary carer.  The judge had speculated about the  Claimant's  husband
    needing to cease employment.

 3. Secondly, it appeared that the judge had unlawfully shifted the  burden
    of proof by saying that no evidence had been submitted by the Secretary
    of State namely that she had not established that the first  Claimant's
    husband had any previous experience in looking after a small child.

 4. Thirdly and finally, in terms of Article 8, there  was  no  reason  why
    family life could not continue between the parties in India.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the appeal came before me  on
    the above date.

 6. For the Secretary of  State  Mr  Staunton  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    application.  In particular there was nothing to  say  that  the  first
    Claimant's husband would have  to  keep  on  working.   The  judge  had
    misapplied the burden of proof in paragraph 12 of the decision.   There
    had been no adequate assessment under Article 8.

 7. For the Claimants Ms Bustani  acknowledged  that  the  judge  may  have
    fallen into error in saying (paragraph 12) that the Secretary of  State
    had submitted no evidence that the  child's  father  had  any  previous
    experience looking after a small child on  a  full-time  basis  and  no
    evidence had been submitted that he would be  in  a  position  to  make
    suitable arrangements for the care of  the  child  if  the  mother  was
    removed from the UK. However that was as far  as  the  criticism  went.
    His findings were crystal clear on which parent was the primary  carer.
    It was important to look at paragraph 12 in its  entirety.   The  judge
    had explained that the first Claimant was  a  full-time  housewife  and
    that her husband worked extensive hours so that she  did  not  need  to
    work and concentrate on bringing up the children.

 8. The judge had set out the position  clearly  in  paragraph  13  of  the
    decision.  The judge had found there were only two possible options  if
    the first Claimant was required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    findings stated there were perfectly reasonable ones and  open  to  the
    judge and there was no error.

 9. Finally the conclusion under Article 8  was  perfectly  adequate.   The
    child was a British citizen.

10. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

11. The application made by the Claimants was under  paragraph  15A  namely
    the "derivative right of residence" contained in the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  Under (4)(a) of paragraph 15A a person satisfies the
    criteria if that person is "the primary carer of  a  British  citizen".
    Under (7) a person is to be regarded as a primary carer if that  person
    is the person who has "primary responsibility for that person's  care".



12. Accordingly the outcome of the case turns on whether or not  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the first Claimant was the primary  carer
    of the children.

13. The burden of proving that rests on the  Claimants  but  if  the  judge
    thought otherwise by referring to the fact  that  "the  Respondent  had
    submitted no evidence ..." (paragraph 12) then he was clearly mistaken.
    It may be noteworthy that  he  did  set  out  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof in paragraph 6 of his decision.  However he  went  on
    to make clear findings in this regard saying in paragraph 12:-

         "I consider that there is clear and undisputed  evidence  that  the
         first appellant is the primary carer of the UK child.   The  father
         worked full-time as a taxi driver, he worked ten  hour  shifts  and
         was  often  working  at  nights  and  early  mornings.   The  first
         appellant was a full-time housewife, her husband  worked  extensive
         hours so that she did not need  to  work  and  concentrate  on  the
         upbringing of the children.  No evidence had been submitted of  the
         family having domestic assistance and  I  have  no  cause  to  find
         otherwise than the first appellant is the primary carer of  the  UK
         child."

14. In my view these are perfectly sustainable and adequate reasons why the
    judge was concluding that the first Claimant was the primary  carer  of
    the UK child.  The judge went on to note that in  the  absence  of  the
    first Claimant the Sponsor might well have to give up work. In addition
    he said that in the absence of the first Claimant he was satisfied  any
    alternative arrangements would not be suitable and that  the  UK  child
    would be unable to remain in the UK without her mother.  On  the  basis
    of the evidence presented  to  him  this  was  a  perfectly  reasonable
    finding to make.  In terms of Article 8  ECHR  the  judge  referred  to
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act which provided that it is  not  in  the
    public interest to remove a person with the parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK.  The judge correctly noted that the  child  was  a  UK
    citizen and therefore a qualifying child at 117D of  the  Act.   It  is
    difficult to see how the judge could have made any other finding.

15. In my view there is no material error in law  by  the  judge  who  gave
    clear and lucid reasons why he found as he did.  It  follows  that  the
    decision must stand. I am continuing the anonymity order.





Notice of Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

