
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17157/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th April 2014                              |On 28th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                       MAI SALAHELDIN YOUSSEF ELGUINDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel, Instructed by Magrath LLP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on 25th June 1961.  He applied
    for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  That
    application was refused for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision
    dated 22nd May 2013.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moore (the Judge) sitting at Taylor
    House on 11th February 2014.  The Judge decided to dismiss  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but to make a recommendation that leave  to
    remain be granted to the Appellant for  the  reasons  set  out  in  his
    Determination dated 17th February 2014.  The Appellant sought leave  to
    appeal that decision, and  on  17th  March  2014  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    245DD(b) of HC 395 because the Appellant had failed to score sufficient
    points under Appendix A.  This was because the Appellant had failed  to
    score sufficient points under the section headed "Creation of  jobs  in
    the UK" as the employee Salma Salama was not a  settled  worker.   That
    decision is not impugned in this appeal.

 4. The Judge went on to recommend that nevertheless the  Appellant  should
    be granted leave to remain.  His reasons for that decision are given at
    paragraphs 16 to 20 inclusive of his Determination.  He found that  the
    Appellant had employed Salma Salama, her daughter,  upon  wrong  advice
    given by the Respondent and that therefore  the  Appellant  had  had  a
    legitimate expectation that her application for leave to  remain  would
    not be refused as a consequence of employing her daughter.

 5. At the hearing, it was agreed  between  the  representatives  that  the
    Judge had erred in law by dealing with the issue by  way  of  making  a
    recommendation whereas he  should  have  found  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the  law  and  allowed  the  appeal
    accordingly.  I so find.

Re-made Decision

 6. Having found that the decision of the Judge contained  an  error  on  a
    point of law I proceeded to re-make  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It was again agreed between the representatives that for the
    reasons  given  above  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law  and  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    accordingly.  I concur.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the  appeal  by  allowing  it  to  the  extent  of
finding the decision of the Respondent not to  be  in  accordance  with  the
law.   The  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
(Entrepreneur) Migrant is therefore to be decided again by the Secretary  of
State.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

