
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               JATINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Moore, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 3 July 1981.   He  applied
    on 22 October 2012 for leave to remain under Tier 4 of the Points Based
    System.  The respondent refused that application on 3 January 2014 (the
    delay is unexplained and of no  relevance).   The  appellant  submitted
    this appeal on 9 April 2014.  After  an  adjournment  and  following  a
    change of agency on 15 January 2015 he relied on additional grounds  of
    appeal, raising the very different issue that he met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules Appendix FM and paragraph EX1 as the parent of
    a child living in the UK, or alternatively that his  appeal  should  be
    allowed under Article 8 of ECHR outwith the Rules.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Porter dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 3 February 2015.

 3. The grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  summary,  are  as
    follows.  The judge should not have expressed reservations over whether
    the appellant had raised further valid grounds of appeal in terms of  a
    section 120 notice.  There was evidence from the appellant and from the
    mother of the child of at  least  weekly  contact  between  father  and
    child.  The judge gave no reasons for rejecting  the  evidence  of  the
    child's mother.  The absence of any formal maintenance arrangement  was
    of no significance, when the appellant had at best  limited  resources.
    The judge found it adverse to the appellant that he  failed  to  notify
    the respondent that he ceased his studies and moved address, but  there
    was no obligation on him to do so.  The judge wrongly held  it  against
    him that he had not made a formal application to the  respondent  as  a
    partner or as a parent. [An application as a partner would  never  have
    been apt, as he does not say there was ever  a  settled  or  long  term
    relationship.]  The matter was appropriately raised by the section  120
    notice.  The question under Appendix FM  was  not  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances but whether it was reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK, and the  judge  determined  that  point  in  the
    appellant's favour.  Under section 117 of the 2002  Act  there  was  no
    public interest in removal of the appellant and "only one  outcome  was
    possible."

 4. In a Rule 24 notice the respondent argued that it was incorrect to  say
    that there was no public interest in removal, since the requirement had
    first to be met that there  was  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child."

 5. In submissions Mrs Moore acknowledged that the point  in  the  Rule  24
    response is correct in principle.   However,  she  said  that  all  the
    evidence was of an amicable arrangement between the parties and of very
    regular contact with the child.  There was no reason to reject  any  of
    that evidence.  The determination contained no  assessment  at  all  of
    what the mother said.  The determination should  be  set  aside  and  a
    further hearing fixed.

 6. Mrs O'Brien acknowledged that the determination errs in law.  The  core
    issue  was  whether  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with the  child.   There  were  no  good  reasons  in  the
    determination for finding against the appellant thereon.

 7. I indicated accordingly that the determination would be set aside.

 8. As conceded by the respondent, the judge's reasoning  is  incorrect  in
    several respects.  The appellant was entitled to raise the family  life
    ground in course of these proceedings.  The judge noted  that  Appendix
    FM paragraph R-LTRPT(b) requires the making  of  a  valid  application.
    However, paragraph GEN.1.9(a)(iii) avoids  that  requirement  when  the
    Article 8  claim  is  raised  "in  an  appeal".   The  judge's  several
    references to the appellant's inability to explain his failure to apply
    separately  on  the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  his  son   are
    misconceived.  He was entitled to raise the matter  by  a  section  120
    notice and that  could  not  reasonably  be  held  as  adverse  to  his
    credibility.

 9. Parties were unable at the hearing to find their way to  resolution  of
    the case based on the evidence which had been led and by  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules.  They agreed that it  would  be  appropriate  to
    order that no findings of the First-tier Tribunal  were  to  stand  and
    that under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and  Practice  Statement
    7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade was such that it was  appropriate  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Porter.



10. The appellant is to provide to the First-tier Tribunal and to  copy  to
    the respondent not less than 14 days prior to the date of the hearing a
    written submission on how it is contended that  the  evidence  for  the
    appellant shows that the provisions of Appendix FM are satisfied.   The
    respondent within 7 days of receipt of such  submission  is  to  advise
    whether the appeal is conceded and if not, why not.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.






           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           4 June 2015


