
[pic]


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Appeal Number: IA/17713/2014         |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 April 2015 and 5 August 2015    |On 13 April 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            MRS ABDUL MALIK SAIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.      The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 31 January 1980.
       She appealed against  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott's  decision
       dated 17 September 2014 from the decision of the respondent dated  1
       April 2014. Permission to appeal was at first refused by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Charlton Brown in a decision dated 30  October  2014.
       Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
       appeal on 20 February 2015 stating that  it  is  arguable  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider  the  position  of  the
       appellant's husband and whether or  not  there  were  insurmountable
       obstacles to family life continuing in Pakistan,  having  regard  to
       his circumstances in the United Kingdom.

       First-Tier Tribunal's Findings


    2.      The First-tier Tribunal's findings  were  as  follows  which  I
       summarise. The appellant has been in  this  country  since  December
       2003 and overstayed her visitor visa. Therefore, she  is  unable  to
       satisfy the provisions of the Immigration Rules unless she can  rely
       upon section EX1. She is  married  to  Abdul  Malik  who  has  seven
       children. There is no evidence however of extensive or  close  bonds
       or ties between the appellant and her  stepchildren.  There  are  no
       letters of support and none of them attended the hearing to  support
       her application. There is no evidence that the appellant  was  burnt
       by her family members in Pakistan by pouring paraffin over her.  The
       appellant has now been in this country for almost 11  years  and  is
       aged 34 years. It is considered  likely  that  she  has  friends  or
       acquaintances remaining in Pakistan who would  be  able  to  provide
       support to her. It is not considered that  the  appellant  would  be
       unable to overcome such problems and therefore she is  not  able  to
       rely on the provisions of EX1.


    3.       The amended  sections  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2014 and in particular section 117B  states  that  little
       weight should be given to a relationship formed when the partner  is
       in this country unlawfully. Therefore, regard must  be  had  to  her
       married state which however is not determinative. The appellant  has
       not discharged the burden  of  proof  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
       Rules.


    4.       In respect of  Article  8,  it  is  not  considered  that  the
       situation is so harsh in Pakistan that she  cannot  return  to  that
       country on her own. The appellant has  attempted  to  embellish  her
       claim by claiming that there is animosity with her family  and  they
       attacked  her  in  Pakistan.  The  appellant  has  embellished   her
       situation for her own purposes. As regards  her  situation  in  this
       country, the appellant is married but she  does  not  have  a  close
       attachment and relationship with her stepchildren that  would  cause
       them notable upset and distress should she  return  to  Pakistan  to
       make a fresh application.


    5.       In respect of  her  private  life,  section  276  ADE  of  the
       Immigration Rules apply to her, in particular if she  can  establish
       there are very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegrating  into
       Pakistani society.


    6.       The public interest is set out in sections 117B  of  the  2014
       Act has also been taken into consideration. The appellant's claim is
       rejected on the basis of  her  family  life  in  this  country.  The
       appellant's private life has been created when she has been in  this
       country unlawfully and therefore in accordance  with  section  117B,
       little weight can be attached to its elements.






       The Grounds of Appeal



    7.      The grounds of appeal state the following  which  I  summarise.
       The Judge has not taken into account the Article  8  rights  of  the
       appellant's spouse who is a British citizen. The spouse has children
       and strong ties to the United Kingdom. This should have demonstrated
       that there are some notable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
       outside the United Kingdom. The Judge in reaching  contrary  finding
       is not supported by the evidence and lacks proper reasoning on  this
       material issue.

               The hearing

    8.       At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to
       whether there is an    error of law  in  the  determination  of  the
       first-tier Tribunal Judge.


       Discussion and findings as to whether there is an error of law


    9.      The complaint against the Judge is that the appellant's  spouse
       is  a  British  citizen  and  no  consideration  was  given  to  his
       circumstances. It is  stated  that  EX1  applies  to  the  appellant
       because she is in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
       British  citizen  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles to family life with her partner  continuing
       outside the  United  Kingdom.  Insurmountable  obstacles  have  been
       defined as very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
       applicant or their partner in continuing the  family  life  together
       outside the United Kingdom and which could not be overcome or  would
       entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.


   10. The Judge having  found  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  subsisting
       relationship with a British citizen husband in the  United  Kingdom,
       did not consider his circumstances in this  country.  There  was  no
       reference  in  the  determination  to  the  evidence  given  by  the
       appellant and her sponsor. The Judge fell  into  material  error  by
       failing to address whether the appellant's husband, who is a British
       citizen with whom, as accepted by the Judge, that the appellant  has
       a genuine and  subsisting  relationship,  will  face  insurmountable
       obstacles to his family life continuing with his  wife  outside  the
       United Kingdom.


   11. The Judge at paragraph 15  of  the  determination  states  that  the
       appellant has friends and acquaintances remaining  in  Pakistan  who
       could support her. The Judge did not  take  into  account  that  the
       appellant will be a female returning to Pakistan on her own and  the
       cultural implications of this.


   12. The Judge's failure to take into  account  the  appellant  husband's
       circumstances, who  has  seven  children  living  in  this  country,
       brought  him  into  material  error.  I  therefore  set  aside   the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.



   13. Mr Ahmed requested that the appeal should be relisted in  the  Upper
       Tribunal in the event I was to find an error of law. I set aside the
       determination in its entirety and direct that the appeal be relisted
       in the Upper Tribunal, preferably before me, on the  next  available
       date.


   14. The appeal came before me again on 5 August 2015.


   15. I remake make the decision and allow the appellant's appeal for  the
       following reasons.


   16. There is no dispute  between  the  parties  that  the  appellant  is
       married to a British citizen who lives in the United Kingdom.  There
       is also no dispute that the appellant's spouse  has  seven  children
       who live in this country. I therefore find that the appellant is  in
       a genuine and subsisting relationship with a British citizen settled
       in the United Kingdom.


   17. I accept that the appellant has lived in this country for  the  most
       part unlawfully. She came to  this  country  in  December  2003  and
       overstayed her visitor visa. Therefore, she is unable to satisfy the
       provisions of the Immigration Rules unless she can rely upon section
       EX1 which is set out below and which is relevant to the appellant.



  18. EX.1. This paragraph applies if:

        (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK
        or in the UK with refugee  leave  or  humanitarian  protection,  and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner
        continuing outside the UK.

        EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
        obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would  be
        faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family
        life together outside the UK and which  could  not  be  overcome  or
        would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
        partner.

   19. The question that  I  have  to  now  answer  is  whether  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
       outside the  United  Kingdom.  Insurmountable  obstacles  have  been
       defined as very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
       applicant or their partner in continuing the  family  life  together
       outside the United Kingdom and which could not be overcome or  would
       entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.


   20. I take into account that the appellant's spouse is a British citizen
       and has seven children living in  this  country  which  demonstrates
       that he is deeply integrated into this country. The appellant spouse
       as a British citizen is entitled to live in this country  and  enjoy
       the benefits. I find that the appellant  spouse's  circumstances  in
       this country amount to insurmountable obstacles and that it would be
       unduly harsh for him to relocate to Pakistan to be  with  his  wife,
       leaving his seven children in this country with whom he  has  family
       connections.


   21. I find that the appellant comes within one of the exceptions in EX 1
       for leave to remain in this country, in that she is in a genuine and
       subsisting  relationship  with  a  British  citizen  and  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles to family life with her husband  continuing
       outside the United Kingdom.



       Decision


   22. I remake the decision and allow the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules.




       Even though I have allowed the appeal I make no fee  order  as  none
       was requested.


       I make no anonymity order.




    Signed by

    A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                  This 6th day of April 2016
     Mrs S Chana









