
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17181/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 24 April 2017                    |On 4 May 2017                           |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                              mr charles amoah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Place promulgated on 2 June 2015.  The appellant is
    a citizen of Ghana born on 16 December 1965.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with a visit visa in May 2008 and overstayed.  His application,
    which was the subject of the decision in this case, was  on  the  basis
    that he enjoys family life in the United Kingdom with his mother, uncle
    and sister and that the relationship  with  his  mother  and  uncle  is
    because of their various different physical  and  mental  health  needs
    more than the usual and the normal emotional ties that thus an  Article
    8 family life for the purposes of Article 8 exist between the appellant
    and his mother and with his uncle.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and his  half-sister.   She
    also had before her a significant amount of evidence  relating  to  the
    care needs and the medical needs of both  the  appellant's  mother  and
    uncle.

 3. The judge's findings appear in the decision from paragraph 25  onwards.
    In summary she accepted that the appellant cares for his  mother,  that
    her quality of life was better with him and it was with Social Services
    being responsible for her issues people should talk to her in  her  own
    language and that her son prepares Ghanaian food  for  her.   She  also
    accepted at 26 that the uncle lives with him some of the time and  that
    the uncle's health has improved with the  company  and  support  he  is
    receiving from the appellant.

 4. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules, that there was no other
    provision of the Immigration Rules which allowed him to enter  and  she
    did not accept that it was implausible that he thought his  immigration
    status was being sorted out.  She found at [29]  that  he  had  had  no
    intention of complying with  the  terms  of  his  visit  visa  when  he
    arrived, that he remained in the full knowledge  that  the  Immigration
    Rules did not allow him to remain and that he deliberately  overstayed.



 5. Materially in this case the judge did not accept that the  family  life
    existed between the appellant and his mother and uncle,  in  particular
    with the mother though accepting that there were unusually strong  ties
    in this case it was against the background  where  there  had  been  no
    contact between the appellant from age 9  until  age  42  and  although
    accepting that the appellant is his mother's carer, she did not  accept
    that family life existed  although  accepting  he  was  acting  as  his
    mother's carer he was provided with accommodation and financial support
    which would not been available to him in Ghana.

 6. The judge gave little weight to private life as it had been established
    whilst the appellant was here  unlawfully  that  being  an  application
    under Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.



 7. The judge then went on to find at [34] that "In case I  am  wrong  with
    the question of family life then I will in any case go on  to  consider
    the question of proportionality."

 8. The judge found however that it would be proportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant, noting that the Immigration  Rules  made  no  provision  for
    relatives to enter or remain as carers,  that  Parliament  appeared  to
    have decided that the need to maintain proper  immigration  control  an
    application for immigration was that savings might be  made  by  having
    relatives from other countries  who  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
    provide care for people who need it; that the  appellant's  mother  did
    have the option of residential care but she had not  been  prepared  to
    consider it; that the care needs were opened ended; and, that there had
    been a complete break in the past of family life.  She found  that  any
    family life which had been established had been so established when the
    appellant had been fully aware he no  legal  right  to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  looking  at  all  the  evidence  the  balance  of
    proportionality tips in favour of the respondent.

 9. The challenge to the decision is based on four grounds of appeal:

        i) that the judge had misdirected herself in law as to the question
           to be asked whether family life existed  in  this  case  and  in
           answering that question had in  any  event  taken  into  account
           immaterial matters (the receipt of funds and accommodation)

       ii) that the judge failed properly  to  take  into  account  various
           factors in  assessing  private  life,  specifically  the  family
           relationships between the appellant and his uncle and his mother
           as although family life had been found  not  to  exist  in  this
           case, nonetheless these should have been taken into  account  as
           part of family life, the judge appearing to have considered that
           Section 117B of the 2002 Act as a complete answer to the Article
           8  case;   and,   on   that   basis,   the    consideration   of
           proportionality was flawed;

      iii) that the judge failed properly to take into account  the  rights
           of the mother in the sense that she has  a  family  and  private
           life which would be impacted by the removal of the appellant;

       iv) that the judge had erred in  considering  the  prospect  of  the
           mother's relocation to Ghana.

10. I deal with the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

11.  Ms  Warren  submitted  that  the  judge's  analysis  of  family   life
    particularly paragraphs [31] and [32] was flawed in that the  incorrect
    test had been applied and on account of the failure to take account  of
    irrelevant factors.

12. Mr Bramble in response submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  find
    there was no family life in this  case  but  that  this  error,  if  it
    existed, was immaterial given that the judge had gone  on  at  [34]  to
    assess proportionality. He submitted that it could not be  argued  that
    the assessment of proportionality in this  case  was  infected  by  any
    incorrect findings of fact and that at [25] and [26]  of  the  decision
    the judge had properly taken into account and made findings in  respect
    of the appellant's family life and the care that he gave to  the  uncle
    and to his mother.

13. It was open to the judge to take into account the  absence  of  contact
    between the appellant between the ages of 9 and 42 and his  mother  and
    she was not satisfied as to his reasons of  why  he  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom or why he decided to leave Ghana to come to  look  after
    his mother.  It was open to her in that context to look at  the  issues
    of accommodation and financial support  that  context  being  this  was
    things he did not have in Ghana.  They were taken together with what is
    found at paragraphs 25 and 26 this is an adequate consideration.

14. I consider that it was open to the judge to  conclude  and  bearing  in
    mind what she had found at [25] and [26] that family life did not exist
    in this case.  I am not satisfied that she misdirected  herself  as  to
    the law, she clearly referred to emotional ties and  whilst  the  fact-
    finding exercise could have been better set  out  it  is  adequate  and
    sufficient.

    Ground 2

15. Whilst I accept that there are difficulties given the lack of reference
    to the existing of family  relationships  in  the  context  of  private
    leave, the judge did consider proportionality. It is sufficiently clear
    from the way that the decision is  framed  (albeit  that  it  could  be
    better structured) at [33] and [34] that the judge did not  in  reality
    simply consider that section 117B  was  a  sufficient  answer  to  that
    issue.  In the context of the decision as a whole it  is  evident  that
    the judge did consider the other factors and simply  did  not  consider
    that the public interest in maintaining immigration  control  had  been
    outweighed. It  must  nonetheless  be  borne  in  mind  that  that  the
    appellant was financially dependent [32] and that  there  is  a  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control, all matters set out
    in sections 117A and 117B.

16. The judge had undertaken a balancing exercise as she says at  paragraph
    [33]  it  also  appears  that  she   has   in   referring   to   "these
    Considerations" [33] taken all the relevant factors set out at [25]  to
    [31] in respect of private life.

17. Further, and in any event, given that the judge did go on  to  consider
    proportionality in the context of their being  family  life  (the  high
    point of the appellant's case), it cannot be argued that any  error  in
    considering private life is material, given not  least  the  effect  of
    section 117B.

    Ground 3

18. Ms Warren submits that the judge did not properly take into account the
    rights of the mother to family life in her alternative  assessment.   I
    consider that this adds little to  the  submission  that  in  assessing
    private life the judge had not taken  into  account  the  relationships
    between the appellant and the uncle and the appellant  and  his  mother
    and for the reasons I have  given  I  have  not  considered  that  this
    amounts to an  error  of  law.   In  any  event,  I  consider  that  at
    paragraphs [35] and [37] the judge has  considered  matters  which  are
    material in assessing the needs of the mother.  I am satisfied that she
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons at [38] for showing that she  had
    in fact taken these factors, that is the mother's rights to family life
    into account and that accordingly ground 3 is not made out.

    Ground 4

19. It is submitted in this case that the judge had erred  in  noting  that
    there was no evidence that the mother would  be  unable  to  return  to
    Ghana by reason of either cultural or medical care [38]  and  that  the
    appellant could continue to care for her in Ghana.  I consider that the
    judge did accept that the mother would refuse to move and  indeed  that
    is implicit in what the judge finds and said she would be unable to  do
    so by reason either of cultural or medical care.  There is  I  consider
    no indication that the judge was considering that this would happen and
    it is important to note that the inability to go to Ghana is  qualified
    by the phrase to do so by reason either of cultural  or  medical  care.
    This is not a situation of saying that she would  return  or  that  the
    appellant would continue to care for her in Ghana were that to occur.

20. In any event I consider that it was open  to  the  judge  in  assessing
    proportionality and indeed was incumbent on the judge in  so  doing  in
    applying Section 117B in that the family life in  this  case  had  been
    established while the appellant's presence in the  United  Kingdom  was
    precarious and that in the circumstances the  judge  was  entitled  and
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons for finding that the  balance  of
    proportionality  tipped  in  favour  of  the  respondent.   Further,  I
    consider that even if it were shown that the judge  had  erred  in  not
    finding in the approach to family life  I  consider  that  the  judge's
    assessment of proportionality in this case was adequate and sustainable
    given the finding she had reached prior to her consideration of that at
    paragraph [34].

21. As Mr Bramble submitted there are  a  substantial  number  of  findings
    which start at paragraph 25 in respect  of  family  and  private  life.
    Whilst I accept that the decision could have been made out in a  better
    it is sufficiently clear to the appellant as to why the judge  was  not
    satisfied that on facts of this  case  even  taking  into  account  the
    health and other needs  of  the  appellant's  mother  that  the  public
    interest was such in maintaining immigration control that the  decision
    was proportionate.  It is also sufficiently clear from the decision for
    the reasons I have just given that the private  life  aspects  and  the
    relationship between the appellant and his uncle and the other  aspects
    of the private life were taken into account.

22. Accordingly, for these reasons I consider  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I
    uphold it.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date:  2 May 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

