
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17363/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 January 2017                   |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms G A BLACK


                                   Between

                          Mr Mohamed Azeez Ibitoye
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher (Counsel instructed by JCWI)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this  matter  is  Mr  Ibitoye  who  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  I shall refer to the  parties  as  the  "appellant"  and  the
    "Respondent". I consider whether or not there is a  material  error  of
    law in the decision the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Hodgkinson)("FtT")
    promulgated on 14th January 2016 in which he dismissed the  appellant's
    human rights appeal under paragraph 276ADE(vi), Article 3 and Article 8
    outside of the Rules.

Background

2.    The appellant came to the UK as a student in 2009, was married with  2
    children from a previous relationship.  He applied for leave to  remain
    under  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  arguing  that  there  would  be   "very
    significant obstacles" to  his  "integration"  in  Nigeria  because  he
    suffered from severe and enduring mental  ill  health  and  would   not
    receive adequate  treatment  or  otherwise  be  able  to  integrate  in
    Nigeria.  His  condition  would  deteriorate  such  that  he  would  be
    destitute.

3.     The FtT made clear findings of fact which are unchallenged  and  were
    set out at [30-36 & 49 & 54].  The FtT [35] gave  reasons  for  finding
    that he would be able to integrate in Nigeria. He was in  remission  at
    the date of hearing due to the care he was receiving. He had  lived  in
    Nigeria  all  his  life  and  there  were  no  language   difficulties.
    Irrespective of his mental illness he would have no problem integrating
    in Nigeria.

4.    The FtT found that Articles 3 and 8 and on medical  grounds  were  not
    engaged. The FtT accepted that he would suffer  a  relapse  in  Nigeria
    with little or nothing by way of support available or accommodation and
    that he was not capable of employment.  In the  light  of  there  being
    some basic medical facilities  and  certain  medications  available  in
    Nigeria and having regard to " N" and "D", the FtT concluded  that  the
    high threshold was not met because  the  appellant  was  not  currently
    critically ill such that Article 3 was engaged. Article 8 private  life
    was engaged based on the length of residence in the  UK  and  his  care
    package which included contact with his sister and his wife.   The  FtT
    found that the UK had not accepted responsibility for the appellant  in
    terms of health care.  GS (India) & others v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40
    [86-87] was cited and the FtT considered the appellant's mental  health
    in its assessment of proportionality.  The FtT found that the  evidence
    failed to show a disproportionate interference  with  Article  8  [69].
    Thereafter reference was made to Nagre and SS (Congo) and the FtT found
    no compelling or exceptional circumstances.

Preliminary issue

5.    Ms Fisher indicated that amended grounds of appeal dated 20.10.16  did
    not appear to have been before Mr Justice Edis.  Those  grounds  sought
    to argue the Article 3 point that  had  been  raised  in  the  FtT.  In
    addition she wished to rely on the recent ECHR judgment  on  13.12.2016
    of Paposhvili v. Belgium (Application no 41738/10) [183] which arguably
    altered the law as to the threshold  required  for  Article  3  medical
    cases to be engaged.

6.    Mr Avery having had the opportunity to  consider  the  further  papers
    argued that the terms of the JR  were  clear.  The  only  issue  to  be
    considered was paragraph 276ADE and that  Article  3  was  outside  the
    remit.  Whilst acknowledging that Ockelton J had granted permission "in
    general terms", it was the 276ADE point that was pertinent.

Decision re preliminary issue

7.   I granted leave for the amended grounds to be relied  on  and  pursued.
    I accepted that Article 3 ought to be considered,  given  that  it  had
    been raised before the FtT and given that permission had  been  granted
    in general terms. I proceeded on the basis that the respondent would be
    allowed time in which to prepare submissions on P following  the  error
    of law hearing.

Amended Grounds for permission to appeal

8.   Ground 1 contended that the FtT  failed  to  consider  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) whether the appellant's severe mental health issues would be
    very significant obstacles to integration given its findings at [47, 48
    and 54]. The findings were completely at odds with the reasoning as  to
    why the appellant could not meet the Rules. The FtT failed to take into
    account that the  appellant  was  in  remission  only  because  of  the
    treatment and support given to him.

9.   Ground 2 contended that it was irrational for the UT to  conclude  that
    the FtT's consideration of Article 8 outside  the  rules  was  correct.
    The appellant had family life because his ties were beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties.  The FtT misapplied GS(India) by failing to  take  into
    account the appellant's dependency on family members together with  his
    ability to form relationships and develop personally.

10.    Ground 3 argued that the threshold in medical cases is  arguably  met
    having regard to that fact that the appellant  will  be  destitute  and
    without support and the deterioration in his mental health  would  lead
    to acute suffering and anguish.

Permission to appeal

11.   Permission to appeal in general terms  was  granted  by  UTJ  Ockelton
    following an application for Judicial review ("JR").  Mr  Justice  Edis
    found that ground 1 was arguable, namely, that in  refusing  permission
    the UT had acted irrationally in concluding that there was no error  of
    law in the FtT's approach under paragraph 276ADE. It was arguable  that
    the FtT's approach to integration was too narrow and given the findings
    made as to his future in Nigeria, failed to explain adequately why  the
    appeal was dismissed under the Rules.

Submissions

12.   Ms Fisher relied on her skeleton argument in which she summarised  the
    undisputed facts.  Principally  it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant
    suffered  from  a  severe  and  enduring  mental  illness  requiring  a
    considerable degree of support in the  community  with  medication  and
    sheltered accommodation.  It was accepted that there was no  equivalent
    accommodation for him in Nigeria and that  he  would  not  be  able  to
    access the same treatment or support in Nigeria.  The medical  evidence
    established that his condition would deteriorate if he went to  Nigeria
    as he would not have access to his medication  and  was  not  compliant
    with taking medication.

13.   Ms Fisher relied on the recent decision of Kamara as  to  the  meaning
    of integration and GS(India) [44] as to the scope of private life.  Her
    main argument was that the FtT acted perversely to the extent  that  on
    the facts as found it concluded that the appellant would not face  very
    significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria.  The FtT  focussed  on
    the fact that the appellant was well and in remission at  the  date  of
    hearing, and would initially be able to reintegrate in Nigeria where he
    previously lived.  Ms Fisher argued that the  appellant  would  not  be
    able to obtain the treatment available to him in the UK and the absence
    of the same treatment  precluded  his  integration  in  Nigeria  having
    regard to the serious nature of  his  illness.   The  medical  evidence
    stated that in the absence of his injections (which  were  administered
    monthly),  the  appellant   would   face   relapse   with   significant
    deterioration.  In short he would be destitute in  Nigeria.  Article  3
    was engaged as this amounted to "intense suffering" (AA (Uganda) [2008]
    UKAIT 00090).

14.   Mr Avery  argued  that  the  FtT  conducted  a  thorough  and  careful
    analysis under paragraph 276ADE. Re-integration was to be  assessed  in
    the light of the degree to which a person had established or integrated
    in the UK, the  extent  to  which  a  person  was  distanced  from  the
    possibility of re-integration in the home country.     He  argued  that
    the approach taken by the FtT looking at the circumstances at the  date
    of hearing was entirely reasonable.  There was no suggestion  that  the
    appellant's health would instantly deteriorate.  He had  only  spent  a
    short time living in the UK.  At the point of return he would  be  well
    and able to integrate. Mr Avery argued  that  Ms  Fisher  was  in  fact
    pursuing a mental health medical point and not  re-integration.   There
    was insufficient evidence to show any engagement of Article  8  private
    life.

15.  Ms Fisher responded that the appellant had lived on the UK since  2009.
    Article 8 was engaged as he lived in the UK for 7 years. The  threshold
    was low.  He was well when he lived in Nigeria and his health  problems
    started in the UK. There was no access to sheltered accommodation or to
    medical treatment in Nigeria. The appellant was found not to be capable
    of employment. There were other factors that engaged private life  such
    as his family relationships and his close relationship  with  his  care
    coordinator in the community.

Discussion and conclusion

16.  I find that there was a material  error  of  law  by  the  FtT  in  its
    approach to paragraph 276ADE in  considering  what  amounted  to  "very
    significant obstacles to integration" in Nigeria.  The FtT carried  out
    a careful and full assessment of all the evidence including the medical
    evidence in reaching clear findings of fact.   However, I take the view
    that the FtT erred in its analysis and application  of  those  findings
    when  considering  what  amounted  to   very   serious   obstacles   to
    integration. I accept Ms Fisher's submissions that the guidance in SSHD
    v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 advocates a balanced approach;  "The  idea
    of integration calls for a broad evaluative judgment  to be made as  to
    whether the individual will be  enough   of  an  insider  in  terms  of
    understanding how life in the society in that country is carried on and
    a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity
    to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day to  day  basis  in
    that society and to build up within  a reasonable time   a  variety  of
    human relationships to give substance to the individual's private  life
    or family life."[14] I also accept her argument that  on  the  evidence
    and facts Article 8 is capable of engagement following GS(India).  I do
    find it  perverse  that  the  findings  made  by  the  FtT  as  to  the
    appellant's mental ill health and the findings made as  to  his  future
    circumstances in Nigeria were found by the FtT not to meet  the  Rules.
    The FtT appeared to view his mental health as having only very  limited
    impact on the ability to integrate.  The FtT failed to give reasons why
    it reached the decision that it did given  the  findings  that  clearly
    detail the very significant obstacles to  integration.     There  is  a
    difference as between the requirements of rules and the  engagement  of
    Article 8 ECHR on medical grounds.  For the FtT to focus on  the  point
    of return for its assessment indicates  that  it  took  a  very  narrow
    approach to the issue of integration which in my view  inevitably  must
    involve a wider assessment.

17.   The appellant was well when he arrived in the UK.  He became  ill  and
    was admitted to hospital under section 3 of the Mental  Health  Act  on
    three occasions between 2011 and 2013. The medical  evidence  confirmed
    that he would need to continue treatment for many years to come and the
    stress of his removal would precipitate a  relapse.   It  was  also  of
    significance that the appellant  struggled  with  compliance  with  his
    medication and required ingoing support.  The mental health  facilities
    in Nigeria were almost non-existent and he would not be in  a  position
    to access treatment regardless  of  any  cost  issues.  The  background
    evidence states that there is stigma  and  discrimination  attached  to
    mental health issues in Nigeria.

18.  In the light of the findings made by the FtT I fail to see  how,  given
    the appellant's severe and enduring condition, its profound  impact  on
    his life and the findings made as to his future in Nigeria, that  taken
    together  this  did  not  amount  to  very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration.  I reject the submission made by Mr Avery that integration
    should be measured by focussing on the degree of integration in the UK.
     Even if that were the case it is clear that the significant aspects of
    the appellant's life are effected by his mental  illness  and  that  it
    dictates the very nature and quality of his life in the UK.   He  lives
    in sheltered accommodation (which is not available in Nigeria)  and  he
    is  not  complaint  with  his  medication  thus  necessitating  monthly
    injections to be administered and he is incapable of work.  Further  to
    limit the assessment the point of return  when  the  appellant  was  in
    remission, is  in  my  view  a  failure  to  consider  the  appellant's
    circumstances in reality and as a whole and to deny his very  real  and
    severely incapacitating illness and the impact thereof on  his  ability
    to integrate.  The  appellant  would  not  be  able  to  replicate  and
    maintain his current level of health in Nigeria where he would have  no
    access to the support and medication available in the UK.  The  meaning
    of integration  implies  connection,  a  fitting  in  with  the  whole,
    belonging or forming a part of society, it is a  concept  that  imports
    the ability to develop real  and  meaningful  connection.   It  is  not
    limited to social, cultural or family considerations  but  requires  an
    assessment of all the circumstances, subjective and objective, relevant
    to  the  appellant's  capability  to   live   independently   and   its
    achievability. The wording of the rules emphasises the need to consider
    the "integration in the country to which he would have to go".  Had  it
    been the intention to focus on the degree of integration in the UK  the
    rules  would  have  been  drafted  accordingly.  Further  there  is  no
    definition of "obstacles" and thus it is left  open  to  interpretation
    having regard to an individuals circumstances and characteristics,  and
    as a bare minimum would require consideration of the basic  aspects  of
    living in a society such as employment, accommodation, the  ability  to
    obtain food, education, healthcare, socialisation.   In  my  view  such
    factors preclude the narrow focus at the point of return.

19.  To summarise the approach to integration  taken  by  the  FtT  was  too
    narrow and ought to have taken into account how his mental health would
    impact on his ability to integrate in Nigeria and to  have  taken  into
    account his personal relationships with family members  and  associated
    to his care in the UK.

20.   I find a material error of  law  in  the  approach  to  paragraph  276
    ADE(vi). This was  the  only  issue  raised  under  the  Rules  by  the
    respondent as it was accepted that the  suitability  requirements  were
    met. I go on to remake the decision on the evidence that was before the
    FtT.   I  find  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration in Nigeria. My reasons are set out above.   For
    the same reasons I would alternatively conclude that Article 8  private
    life  (GS  (India)  is   engaged   and   that   the   interference   is
    disproportionate.   I am  satisfied  that  his  private  life  includes
    individual features and aspects of personal and moral  integrity  which
    necessarily  incorporates  his  mental  health  which  is  an  enduring
    illness. The Courts (Bensaid [47]) have already found that private life
    is a "broad term" and that "the preservation of mental stability is  in
    that context an indispensible precondition to  effective  enjoyment  of
    the right to respect for private life." In  addition  there  are  other
    factors such as his residence of 7 years  and  his  relationships  with
    family which engage Article 8.  I do not find evidence of  family  life
    that there are emotional ties above and beyond the normal family  ties,
    but private life is clearly established.  The decision is unlawful as I
    have found that the Rules are met. There would be  an  interference  as
    the appellant would face destitution and incarceration.  Having  regard
    to public interest factors under section 117B 2002 Act I find none that
    are capable  of  outweighing  the  appellant's  private  interests  and
    accordingly the interference is disproportionate.

21.  I indicated at the hearing that I would  allow  a  further  opportunity
    for the parties to  make  submissions  on  Article  3  with  particular
    reference to the issue of the threshold for medical cases in the  light
    of the judgment of Paposhvili. Although  I  indicated  that  a  further
    hearing would be arranged I now take to view that such submissions  can
    readily be made in writing.

22.  Decision

    There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.
    I remake the decision and allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    paragraph 276ADE(vi)  and under Article 8 ECHR.

23.  Directions

     I direct that if considered necessary up to date medical  evidence  is
    produced within 14 days of the issue of this decision to be  served  on
    the  respondent  and  on  the  Tribunal  within  7  days  of   receipt.
    Thereafter I direct that  written  submissions  are  produced  by  both
    parties within 14 days of the receipt  of  the  medical  evidence.  The
    submissions, in the event that Article  3  is  to  be  pursued  in  the
    appeal, are to deal with the matters referred to in paragraph 21.   All
    material is to be marked for the attention of Deputy Judge GA Black.


                               Signed                     Date 27.1.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 27.1.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


