
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA172042015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On July 24, 2017                         |On July 27, 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR SAJID LATIF
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, Counsel, instructed by MA Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a Pakistani  national.   The  appellant  entered  this
    country as a visitor on June 6, 2001. He applied for asylum on June 18,
    2001 but this was refused  on  August  15,  2001.  He  has  lived  here
    unlawfully since that date despite a failed application to  be  granted
    status under the Legacy provisions in 2010.

 3. The appellant applied for leave to remain on February 15, 2015  on  the
    grounds of private and family life with his  "wife",  Fatima  Dar.  The
    respondent refused this application on April 22, 2015.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision on May  5,
    2015 under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.  His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Goodrich
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on October 19, 2016 and in a  decision
    promulgated on November 15, 2016 the Judge refused his appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on November 23,  2016.  Permission
    to appeal was given by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingsworth
    on May 26, 2017.

 6. The matter came before  me  on  the  above  date.   The  appellant  was
    present.

    Submissions

 7. Mr Karim adopted his grounds of appeal and the views of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hollingsworth and submitted the Judge had erred  in
    her approach. He accepted that this was an appeal that could never have
    been considered under Section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  because  at  the
    relevant time  the  appellant  and  his  "wife"  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph Gen 1.2 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because the appellant and  his  "wife"  were  not  married  under
    English law and at the date of application they had  only  been  living
    together  for  three  months.  However,  he  submitted   in   assessing
    proportionality the Judge had erred because:

      a) She had departed from the previous decision of Judge of the  First-
         tier  Tribunal  Sweet  who  had  previously  found  it   would   be
         disproportionate to require Mrs Dar to leave the country due to her
         role with her niece and nephew who were, at the  date  of  hearing,
         aged 7 and  6  respectively.  The  Judge  had  departed  from  that
         decision without any evidence to support such a departure and based
         purely on speculation.

      b) The Judge had applied both a test of insurmountable  obstacles  and
         undue hardship instead of reasonableness.

      c) The Judge's finding in paragraph [34] on  page  7  of  the  Judge's
         decision was contrary to the approach that should have been taken.

 8. Mr Tufan adopted the Rule 24 response dated June 23, 2017 and submitted
    that there had been no material error. The decision was  both  detailed
    and thorough and the finding that she believed the  appellant  and  Mrs
    Dar placed the interests of the nephew and niece secondary to their own
    wishes to remain in this country was open to the  Judge  based  on  the
    evidence she heard.

 9. The Judge commenced her consideration of the evidence with Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Sweet's decision but then  gave  reasons  why  this
    decision was of limited  use  in  this  appeal.  Whilst  this  was  the
    starting point the Judge was concerned  with  an  application  by  this
    appellant-a person who had an appalling immigration history. His family
    life with Mrs Dar was established whilst he was here unlawfully and she
    was here precariously.

10. The Judge was entitled to consider  the  application  as  a  change  in
    circumstances facing Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet  but  was
    entitled to make the findings she did.  There  was  also  no  error  in
    applying a test of undue hardship following the decision of SSHD  v  SS
    (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

11. This was an appeal where if anything the Judge attached  no  weight  to
    the fact that the appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  entry  clearance
    requirements as an unmarried partner. The fact they had a child by  the
    time of the hearing did not alter  the  situation  as  that  child  was
    neither British nor  had  he  established  seven  years  residence.  He
    invited me to dismiss the appeal.

12. Mr Karim accepted  that  Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  did  not
    personally cover the appellant because he did not have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with  a  British  child  bearing  in  mind  the
    children's father cared for them although he submitted that as Mrs  Dar
    did this was something to be taken into account. The  circumstances  of
    this case were unique as evidenced by the fact Mrs Dar had  been  given
    leave to remain by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet - a  decision
    upheld by the Upper Tribunal.

13. Having heard submissions  and  discussed  matters  generally  with  the
    representatives I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

14. The Judge in a detailed decision dismissed the appeal  but  it  is  the
    Judge's approach that  has  been  raised  in  this  appeal  to  me.  In
    considering this appeal I remind the parties that I am  concerned  with
    the situation as it faced the Judge and  I  can  only  have  regard  to
    evidence placed before the Judge.

15. The Judge had  the  respondent's  bundle  and  documents  of  relevance
    contained therein included the application form,  the  decision  letter
    and the grounds of appeal.

16. The decision letter made it clear that that Section EX.1 of Appendix FM
    could not apply because the appellant and his "wife" were  not  married
    under English law and as they had only been together for a short period
    when the application was submitted  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy
    paragraph GEN 1.2  of  Appendix  FM.  The  decision  letter  considered
    paragraph 276ADE but the respondent refused the application because she
    concluded there were no significant obstacles to their integration into
    the country. Exceptional circumstances were considered because Mrs  Dar
    had limited leave to remain until May 3, 2017 and was  expecting  their
    child  but  the  respondent  concluded  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances.

17. The appellant's bundle included statements from the appellant  and  Mrs
    Dar, medical documents for the appellant and their child  who  had,  by
    the time of the hearing, been born, a letter from the Mrs Dar's brother
    and one page from the Mrs Dar's Upper Tribunal decision.

18. In addition to this the appellant and Mrs Dar gave oral evidence at the
    hearing.

19. Mr Karim raised a number of points concerning the Judge's consideration
    of the claim and in particular the appellant's  possible  appeal  under
    the Rules but as Mr Karim accepted the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Rules at all this could only ever be an appeal outside of the Rules.

20.  The  numbering  in  the  Judge's  decision  unfortunately  went   from
    paragraphs 1-37  (page  7)  and  when  article  8  was  considered  the
    numbering restarted with paragraph 15 and ended on 41.

21. Paragraphs 1-22 concern the evidence taken, the decision letter and the
    appellant's immigration history.

22. The Judge's finding on compliance with the Rules was addressed  between
    paragraphs 23 and 37 but  I  find  that  most  of  those  findings  are
    irrelevant because it was accepted today that the Rules  could  not  be
    met. However, there were some findings of fact that would  be  relevant
    and these were:

      a) Mrs Dar had no current health issues although she may  suffer  from
         diabetes.

      b) The appellant underwent a laparotomy  and  colostomy  in  September
         2015 and there were plans to reverse the stoma in November 2016.

      c) The appellant's son was diagnosed with transposition of  the  great
         arteries, ventricular septal defect and coarctation of  the  aorta.
         However, according to the appellant and Mrs Dar he was  doing  well
         and there was no evidence that ongoing monitoring was necessary  or
         that the treatment was not available in Pakistan.

      d) The Judge found that the best interests of  Mrs  Dar's  nephew  and
         niece were secondary to the fact that the appellant and Mrs Dar  do
         not want to live in Pakistan.

23. Mr Karim argued the Judge erred by only considering  the  applicability
    of the Rules to the higher test of  "insurmountable  obstacles".  I  am
    satisfied that if the appellant had met the mandatory  requirements  of
    the Rules and Section EX.1 could have applied then there may have  been
    an error in this approach but as Mr Karim accepted the Rules could  not
    be met any erroneous findings made in this part of the  decision  would
    not automatically mean the article 8 assessment is flawed. The  Judge's
    consideration of article 8 must be considered in its own right.

24. At paragraph 15 (article 8 paragraph 15) the Judge reminded herself  of
    the  appellant's  argument  namely   that   he   felt   it   would   be
    "disproportionate and unreasonable that he and his wife and child  will
    be separated". It seems accepted that the appellant knew he  would  not
    meet the entry clearance requirement either in the short or long  term.
    The Judge reminded herself of the relevance of  Mrs  Dar's  nephew  and
    niece and the appellant's own child.

25. At paragraph 17 the Judge  repeated  his  reference  to  insurmountable
    obstacles but only for  the  purposes  of  finding  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to consider the appeal outside of the Rules.

26. Paragraph 20 of her decision set  out  the  reality  of  the  situation
    namely that the appellant  and  Mrs  Dar  would  be  separated  if  the
    appellant was removed unless Mrs Dar and their son accompanied him. The
    Judge considered  the  cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197  (IAC),  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  74,  EV
    (Phillipines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and R (on the  application  of
    MA(Pakistan) and others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and  she
    concluded, quite properly, that Ibrahim's  (their  son)  best  interest
    were with the appellant and Mrs Dar but in light of his age he would be
    able to adjust relatively easily if he had to leave this  country.  She
    concluded there was nothing in Ibrahim's medical condition  that  would
    specifically engage article 8 ECHR.

27. The Judge's assessment was clear that Ibrahim should  remain  with  his
    parents and the issue she had to decide was where they would all  live.
    The Judge was aware the child was a Pakistani national,  the  appellant
    did not satisfy the Rules and Mrs Dar had limited leave to remain.

28. The Judge then touched on the position of Mrs Dar's nephew  and  niece.
    The Judge noted there was little evidence over and above a brief letter
    from the Mrs Dar's brother which states they all live together and  Mrs
    Dar took care of them.

29. Mr Karim submitted that the situation had not changed  when  the  Judge
    heard this appeal and therefore the Judge should have started from  the
    position that Mrs Dar had leave to remain  based  on  the  approach  in
    Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka
    * [2002] UKIAT 00702.

30. The Judge noted the following at paragraphs 27 and 28:

      a) Life had moved on since Mrs Dar was granted leave to remain.

      b) She was now married.

      c) She had her own child to care for.

      d) The nephew and niece were now in full-time education.

      e) The children's mother saw them regularly and took them out.

      f) Mrs Dar still lived with and cared for her nephew and niece.

      g) It remains in their best interests that Mrs Dar continues to do  so
         and their relationship to Mrs Dar would continue to be important.

31. Mr Karim submits the Judge's findings at paragraph 29 were  speculative
    but the Judge noted the size of the house and  that  it  was  a  three-
    bedroom home and that now the appellant and another  young  child  were
    living there. The Judge commented on the lack of evidence  about  their
    financial circumstances and then went onto  find  that  article  8  was
    engaged for the purposes of family life. Mr Karim viewed  the  findings
    in paragraph 29 as speculative but  having  considered  everything  the
    Judge concluded that article 8 family life was engaged  and  went  onto
    consider the remaining questions set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.

32. If there is to be  an  error  it  would  only  be  in  the  content  of
    paragraphs 32 and 41 as up until then I find the Judge has said nothing
    that materially flawed her decision.

33. The requirements of a proportionality assessment are set out  correctly
    in paragraph 32 of the decision. At paragraph  34  the  Judge  reminded
    herself of the importance of the  proportionality  assessment  and  the
    impact of Section 117B of the 2002 Act. Her findings on Section 117B of
    the 2002 Act, in paragraph 35, were clearly open  to  her  as  was  her
    assessment of the relevant case law.

34. Mr Karim argued that Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act should  have  been
    approached differently. I disagree and find  the  Judge's  findings  in
    paragraph 38  correct  namely  the  appellant  did  not  have  parental
    relationship with his wife's nephew and niece because their father  was
    not only alive but lived with his children and also cared for them. The
    appellant's own son could not be a  qualifying  child  because  he  was
    neither British nor had he lived here for seven years,.

35. At paragraph 39 the Judge remineds herself that the appellant sought to
    rely on a life he built whilst here unlawfully. That is  a  factor  the
    Judge had to have regard to when considering proportionality because it
    is one of the factors in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

36. The only submission that may have merit was the Judge's approach to the
    previous finding of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet  in  respect
    of Mrs Dar and her niece and nephew. However, at paragraph  39  of  her
    decision the Judge tackles this very issue and  reminded  herself  that
    this was the strongest part of the claim. The Judge stated that it  was
    in Mrs Dar's nephew and niece's best interest for  the  status  quo  to
    remain but  concluded  that  their  best  interests  whilst  a  primary
    consideration were capable of being outweighed by the public interest.

37. That balancing act is concluded in paragraph 40 of her decision.  There
    is nothing in that assessment which was not  open  to  the  Judge.  The
    Judge had already given reasons why the situation was different to when
    she was  originally  granted  discretionary  leave.  The  situation  is
    different because not only had she now embarked on a new life with  the
    appellant but she also had her own child and the children were older.

38. I was made aware at the hearing that Mrs Dar  and  her  son  have  been
    given discretionary leave  but  this  is  all  post-dates  the  Judge's
    decision. It cannot have a bearing on the FTT Judge's decision.

39. Based on the evidence that was presented to  her  I  am  satisfied  the
    judge made findings on the article 8 claim that were properly  reasoned
    and applied the correct standard of proof and legal tests.

40. There was no error in law on any of the grounds argued by Mr  Karim  at
    the hearing before me.

    DECISION

41. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date     25.07.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     25.07.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





