
[pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17205/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 20 April 2015                    |On: 11 June 2015                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                         Mr Ashik Anthoora Valappil
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal had applied for leave to remain in  the  UK
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student. However, the respondent  noted  that  he
    had supplied a loan letter dated 14 February 2014 from the South Indian
    Bank. That letter was not accepted because from 2 March 2013  the  only
    loan accepted is one provided by  the  student's  national  government,
    state or regional  government,  a  government  sponsored  student  loan
    company, or is part of an academic or educational loans scheme.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wellsley-Coles dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision refusing a variation of his leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student. She stated (incorrectly) that the basis  of  refusal
    was that the appellant did not  have  30  points  for  confirmation  of
    acceptance for study, which she found was the sole issue in  the  case.
    On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

 3. On 19 November 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that the actual reasons for
    refusal showed that the appellant had in fact been  awarded  30  points
    for his CAS but "zero points for maintenance (funds)".

 4. In the Rule 24 response, it was acknowledged that the Judge had made an
    error in law. The refusal letter is clear.

 5. However, the issue still  remains  as  to  whether  the  appellant  had
    provided any evidence to deal with the reason  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter. If so, the error may not be material and the appellant's appeal
    would fall to be dismissed in any event.

 6. On 17 March  2015,  the  appellant's  former  solicitors  informed  the
    Tribunal that they were  no  longer  representing  him.  The  appellant
    confirmed that at the hearing on 20 April 2015; he stated that  he  did
    not want the opportunity to engage other legal representatives.

 7. The appellant was present in  Court  when  a  similar  matter,  raising
    identical issues was argued. The latter appellant was represented by  a
    solicitor, Mr R Saravanan who assisted Mr Vallapil.  I am grateful  for
    the assistance given, including the filing of  documentation  from  the
    Reserve Bank of India relevant to the appellant's claim.

 8. The appellant confirmed that he understood the nature  and  reasons  of
    the refusal. He had in his possession the relevant statement of changes
    in the immigration rules applicable to this case as well  as  the  full
    bundle of documents including the grounds of appeal before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal; the application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and written submissions on behalf of the  respondent  provided
    by Ms Holmes, produced at an earlier hearing on 2 March 2015.

 9. He relied on the grounds produced to the First-tier tribunal Judge.  At
    paragraph 5 of the grounds, it was submitted that the appellant applied
    for a student loan from the South Indian Bank, considered to be "one of
    the most proactive banks in India." The bank is the first Kerala  based
    bank to implement Core Banking System and became a  scheduled  bank  in
    1946 under the Regulated Banks of India Act. This is  a  UKBA  approved
    financial institution.

10. The appellant had produced the letter from the South Indian Bank  dated
    14 February 2014. A loan was sanctioned for the purpose of education in
    the UK. The loan is confirmed  as  being  "completely  sanctioned"  and
    ready  for  disbursement.  That  was  the  letter  submitted   to   the
    respondent.

11. It is not disputed that the South Indian Bank is a regulated  financial
    institution.  Nor is it disputed that the  original  loans  letter  was
    from a financial institution regulated by the official  body  in  India
    where the money is held.

12. The further grounds contend that the bank is the third  largest  branch
    network amongst private sector banks in India. The bank has  customised
    educational loans for education overseas. It is contended that  he  was
    issued a loan from that particular bank which was part of  an  academic
    and educational loan scheme.

13. None of that was disputed by Ms Holmes. The actual letter from the bank
    has been headed "sub: Sanction of Loan for Education Purpose Reg."

14. In Appendix C, the restrictions placed under paragraph 1B (5 )  of  the
    appendix  with  regard  to  an  entry  clearance  application  are  not
    applicable to an in country application for leave to remain, as in  the
    appellant's case. He submitted that the  loan  from  the  South  Indian
    Bank, which is part of an academic or educattional loans scheme.

15. Ms Holmes submitted therefore that the appellant in this case needs  to
    demonstrate that with the exception of sub paragraph 5, he fulfils  all
    the requirements.

    Assessment

16. I find that this appellant applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 student prior to the expiry of his leave. He applied from within
    the UK. He is thus required to provide an original loan letter  from  a
    financial institution regulated for the purpose of student loans by the
    official regulatory body for the country the institution is in.

17. There must be no conditions placed upon the release of the  loan  funds
    other than his making a successful application as a Tier 4 Migrant  and
    finally that the loan is provided by the national government, the state
    or regional government, or a government sponsored student loan company,
    or is part of an academic or educational loans scheme.

18. It is thus necessary for this appellant to provide the necessary letter
    from a financial institution  regulated  for  the  purpose  of  student
    loans, in this case, by the official regulatory body for India.

19. The appellant's grounds of appeal including the assertion that the loan
    was issued from the South Indian Bank which was part of an academic and
    educational loan scheme. The contention that the  bank  has  customised
    educational loans for education overseas has not been disputed. Nor  is
    it disputed that the loan issued to the appellant from  that  bank  was
    part of an academic and educational loan scheme.

20. The loan letter that he produced was from the  South  Indian  Bank.  Ms
    Holmes accepted that that bank relates  to  an  overseas  account.  She
    accepted that the bank is regulated by the official regulatory body for
    India. The bank is approved by the Home Office.

21.  I  have  had  regard  to  the   consolidated   statute,   subsequently
    produced,namely, the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 as amended up to  7
    January 2013.

22. It is evident from the legislation that the Reserve Bank  of  India  is
    the official regulatory body regulating and controlling banks in India.
    The Reserve Bank of India derived its powers under the Reserve Bank  of
    India Act 1934. The banks in India are also controlled by  the  Banking
    Regulations Act 1949, a copy of which has been provided. The latter Act
    consolidates and amends the law relating to banking and extends to  the
    whole of India.

23. The schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act  has  a  list  of  Indian
    banks classified as such and regulated by the Reserve Bank.  The  South
    Indian Bank which provided the loan letter to the appellant is  a  bank
    identified in the schedule.

24. The Banking Regulation Act 1949 enables and empowers the  Reserve  Bank
    of India to issue notification, directions, circulations and the  like,
    having effective supervision and control of the scheduled banks.

25. The Reserve Bank of India derives powers and  directions  to  supervise
    educational loan schemes and has issued circulars.

26. I have had regard to a document produced, which is headed  "Educational
    Loans Scheme" dated April 2001. The finance minister in a meeting  with
    the Chief Executives of the public sector banks highlighted the role of
    commercial banks in facilitating the pursuit  of  higher  education  by
    poor, but meritorious students. In pursuance thereof, the Indian Banks'
    Association - IBA - constituted a study group under the chairmanship of
    one of the  banks  to  examine  the  issue  in  detail.  Based  on  the
    recommendation of the study group  a  comprehensive  model  educational
    loan scheme was prepared by the Indian banks' association for  adoption
    by all banks. The scheme aims at providing financial support  from  the
    banking system to  deserving  and  meritorious  students  for  pursuing
    higher education in India and abroad.

27. Ms Holmes has subsequently accepted that the bank is regulated for  the
    purpose of the Rules.

28. From the documentation produced I am  accordingly  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has provided evidence from the official regulatory  body  for
    India that the South Indian Bank Bank was regulated for the purpose  of
    student loans by the official regulatory body of India. I am  satisfied
    that he has shown that he satisfies the relevant requirements under the
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law and the decision  is
    set aside.

30. I substitute a fresh decision allowing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



    Signed        Dated: 8 June 2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
