
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17099/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2013                            |On 01 November 2013          |
|Prepared 24 October 2013                      |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                               charlotte kumi
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Akohene, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Thomas,  promulgated  on  28  August  2013,
    dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  refusal  to  issue  her
    with a residence card as confirmation of her right of residence as  the
    spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 10 March 1982.  On 20  June
    2011 married to Tony Gyamfi, a  citizen  of  Germany,  originally  from
    Ghana, who is employed in the United Kingdom.  The marriage took  place
    in Ghana by proxy, according to customary law in Ghana.   The  marriage
    was registered with the district registrar on 20 April  2012  following
    provision to the registrar of a statutory declaration executed  by  the
    fathers of the appellant and her husband.  It is the  appellant's  case
    that this marriage is valid under Ghanaian  law,  and  thus  is  to  be
    recognised as valid under English law.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's application for a residence card
    on the basis that she was not satisfied that the appellant was lawfully
    married to the sponsor as she was not satisfied that the  marriage  had
    been registered given that the statutory declaration provided  did  not
    comply  with  Section  3(1)  of  the  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985 (the relevant Ghanaian statute) in that it  did
    not state where the parties to the marriage were residing at  the  time
    of marriage and thus, as the declaration was not  valid,  the  marriage
    certificate was not valid as it was not supported by a valid  statutory
    declaration and therefore, absent evidence that they both attended  the
    wedding ceremony, was not satisfied they were lawfully married.

 4. The respondent considered also that the appellant was not entitled to a
    residence card on the basis that she was in a durable relationship with
    the sponsor.

 5. The appellant appealed against the decision on  the  grounds  that  the
    decision was contrary to her rights under European Law and pursuant  to
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations"). The appeal was accompanied by certificates issued by the
    Ghana  High  Commission  confirming  that,  amongst  other  things,   a
    statutory declaration from the appellant's and  sponsor's  fathers  and
    the certificate issued by the registrar in Accra were genuine  as  well
    as a copy of the UKBA's policy.  It was requested that  the  appeal  be
    dealt with without an oral hearing.

 6. In a determination promulgated on 28 August  2013  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thomas dismissed the appeal finding:

      i) that the issue was whether the appellant had  proved  that  she  is
         married to the sponsor and to  that  end  had  adduced  a  marriage
         certificate  recording  entries  in  the  register   of   customary
         marriages  in  respect  of  her  earlier  divorce  and  her  second
         marriage, letters of confirmation from the  Ghana  High  Commission
         and an affidavit from her and the sponsor's fathers [5];

     ii) that the appellant's previous marriage had properly been  dissolved
         [6];

    iii) that he attached little weight to the statutory declaration by  the
         fathers given a failure to explain the customary rights which  were
         performed, lack of evidence of presence otherwise  the  parties  to
         the wedding or of a dowry and they had not provided  evidence  that
         the marriage was still subsisting [7]; and therefore;

     iv) that the statutory declaration and documents based thereon were not
         sufficient  to  prove  that  the  appellant  is  married  or  in  a
         subsisting customary marriage as claimed.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision on  the
    grounds that in concluding that the appellant was not lawfully married,
    the judge had taken into account irrelevant  matters,  there  being  no
    requirement in Ghanaian law that the customary rights are explained  in
    an affidavit, had  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the  marriage
    certificate had been authenticated by the Ghanaian High Commission  and
    that as the registrar in Ghana had  been  satisfied  by  the  statutory
    declaration, although registration is no longer necessary, there is  no
    proper basis for concluding the marriage was not valid.

 8. On 16 September 2013 Designated Judge David Taylor  granted  permission
    to appeal on all grounds although observing that it was  arguable  that
    what the judge should have considered was whether German  national  law
    recognises the validity of proxy marriage, it being arguable  that  the
    relevant law is that of the country of which  the  EEA  national  is  a
    citizen.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

 9. Mr Akohene submitted that  in  addition  to  taking  into  account  the
    irrelevant matters identified in the grounds of appeal, the  judge  had
    confused the issues of whether the marriage was valid  and  whether  it
    was subsisting and, in taking into account the  issue  of  whether  the
    marriage was subsisting in  assessing  its  validity,  had  taken  into
    account an irrelevant matter.  Mr Walker accepted  that  in  doing  the
    latter the judge had erred.

10. I consider also that the judge erred in his approach  to  the  material
    before him.  The statutory declaration in this case does not  stand  on
    its own.  It is evident from the material before the Tribunal that this
    was produced to the Ghanaian authorities as a  step  necessary  to  the
    registration of a customary marriage.  A certificate to the effect that
    the customary marriage had been registered has been  produced  and  its
    authenticity was confirmed in a document issued by  the  Ghanaian  High
    Commission  which  in  addition  confirms  the  authenticity  of  those
    witnessing the statutory declaration.

11. It may well be that the statutory declaration did not comply  with  the
    strict requirements of Ghanaian statute but it  is  important  to  note
    that the authorities did issue the certificate as confirmation that the
    marriage  had  taken  place.   Absent  any  evidence  of  fraud  it  is
    inappropriate to question whether the Ghanaian authorities were correct
    in doing so.  It is not appropriate for a judge sitting in  the  United
    Kingdom to conclude on the basis of his interpretation of its law  that
    the authorities of a foreign country acted incorrectly in registering a
    marriage which is, in effect, what the judge has  done  by  not  taking
    into account the fact that the marriage certificate was issued  by  the
    competent authorities and its authenticity has been  confirmed  by  the
    Ghanaian High Commission.

12. In the circumstances, I consider that the judge did err in law  in  his
    approach to the evidence before him,  taking  into  account  irrelevant
    matters in assessing whether the marriage  was  valid  or  not  and  in
    failing to give proper weight to the confirmation of  the  authenticity
    of the marriage certificate produced by the Ghanaian High Commission.

13. Whilst the issue of the sponsor's capacity  as  a  German  national  to
    enter into the marriage was raised in the grant of permission,  neither
    party addressed me on this.  As a matter of private international  law,
    a party's capacity to enter into a marriage is governed by the  law  of
    his domicile.  There is no evidence before me that those with a  German
    domicile or nationality  lack  the  capacity  to  enter  into  a  proxy
    marriage, nor was such a submission made.

14. In remaking the decision, in light of  the  submissions  made  by  both
    parties, I am satisfied, on the balance of  probabilities,  that  given
    the  appellant's  marriage  to  her  husband,  performed  according  to
    customary rights,  has  been  registered  as  such  in  Ghana  and  the
    signatures of those witnessing the statutory declaration which preceded
    it have been confirmed by the Ghanaian High Commission,  and  that  the
    marriage is valid for the purposes of Ghanaian law.  Accordingly  I  am
    satisfied that the law is that the marriage is therefore to be  treated
    as valid in English law and accordingly, that being the only  basis  of
    which the appellant's application was refused, that the  appeal  should
    be allowed under the EEA Regulations.

SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

   1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of
      an error of law and I set it aside.
   2. I remake the appeal by allowing it under the EEA Regulations.


Signed                                  Date:  31 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

