
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17141/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2015                 |On 11th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     t o
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen
For the Respondent:    Ms E Norman


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal shall,  hereinafter,
    be referred to as the Secretary  of  State.   The  Respondent  in  this
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal shall, hereinafter, be referred to as  the
    Claimant.  This is  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in respect of a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Stott) promulgated on 8th January 2015 allowing the  Claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 25th March 2014 to  remove
    her from the UK under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.

 2. By way of background, the Claimant is a citizen of Nigeria and was born
    on 18th December 1968.  She has a daughter, also a citizen of  Nigeria,
    who was born on 29th April 1998.  The Claimant had, prior to coming  to
    the UK, lived in Italy for a number of years and, indeed, her  daughter
    had been born in that country.  The two of them then entered the UK  on
    12th July 2005 in possession of visit visas conferring leave  to  enter
    until 15th September 2005.  The Claimant and her daughter  remained  in
    the UK after their respective visit visas had expired.

 3. There is a history of the Claimant having made a number of applications
    on behalf of herself and her daughter to regularise her stay in the  UK
    but all of those  applications  have  been  refused.   Ultimately,  the
    Secretary of State took the decision referred to above with respect  to
    removal.  It was intended to  remove  the  Claimant  and  her  daughter
    together and to return them to Nigeria.

 4. As  noted,  the  Claimant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    successful.  It was allowed under what might  be  referred  to  as  the
    Article 8 related Immigration Rules on the basis that,  in  particular,
    the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1(a)  were  met.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was satisfied that,  in  this  context,  the  Claimant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her  daughter,  her
    daughter of course being a child, that the daughter had lived in the UK
    continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of
    application and it would not be reasonable to expect her (that  is  the
    daughter) to leave the UK.

 5. It is  perhaps  helpful,  at  this  stage,  to  set  out  the  relevant
    provisions of EX.1 which  are  contained  within  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  They are as follows;

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if -

             (a)

                  (i)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child who -

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                           age of 18 years  when  the  applicant  was  first
                           granted leave on the basis  that  this  paragraph
                           applied;

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British citizen or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                           continuously  for  at  least  the   seven   years
                           immediately preceding the  date  of  application;
                           and

                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the UK.

 6. Having summarised, in its determination, the  competing  arguments  and
    some of the evidence relied upon by the respective parties, the  First-
    tier Tribunal explained its key conclusions in this way;

         "11. I accept the evidence which has been provided by the Appellant
             and her daughter as to the length of time that they have spent
             away from Nigeria living in Italy and in this country.

         12.  I also accept the documentary  evidence  which  clearly  shows
             that the Appellant's daughter has taken full advantage of  the
             educational opportunities presented to her in this country and
             is  thriving  with  every   prospect   of   excellent   career
             development.

         13.  I take account  however of the  public  interest  factors  and
             responsibilities placed upon the Respondent to  maintain  firm
             and effective immigration control and to this extent take note
             of Section 117A-D of the amended 2002 Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act.

         14.  I have also taken particular account of the principles  to  be
             followed when assessing the best interests  of  children  when
             considering the proportionality assessment  under  Article  8,
             (see paragraph 10 of the case Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74).
             I accept that  the  interests  of  the  child  are  a  primary
             consideration which  can  be  outweighed  by  public  interest
             factors.  I also take account of the fact that  a  child  must
             not be blamed for matters for which he is not responsible such
             as the conduct of a parent.

         15.  In this case the Appellant's daughter  has  been  moved  as  a
             child in 2005 from Italy to this country and has only had  two
             short visits back to Nigeria.  She has lived here  ever  since
             and prior to that was living in Italy since her birth in 1998.
              She has never therefore experienced the language, culture  or
             environment of Nigeria.  It is apparent that  the  educational
             system in Nigeria is far inferior to that  available  in  this
             country  but  on  its  own  that  fact  would  not  provide  a
             determinative reason for her not returning to Nigeria with her
             mother.

         16.  However, in view of the massive cultural change and adaptation
             which  would  be  required  of  the  Appellant's  daughter,  I
             consider that it would not, at this stage, after  living  here
             for nine years and in Italy for seven years, be reasonable  to
             expect her to relocate with her mother to such an environment.



         17.  In view of that decision I consider  that  the  Appellant  has
             satisfied  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  as  regards  the
             parental requirements  and  also  those  set  out  in  Section
             EX.1(a)(ii)."

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The three grounds of appeal advanced were to the effect that
    the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  failing  to  identify  elements
    within the Claimant's daughter's private life which would point towards
    her return to Nigeria with  the  Claimant  as  being  unreasonable;  in
    failing to consider whether the Claimant's daughter would  be  able  to
    adapt to life in Nigeria and in  failing  to  take  into  account  "any
    countervailing factors", thereby failing to reach a balanced judgment.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted, in these terms, by  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal;

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent  of
         the Judge's consideration of the application  of  the  criteria  in
         Section 117.  A further arguable error of law arises in the context
         of the consideration of the issue of adaptation."

 9. The matter was then listed before me to consider whether the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision ought to be set  aside
    and to go on, if necessary or appropriate, to remake the decision.

10. Ms Pettersen, for the Secretary of State, relied upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the further point, regarding Section 117 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which had been raised in the grant  of
    permission.  She contended that the First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to
    take into account, in considering whether it would  be  reasonable  for
    the daughter to go to live in Nigeria, the  fact  that  her  mother  is
    Nigerian and could assist her with  the  adaptation  process  and  that
    English is widely spoken in Nigeria.  It  had  erred  in  treating  the
    daughter's length of residence in the UK and matters  relating  to  her
    education here as being determinative.  Whilst  Section  117  had  been
    mentioned there had been no overall  consideration  of  the  Claimant's
    history and matters relating to how the two  would  support  themselves
    had not been factored in when considering reasonableness.

11. Ms Norman, for  the  Claimant,  relied  upon  her  written  "Order  24"
    response.  She pointed to evidence which had been before the First-tier
    Tribunal, and which she said appeared to have been accepted, suggesting
    that the Claimant and her daughter  had  become  estranged  from  their
    family in Nigeria because of a risk the daughter might be subjected  to
    female genital mutilation.  It had been accepted  that  the  Claimant's
    daughter had never lived in Nigeria.  She  had  only  visited  for  two
    brief periods.

12. It is also right to note that, once I had heard  submissions  regarding
    the error of law issue, an application was made by Ms Norman, on behalf
    of the Claimant and in particular her daughter, for an anonymity order.
     Ms Norman informed me that a member of the press was  in  the  hearing
    room,  as  of  course  is  permitted,  but  said  that  it   would   be
    inappropriate for any details to be published regarding the Appellant's
    daughter who, of course, remains a child.  There were, she  said,  some
    sensitive background  issues  regarding  the  risk  of  female  genital
    mutilation.  Ms Pettersen indicated that she did not oppose the  making
    of such an order.

13. I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal did not make an error  of
    law such that its decision shall stand.  I explained my reasons orally,
    albeit briefly, to the parties and I now set them out in full.

14. As to the first ground relied upon by the Respondent, I do not think it
    right to say that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  identify  any
    elements of the Claimant's daughter's private  life  in  the  UK  which
    would point towards her return to Nigeria as being unreasonable.   What
    the First-tier Tribunal did was to note, in particular, the  fact  that
    the daughter had never lived in that country, the oral evidence  as  to
    that having been accepted, and that she had only had two  short  visits
    there.  It seems to me that the fact that she had  lived  most  of  her
    young life in the UK  and  had  never  lived  in  Nigeria  at  all  was
    significant  and  was  a  matter  of  obvious  relevance  as   to   the
    reasonableness or otherwise of her going to live in Nigeria.

15. As to the second ground, the First-tier Tribunal clearly  did  consider
    the question of the daughter's ability to adapt to life in Nigeria  and
    it was that which led it to say what it did  at  paragraph  16  of  its
    determination.  It had, prior to reaching the conclusion  contained  in
    that paragraph, noted some obstacles to adaptation, being the fact that
    she had never experienced "the  language,  culture  or  environment  of
    Nigeria" and that she had only ever lived in Italy and the UK.

16. As to the third ground, the Secretary of State does  not  say,  in  the
    grounds, what specific "countervailing factors" the First-tier Tribunal
    ought to have taken into account but did not.   In  any  event,  as  Ms
    Norman  points  out,  it  did  take  into  account  the  interests   of
    immigration control as a countervailing factor as noted at paragraph 13
    of its determination.

17. As to the point regarding Section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, again, at paragraph 13, it clearly  took  it  into
    account.  It is right to say that it did not specifically  address  the
    various factors contained within the Section but I see nothing  in  its
    determination to suggest that it lost sight of  them  or  that,  having
    said it was taking them into account, it did not do so.

18. It might be thought that the reasoning of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    relatively brief.  However, it seems to me that the Grounds of  Appeal,
    essentially,  amount  to  what  might  be  characterised  as   "reasons
    challenges".  In that context the  requirement  of  a  Tribunal  is  to
    provide adequate reasons.   In  my  judgment  that  standard  has  been
    reached.

19. I conclude, therefore, that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    error of law with the consequence that its decision shall stand.

20. As to anonymity, as indicated, Ms Norman made an application to me  for
    such an order, the First-tier Tribunal not  having  made  one.   Having
    heard what she had to say, as summarised above, and having  noted  that
    Ms Pettersen was not opposing the application, and bearing in mind  the
    Appellant's daughter is a minor, I decided to make such  an  order  and
    indicated, orally, at the hearing that I would.

Conclusions

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

22. I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

23. I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Therefore, the Claimant  and  members  of
    her family are granted  anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.   No
    report of these  proceedings,  in  whatever  form,  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the Claimant or any member of her family.   Failure
    to comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

