
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17057/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2016                            |On 7 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                             Md Shahin Khondoker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A O'Dair, Counsel instructed by Visa Inn
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 8 April  2016  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McWilliams which refused the  appeal  against
    refusal of leave as a Tier 4 student.

 2. The appellant here applied in time to extend his Tier  4  leave  on  26
    July 2013. On 20 January 2015 the  respondent  informed  the  appellant
    that the college that issued his CAS was no longer listed as a  Tier  4
    sponsor. He was informed that he had 60 days to find a new sponsor  and
    obtain a new CAS. The application was refused on 16 April 2015  as  the
    appellant had not provided a new CAS.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge McWilliams found against  the  appellant  for
    the reasons given at [14]  of  the  determination.  The  appellant  had
    contacted the respondent to ask for his passport back in order  to  sit
    for an English language test in order to obtain a new CAS  from  a  new
    sponsor. A certified copy was provided and a test booked but only after
    18 April 2016 and outside the  60  days  allowed.  In  the  event,  the
    appellant was not allowed to sit the  test  as  he  did  not  have  his
    original passport, but that was outside the 60 days.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  on  4
    November 2016 on the ground that the appellant had shown  that  he  had
    been prevented from finding a  new  sponsor  and  CAS  because  of  the
    respondent's failure to return his original passport as requested.

 5. Notwithstanding the defence put forward by the respondent in  the  Rule
    24 reply dated 18 November 2016, at the hearing before me  the  parties
    were in agreement that the appellant had been prevented from sitting an
    appropriate English language test as only a copy of  his  passport  was
    returned and that this had, in turn, prevented him from obtaining a new
    sponsor and CAS within the  60  days  allowed.  The  parties  indicated
    agreement to the error of law appeal being made out,  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal being set aside and the decision re-made.

 6. The parties also indicated that in that re-making  the  Upper  Tribunal
    retained a not in accordance with the law jurisdiction. This arose from
    Article  9(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.3,
    Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014/2771. This provides that
    the changes to the appeal regime brought in by the Immigration Act 2014
    did not apply to:

         "a decision made on or after 6th April 2015 to reuse an application
         to vary leave to enter or remain  made  before  20th  October  2014
         where the person was seeking leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant or
         as the family member of a Tier 4 Migrant and where  the  result  of
         that decision is that the  applicant  has  no  leave  to  enter  or
         remain."

 7. The  parties  were  in  agreement  that  under  that  jurisdiction  the
    respondent's decision had not been in accordance with the law as by her
    failure to return the original passport, the  appellant  had  not  been
    able to use the 60 days afforded to him to obtain a new sponsor and new
    CAS. Ms Fijiwala and Mr O'Dair agreed that the appeal should  therefore
    be allowed as not in accordance with the law.

 8. There was some discussion as to  where  that  left  the  appellant.  Ms
    Fijiwala conceded he was in difficulty as, where the obvious course was
    for the respondent to allow him a further 60 days with the  benefit  of
    his original passport in order to obtain  new  sponsor  and  CAS,  that
    would not be sufficient as his passport has now expired  and  he  would
    need to obtain a new one if the new period of 60 days was to be of  any
    real benefit to him. Ms Fijiwala indicated that this  would  appear  be
    appropriate matter for the case worker considering the re-making of the
    respondent's  decision  to  liaise  on  with  the   appellant's   legal
    representatives.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is allowed as not in accordance with the law.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 5 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


