
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17575/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              25th              January              2017
 On the 07th February 2017

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                          MR JOSHUA ANTHONY EJEMBI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Lam (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

             DECISION AND REASONS FOLLOWING THE RESUMED HEARING

   1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  who  was  born  on  the  21st
      February 1971.  On the 24th April 2015,  the  Respondent  refused  the
      Appellant's application for Leave to Remain in the United  Kingdom  on
      the basis of his Human Rights.  The Appellant appealed  that  decision
      to the First-tier Tribunal, and that appeal was allowed by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sweet in a decision promulgated on the 30th June  2016,
      in which  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
      Appellant and his dependents could not meet the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules, but nevertheless allowed the appeal  on  Article  8
      grounds.

   2.   That decision was appealed by the Secretary of State  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, and the error of law hearing was heard before  Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Peart on the 14th November  2016,  and  in  a  decision
      dated the same day, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart found that First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Sweet had not adequately dealt with the  issue  as
      to whether or not it would be reasonable to expect the  Appellant's  2
      children and their parents to return to Nigeria and therefore erred in
      his assessment of  Article  8.   Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Peart
      therefore set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet
      and ordered that the decision was to be remade by himself.

   3. However, in  a  decision  dated  the  29th  December  2016,  Principal
      Resident Judge Dawson, decided that she was satisfied on the materials
      before her, that it was not  practicable  for  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Peart to give a decision without undue further delay, (seemingly
      on the basis that he is not sitting for a few months) and that it  was
      appropriate for a Transfer Order to be made transferring the appeal to
      be heard by a differently constituted Tribunal, pursuant to the Senior
      President of Tribunals' Practice Statements.  It  was  on  that  basis
      that the resumed hearing was listed  before  me,  in  order  that  the
      decision could be remade without such delay.







   Substantive Issues Under Appeal

   4. Within the Respondent's original decision dated the 24th  April  2015,
      it was noted that the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on  the
      3rd November 2006 with a visit visa, valid for the period between  the
      3rd October 2006 until the 3rd April 2007, but that he  overstayed  on
      his visa. Thereafter he applied as a dependent spouse  on  his  wife's
      Human Rights application dated the 1st June 2011,  which  was  refused
      with no right of appeal.  The Appellant's wife Miss Elizabeth Temitope
      Williams, who was born on the 24th February 1975, and their 2 children
      Miss Patricia Ayomide Ejembi, who was born on the 18th  May  2008  and
      who is therefore now aged 8 years old, and Miss Martha Olamide Ejembi,
      who was born on the 8th August 2010, who is therefore now aged 6 years
      old,  were  dependents  upon  the  Appellant's  application  and  were
      considered in the same refusal notice.

   5.   It was found  within  the  refusal  notice  that  in  respect  of  a
      consideration of the Appellant's application under Appendix FM for the
      Partner Route, that his partner Miss Williams was in the UK unlawfully
      and that she was not a British citizen and not present and settled  in
      the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection.  It
      was therefore said that he did not fulfil the requirements to  qualify
      for leave by virtue of Paragraph E-LTRP.1.2  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules.  It was said that as the  eligibility  requirements
      were not met, the Appellant could not benefit from Paragraph EX.1.

   6. In respect of a decision under the Parent Route, it  was  stated  that
      neither of the children were British citizens and had not been in  the
      UK for 7 years as at the time of the application  and  that  therefore
      the Appellant failed to qualify for leave by virtue  of  Paragraph  E-
      LTRPT  2.2.   It  was  further  found  that  he  did  not  have   sole
      responsibility for the children as the children lived with himself and
      his partner as a family unit and that therefore  the  requirements  of
      Paragraph E-LTRPT 2.3 were also not met.  Again,  as  the  eligibility
      requirements were not met Paragraph EX.1 was said not to apply.

   7. In respect of the Appellant's  private  life,  it  was  further  found
      within the refusal notice that the requirements  of  Paragraph  276ADE
      were not met as the Appellant had not lived in the UK for 20 years, he
      having lived in the UK by that stage for  8  years.   It  was  further
      found that there would  not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration back into life in Nigeria were he to be required to leave,
      given that he had spent 35 years of his life in Nigeria.

   8. It was further found that although  the  Appellant  had  produced  NHS
      documentation confirming that  he  was  suffering  from  glaucoma  and
      hypertension, the Appellant's glaucoma was said in a letter  from  the
      NHS dated the 30th December 2014 to be stable  and  that  he  had  had
      several operations to both eyes and it was therefore found that he was
      not critically ill and was capable of travel.  It was found that there
      was no reason why his wife or another carer could  not  aid  him  upon
      return and that Nigeria has a medical system which could  be  utilised
      upon return. It was found that although the healthcare systems in  the
      UK and Nigeria were unlikely to be equivalent that did  not  make  the
      case exceptional and entitle him to remain.   It  was  said  that  the
      decision was not a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR or  Article  8,  on
      the basis of his medical condition.

   9. It was further stated  in  respect  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, that he would  be  returning  to
      Nigeria with his children and would be able  to  support  them  whilst
      they became used to living there and enjoying  their  full  rights  as
      citizens of Nigeria and that there is a functioning educational system
      in Nigeria which they would be able to enter.  It  was  said  that  he
      would be returning as a family unit with his  wife  and  children  and
      that they could enjoy family life together in Nigeria.

  10. In respect of the Appellant's wife Elizabeth Williams,  it  was  again
      found that she did not qualify under the Partner Route of Appendix FM,
      given that the Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and  was
      therefore not a British citizen and not present and settled in the  UK
      or here with refugee leave or humanitarian  protection.   Further,  in
      respect of the Parent Route, it was said that again neither child  had
      been in the UK for 7 years as at the time of the application and  that
      she did not have sole responsibility for the children.

  11.  In respect of her private life, it was again found that she  did  not
      meet the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE, that she had entered the UK
      on the 3rd November 2006, and therefore had lived  in  the  UK  for  8
      years by the date of the decision and not lived continuously in the UK
      for 20 years and again it was found  that  there  would  not  be  very
      significant obstacles to her reintegration back into life  in  Nigeria
      and that there were not any exceptional circumstances which  justified
      leave being granted outside of the Immigration Rules.

  12. In respect of the appellant's elder daughter Patricia,  it  was  found
      that she had been born in the United Kingdom on the 8th May  2008  and
      that she had previously applied as a dependent child on  her  mother's
      Human Rights application on the 1st June 2011, which had been  refused
      with  no  right  of  appeal.   It  was  said  that  as  her   parents'
      applications under Appendix FM had been refused she did not  meet  the
      requirements of Paragraph E-LTRC 1.6.  In respect of her private  life
      under Paragraph 276, it was found that she had lived in the UK  for  6
      years having been born in the UK on the 18th May 2008, but she was not
      a British citizen and was in fact a citizen of Nigeria  and  therefore
      did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules under Paragraph
      276ADE in respect of her private life.

  13.  The decision for the appellant's younger daughter Martha again  noted
      that she had been born in the UK on the 8th August 2010, but again  it
      was stated that she is a Nigerian national and that she also had  been
      a dependent child on her mother's Human Rights application on the  1st
      June 2011 which was refused with no right of appeal and that she  also
      did not meet the requirements under  the  Child  Route,  her  parents'
      application having been refused. It was further found that she did not
      meet the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE, on the basis that  she  had
      lived in the UK just for 4 years, by the date of the decision.

  14. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it  is  argued,  inter  alia,  that  the
      decision is in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR.  I remind myself  in  this  case  that  as  the
      decision  under  appeal  is  dated  the  24th  April  2015  from   the
      Respondent, and therefore postdates the 6th April 2015, and  that  the
      decision included a Human Rights decision, and that therefore  as  was
      correctly stated by the Respondent in the  refusal  notice,  the  more
      limited rights  and  grounds  of  appeal  apply,  and  that  the  only
      applicable ground of appeal in this  case  is  that  the  decision  is
      unlawful and contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998,  as
      being in breach of the Appellant's Human Rights.

  15. The previous Grounds of Appeal which include that the decision was not
      in accordance with the Immigration Rules, do not apply in  this  case,
      given the date of the human  rights  decision,  but  clearly,  as  the
      Immigration Rules were amended in 2012  to  reflect  the  government's
      position on Human Rights, the extent to which  the  Immigration  Rules
      have or have not been met is therefore still a  relevant  and  weighty
      consideration,  when  determining  whether  or  not  the  decision  is
      unlawful and contrary to Section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  when
      carrying  out  the  balancing   exercise   required   in   determining
      proportionality for the purpose of Article 8.

   Oral Evidence

  16. In giving oral evidence to me, the Appellant confirmed that  both  the
      contents  of  his  original  statement  and  the   contents   of   his
      supplemental statement, which was dated the 18th  January  2017,  were
      true to the best of his knowledge  and  belief  and  he  adopted  both
      statements as his evidence.  He told  me  in  addition  that  his  eye
      condition had not got better and that an operation to  remove  one  of
      his eyes was being listed and that he expected  to  receive  a  letter
      with the date for the operation to remove his eye.  He said that there
      was no provision in Nigeria for people  with  a  disability  and  that
      removal would be devastating for his children.  He said that he  would
      have no hope if he were removed to Nigeria.  He said that his children
      were established in their school.

  17. In cross-examination the Appellant said that he  thought  that  within
      the bundle there was a letter from last June  referring  to  the  fact
      that an operation on his eye  had  been  listed  for  July,  but  that
      operation had been moved.  Mr Lam told me that no such letter  existed
      within the bundle before me.  The Appellant further told  me  that  he
      had spent the great majority of his life in Nigeria and that he was  a
      Nigerian citizen, but said that he would not be able to  pick  up  his
      life if he were returned as he would have no opportunity of  obtaining
      housing.  He said that when he came to the UK he was able to see,  but
      now he could not and would not be able to cope  with  work.   He  said
      that at the moment he was being supported by charities in the  UK  and
      by the Holy Church, and St Luke's Holy Cross and by the  Jesus  Christ
      of Latter-day Saints.  He said that he had been sent a  letter  asking
      him to pay for his NHS treatment and that the NHS had said  that  they
      wanted payment in full, but that his lawyer had said the situation was
      with the Home Office.  He said that it had been  suggested  that  they
      pay �20 monthly, but the NHS had said that was too little.  He told me
      that his children are doing very well at  school  and  they  had  100%
      attendance.  He said that Patricia had eczema and that she  now  wears
      glasses and that her eyesight had been monitored.  He had not  brought
      any letters in respect of her eczema or eye checks, but he  said  that
      he did have letters somewhere  from  Specsavers.   There  was  no  re-
      examination.

  18. In answering my questions in clarification, the Appellant told me that
      his children had never been to Nigeria and did not know anything about
      Nigeria.  He said that they loved being in the UK.  He said  that  his
      children did have some Nigerian friends, but  also  friends  who  were
      from Kenya and other nationalities as well.  He said that he  had  not
      taught his children anything about Nigerian culture and background and
      that at school the children would talk about other  nationalities  and
      countries, but they had not said that they had  been  taught  anything
      specifically about Nigeria.

  19. He said that he had an aged father and mother in Nigeria but said that
      he was not in regular contact with them.  He said that he was from the
      north and that his wife was from the  south  and  that  therefore  his
      family did not now want anything to do with them.  He  said  the  same
      was true for  Miss  Williams'  family  as  well.   He  said  that  his
      grandchildren had not spoken to  their  grandparents.   The  Appellant
      further told me  that  the  children  go  swimming,  Patricia  was  in
      Brownies and Martha was in Rainbow and that Martha  also  helped  with
      the Salvation Army charity.  He said that the  children  had  lots  of
      friends at school and at church  and  swimming  and  at  Brownies  and
      Rainbow.  He said that Patricia went for sleepovers with  her  friends
      and that Patricia was also an alter girl at church.  He said  that  he
      himself was from the northern part of Nigeria from  Benue,  where  the
      main languages spoken were Tiv/Idoma, together with English, but  that
      education at school was in English.

  20. In answering questions arising out of my  questions  in  clarification
      put by Mr Lam, the Appellant  said  that  Hausa  was  a  language  for
      education in the north and that his children did not  know  any  other
      language other than English.  He said  that  English  was  used  as  a
      supplement to Hausa in the north.  When asked by me as to why he would
      not be able to relocate to the south of the country he  said  that  he
      would have no opportunity and would not be able to start a life  there
      and that there would be no opportunities for him in the south.

  21. I next heard from Miss Williams who confirmed that both  her  original
      statements and the contents of her more recent statement were true  to
      the best of her knowledge and belief  and  adopted  the  same  as  her
      evidence.  She said that if she was given the opportunity to  work  in
      the UK she would work very hard.  She  said  that  she  did  not  have
      anything more to do with her family and that if she had to return back
      to Nigeria she would have to take care of both  her  husband  and  her
      children and that they would end up on the streets and that they could
      not rely upon their parents for help following  the  family  fall-out,
      after the  couple  got  married.   She  said  the  children  would  be
      devastated if they had to return and that everything had settled  down
      after the original decision from Judge Sweet, but after  the  children
      knew the decision was being appealed, Patricia  had  become  withdrawn
      and her teacher in class had called to ask what  was  happening.   She
      said that Patricia would wake at night and did not want to  leave  her
      home and friends.

  22. In cross-examination, Miss Williams said that she would not be able to
      take care of herself and her husband and children and still be able to
      work and that she would not be able to cater for  all  of  them.   She
      said that she would be entitled to work in  Nigeria,  but  the  school
      fees would have to be paid for and that they would have to eat and  be
      clothed and that she would be the only one who would be able  to  work
      as her husband would not be able to work and that there would  be  no-
      one to help them.  She said that she was not working in the  UK.   She
      said that they got funding from some churches.  She said that the main
      language spoken in the south was Europa, but the school curriculum was
      in English. There were public schools and there was a lack of  funding
      for public schools so that they did not have chairs and  the  teachers
      often did not come to school.  There was no re-examination.

   Closing Submissions

  23. In his closing submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tufan asked
      for me to dismiss the appeal.  He said that  the  Appellant's  medical
      condition was not sufficiently severe such as to amount to a breach of
      Article 3, or Article 8.  He referred to the letter at page 22 of  the
      initial bundle in respect of the Appellant's medical  condition  dated
      the 25th May 2016 and said that the condition was stable and  was  not
      expected to deteriorate and  that  there  were  no  further  documents
      relating to his medical condition to  say  that  there  had  been  any
      deterioration.  He argued that Miss Williams would be able to  find  a
      job in Nigeria and would be entitled to work in Nigeria and  the  fact
      that there would be different living standards did not enter into  the
      equation.

  24.  He said that the appeal turned on the 2 children.  He said  that  the
      application had been made when the eldest child was still not 7  years
      old and that therefore Paragraph 276ADE was not met.  He  argued  that
      there had to be  compelling  circumstances  for  the  decision  to  be
      granted outside of the Immigration Rules for Section 117B to come into
      play.  However, he conceded that the fact the eldest child was  now  8
      years old could be a compelling circumstance.   He  argued  the  cases
      needed to be considered holistically and he recognised that each  case
      is fact specific.  He argued that following the Court of  Appeal  case
      of EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department,
      given neither parent had the right to remain, that was the  background
      against which the assessment should be carried out and that ultimately
      the question was whether it was reasonable for the children to  remain
      in the UK.

  25.  Mr Tufan conceded that the children had been born in the UK  and  had
      conducted all of their schooling in the UK and stated that it would be
      illogical to say that it would not be in the children's best interests
      to remain in the United Kingdom, but that equally it was in their best
      interests to be with their parents and it was reasonable for them  all
      to go back to Nigeria and it was proportionate for them to be removed.
       He submitted that the case of Azimi-Moayed v Secretary of  State  for
      the Home Department had been declared to be  wrong  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal in the case of MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department.  He argued that it was in  the  public  interest  for  the
      maintenance of an effective immigration  control  for  the  family  to
      return back to Nigeria.

  26. In his closing submissions on behalf of the Appellant, Mr  Lam  relied
      upon his Skeleton Argument, which I have fully taken  account  of  and
      also referred me to the Immigration Directorate Instructions from  the
      Respondent dated August 2015.  He argued that everything  turned  upon
      the question of proportionality and reasonableness.  He  further  said
      that it was in the best interests of the children to remain in the  UK
      and that the children were deep-rooted here and been  to  school  here
      and had friends and activities in the UK, such as going to church.  He
      argued that there was no  criminality  such  as  to  give  rise  to  a
      deportation and this is not a deportation case.   He  referred  me  to
      paragraphs 40, 47, 48, 49 and 103 of the Court of Appeal  decision  in
      the case of MA (Pakistan), which I have fully taken  account  of.   He
      argued  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  no  longer  had   family
      connections  in  Nigeria  and  there  was  no  contact   between   the
      grandparents and grandchildren, given the family fall-out.  He  argued
      that given the Appellant's medical condition it would be unlikely that
      he would be able to obtain employment.  He conceded specifically  that
      he  was  not  arguing  that  the  Appellant's  medical  condition  was
      amounting to a breach of Article 8 and said that the medical condition
      was not being argued in isolation in respect of the father's position,
      but said that the medical condition should be taken into account  when
      considering the question of reasonableness for the family  to  return.
      He argued it was unreasonable to expect the children to be required to
      leave the UK.

  27. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Respondent accepted that the children should
      not be blamed for the sins of their parents, but the Appellant and his
      wife had been here both illegally and precariously.

   My Findings of Fact and Analysis of the Case

  28. As stated above, given the date of the Human Rights decision  in  this
      case, the new more limited rights and grounds of appeal under  Section
      82 and 84 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as
      amended by the Immigration Act 2014,  apply  and  therefore  the  only
      relevant ground of appeal is whether or not the decision  is  unlawful
      pursuant to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, as being in breach
      of the  Appellant's  Human  Rights.   However,  as  stated  above,  in
      determining that  issue,  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the
      Immigration Rules were met and the reasons for why such Rules were not
      met, is still a  relevant  and  weighty  feature  in  determining  the
      question of reasonableness, and therefore has to still be considered.

  29. I further remind myself that the burden of proof is on  the  Appellant
      to satisfy me that he does have a private or family life in the UK for
      the purposes of Article 8(1), but if that is established,  the  burden
      is then on the Respondent to show  that  the  decision  taken  was  in
      accordance with the Law, and is proportionate to the legitimate public
      end sought to be achieved.

  30.  In considering this appeal, I have considered all of the evidence  in
      the case, including the original  refusal  decision,  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal, the Appellant's Skeleton Argument, the witness statements  and
      all of the supporting documentation contained  within  the  respective
      bundles, the oral evidence of the Appellant and his wife which I heard
      at the appeal hearing, together with their written statements, and all
      of the medical documentation and all of the documents contained within
      the supplemental  bundle  submitted,  including,  inter  alia,  school
      reports for both children and the letter from the Holy  Cross  Primary
      School on the children's educational situation dated the 19th  January
      2017.  Even if I do not refer to any  particular  piece  of  evidence,
      statement or documentation within this decision, or even if I  do  not
      put any particular submission, that does not mean that I  have  failed
      to consider the same, as I have considered all of the  documents,  all
      of the evidence and all of  the  submissions,  in  the  round,  before
      making any findings of fact whatsoever.

  31. It was not argued before  me  that  any  of  the  Appellants  met  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, which could then be used  as  a
      relevant factor when assessing reasonableness and proportionality  for
      the purposes of Article 8.  In that  regard,  as  was  quite  properly
      found by the Respondent in the refusal notice, neither  the  Appellant
      Mr Joshua Ejembi, nor  his  wife  Miss  Elizabeth  Williams,  met  the
      requirements under the Partner Route of Appendix FM,  given  that  for
      each of them their respective partner was in the  UK  unlawfully,  and
      therefore given that the Appellant and Miss Williams were not  British
      citizens, not present and settled in the UK and were  not  in  the  UK
      with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  but  were  in  the  UK
      unlawfully, and therefore did not meet the requirements of Paragraph E-
      LTRP 1.2 or 3 of Appendix FM.

  32. Nor did either of them meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
      in respect of the  Parent  Route,  given  that  at  the  time  of  the
      application, neither child was over 7 years old and therefore  neither
      child had been in the UK for 7 years as at the date of the application
      for the purpose of Paragraph E-LTRPT 2.2 of Appendix FM.

  33. Nor was it suggested before me that the Appellant met the requirements
      of Paragraph 276ADE, and in that regard, I do find that the  Appellant
      Mr Ejembi entered the UK on the  7th  November  2006,  as  was  stated
      within the refusal notice, and that he has therefore now been  in  the
      UK for 10 years, but has not been continuously in the UK for 20 years.



  34.  I do accept that he is suffering from glaucoma and  hypertension,  as
      stated within the NHS documentation provided, and that he did  undergo
      right cataract surgery which had not improved the vision in  his  eyes
      due to his advanced glaucoma and I accept that  the  level  of  visual
      acuity was only 5/60 in his right eye and  he  had  no  perception  of
      light in the  left  eye,  as  set  out  within  the  letter  from  the
      Moorfields Eye Hospital on the 26th May 2016.  It was  also  confirmed
      within that letter that he has a primary open angle glaucoma which  is
      very advanced in nature and has also developed  an  infection  in  the
      left eye in the past called endophthalmitis which would  have  had  an
      impact on his vision, and it was stated within that letter that it was
      essential that he is  monitored  by  an  ophthalmologist  due  to  the
      advanced degree of glaucoma and that if not monitored the  intraocular
      pressure in his right eye may become  elevated  and  this  would  need
      intervention which would  not  happen  without  monitoring.   On  this
      basis, I do accept the evidence given by the Appellant in his  initial
      statement that he has been registered as blind, and this was confirmed
      by the certificate of a person as sight  impaired  or  severely  sight
      impaired (blind) wherein the Consultant Miss Nolan has indicated  that
      the Appellant is severely sight impaired (blind) following examination
      on the 22nd July 2014, at page 62 of the bundle.

  35. However, the letter from Moorfields Eye Hospital dated  the  26th  May
      2016, indicated that the Appellant's vision was stable and  that  they
      would not be expecting any further deterioration in  his  vision,  but
      likewise there would not be an improvement.  No  documentary  evidence
      has been submitted by the  Appellant  to  substantiate  his  assertion
      raised within the original statement and in evidence before  me,  that
      an operation was planned for July to remove one of his eyes, and I  do
      not accept that that is the case, given the  lack  of  any  supporting
      evidence in that regard, which the Appellant I find should  have  been
      in a position to produce, had  it  existed.   In  light  of  any  such
      documentation, I am not prepared to accept that  he  is  scheduled  to
      have one eye removed, but I do accept and find that  he  is  blind  as
      claimed, in light of the medical evidence.

  36. However, even though the Appellant is blind, if he were returned  with
      his wife and children, I do  not  accept  that  there  would  be  very
      significant obstacles to him being able to reintegrate back into  life
      in Nigeria.  Although the fact that he is blind  would  give  rise  to
      problems with him being able to work, he has lived for the majority of
      his life in Nigeria and does speak the local  language  in  he  north,
      together with English, which  is  one  of  the  primary  languages  in
      Nigeria, and he had grown up in the country and is familiar  with  the
      culture.  He will have the same difficulties in  obtaining  employment
      in the United Kingdom.  However, there is I find, nothing  to  prevent
      his wife from obtaining employment, and for the children to be sent to
      state schools.  Although the schooling may not be at  the  same  level
      and quality as that provided in England, that does not mean that it is
      a very significant obstacle to reintegration.

  37. Further, as far as Miss Williams is concerned, she again has not lived
      in the UK for 20 years, she having entered the UK on the  3rd  October
      2006 as a visitor.  She therefore has now been in the UK for 10 years,
      but again, I do not consider, given that given she is also a  Nigerian
      citizen with full rights to live in that country and given that she is
      able to work, that she will have  any  difficulties  in  reintegrating
      back into that country, even though she would be  returning  with  the
      appellant and her 2 children.  There is insufficient evidence to  show
      the Appellant is unable to care for himself, even though he is  blind,
      or that any care he requires cannot be provided within Nigeria.

  38. Further, as regards to the 2 children  they  also  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, in that Patricia  was  born  in
      the United Kingdom on the 8th May 2008, but is a Nigerian citizen  and
      therefore had not lived in the UK for at least 7 years as at the  date
      of the application for the purpose  of  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  and
      further, her parents' application having been  refused,  she  did  not
      meet  the  requirements  of  the  Child  Route  under   Appendix   FM.
      Similarly, Martha, who was born in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  8th
      August 2010, again was also a Nigerian citizen and therefore similarly
      had not lived in the  UK  for  7  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
      application, and again her parents' application having  been  refused,
      she did not meet the requirements of the Child  Route  under  Appendix
      FM.

  39. The fact that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules, nor did his dependents, is a relevant  and  weighty
      factor that does have to be taken  into  account  and  is  taken  into
      account by me in consideration of  the  appeal  when  determining  the
      question of  reasonableness,  when  determining  whether  or  not  the
      decision is proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought  to  be
      achieved under Article 8.

  40. I further bear in mind that it was specifically  conceded  by  Mr  Lam
      that the Appellant's medical condition was not so severe as to  amount
      to a breach of Article 8.  I further find that the Appellant's medical
      condition is not at a stage where it is life threatening and where  he
      would not be exposed to such a degree of suffering, if removed, during
      any terminal stages of a condition, such as to potentially amount to a
      breach of Article 3.

  41. However, I do find that the Appellant does have a family life  in  the
      UK with his wife and children, of  sufficient  magnitude  such  as  to
      potentially engage Article 8.  When considering the 5  stage  test  as
      set out by the House of Lords in the case of R (Razgar) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL  27,  I  do  find  that  the
      proposed removal would be an interference by a public  authority  with
      the exercise of the Appellant's right to and respect for  his  private
      and family life in the UK, and I do find that he  had  both  a  family
      life and a private life in the UK given that he has been in the UK now
      for 10 years, and has established himself with a private life  in  the
      UK during that time.  I further do find that  such  interference  will
      have consequences  of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
      operation of Article 8.  It is further clear that the interference  is
      in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in
      the interests of national security, public  safety  and  the  economic
      wellbeing of the country and for the  protection  of  the  rights  and
      feelings of others.

  42. Ultimately, the fifth stage of the Razgar test is whether or not  such
      interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought  to
      be achieved.

  43. I remind myself that when  the  court  determines  whether  or  not  a
      decision made under the Immigration Act breaches a person's  right  to
      respect for private and family life under Article 8 and  as  a  result
      would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  in
      considering the public interest question, the court must  have  regard
      in all cases to the considerations  listed  in  Section  117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014.

  44. This is not a case involving deportation, and therefore the additional
      factors listed in Section 117C do apply.

  45. As stated by Lord Justice Elias in  the  case  of  MA  (Pakistan)  and
      others v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  and  another
      [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [17] Section 117B "Subsection (6) falls into  a
      different category again.  It does not simply identify  factors  which
      bear upon the public interest question.  It resolves that question  in
      the context of Article 8 applications which satisfy the conditions  in
      paragraphs (a) and (b).  It does so by  stipulating  that  once  those
      conditions are satisfied, the public interest  will  not  require  the
      applicant's removal.  Since the interference with the right to private
      or family life under Article 8(1) can only be justified where there is
      a sufficiently strong countervailing public  interest  falling  within
      Article 8(2), if the public interest does not  require  removal,  then
      there is no other basis on  which  removal  could  be  justified.   It
      follows, in my judgement, that there can  be  no  doubt  that  Section
      117B(6) must read as a self-contained  provision  in  the  sense  that
      Parliament has stipulated that where the  conditions  specify  in  the
      subsection  are  satisfied,  the  public  interest  will  not  justify
      removal.  It is not legitimate  to  have  regard  to  public  interest
      considerations  unless  that  is  permitted,  either   explicitly   or
      implicitly, by the subsection itself."

  46.   However, as Lord Justice  Elias  went  on  to  find,  following,  he
      considered himself bound by the previous  decision  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in the case of MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450, to find that when considering  whether
      or not it would be reasonable to expect a qualifying  child  to  leave
      the United Kingdom, all of the relevant public interest considerations
      had to be taken into account, and that analysis was not limited to the
      circumstances of the child itself, but  included  all  of  the  public
      interest considerations applicable in the case including the  position
      of  the  parents  and  the  whole  family  and  the  public   interest
      considerations affecting them.

  47. It is relevant in this case that although she was not aged  7  by  the
      date of the application, Patricia, who was born on the 8th  May  2008,
      is now 8 years old, and  therefore  is  a  qualifying  child  for  the
      purposes of Section 117D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002, in that she is under the age of 18 and has now lived in  the
      United Kingdom for a continuous period of 7 years or  more.   In  such
      circumstances consideration has to be given to Section 117B(6) of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which states that:

      "117B(b)  In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
      the public interest does not require the person's removal where:

      (a)  the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
      with a qualifying child and

      (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom."

  48. It is clear and I find as a  fact  that  the  Appellant  does  have  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with Patricia, who  is  a
      qualifying child.  Nor is the Appellant  liable  to  deportation,  and
      therefore, in determining whether or not the public interest  requires
      the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom, the question that has
      to be answered is whether or not it would be reasonable to expect  the
      child, Patricia, to leave the United Kingdom.

  49. I remind myself, when considering that issue, that as  stated  by  the
      Upper Tribunal in the case of PD and others  (Article  8  -  conjoined
      family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108, that  in  considering  the
      conjoined Article 8 ECHR claims of multiple family  members  decision-
      makers should first apply the Immigration  Rules  to  each  individual
      applicant and if appropriate, then consider Article 8 outside  of  the
      Rules.  This exercise will  typically  entail  the  consideration  and
      determination of all claims jointly, so as to ensure that all material
      facts and considerations are taking into account in each case.

  50. I remind myself as stated by Lord Hodge  in  the  case  of  Zoumbas  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74 at [10] that
      "the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  an  integral  part  of   the
      proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR and that in making the
      assessment  the  best  interests  of   a   child   must   be   primary
      consideration, although not always the only primary consideration, and
      the child's best interests do not of themselves have the status  of  a
      paramount consideration.  It was further stated that although the best
      interests of a child can be outweighed by  the  cumulative  effect  of
      other  considerations,  no  other  consideration  can  be  treated  as
      inherently more significant and that it is important to have  a  clear
      idea of the child's circumstances and what  is  in  the  child's  best
      interests before asking oneself whether those interests are outweighed
      by the force of other considerations.  It was also stated that a child
      must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible,
      such as the conduct of a parent".

  51. Further, as was stated by Lord Justice Christopher Clarke in the  case
      of EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2014] EWCA Civ 874, that "the best interests of a  child  are  to  be
      determined by reference to the child alone without  reference  to  the
      immigration or status of either parent" and that  as  stated  by  Lord
      Justice Elias in the case of MA (Pakistan) at [53] that  "accordingly,
      when making that assessment, it would be inappropriate  to  treat  the
      child as having a precarious status merely because that  was  true  of
      the parents".

  52. In considering the best interests of the children in this  case,  both
      in terms  of  the  best  interests  of  Patricia  and  Martha,  having
      considered all of the factors  in  the  case,  but  including  factors
      referred to within the case of EV (Philippines) at [35], I do bear  in
      mind that Patricia has now been in the UK for 8 years, and Martha  has
      been in the UK now for 6 years, and that both children  were  born  in
      the UK and that they are aged 8 and 6 respectively.  I  bear  in  mind
      therefore that Patricia has been in the UK educational  system  for  4
      years and Martha has been in the UK educational system for 2 years.  I
      bear in mind that both children are at the same  primary  school,  and
      bear in mind and accept that both children have never been to Nigeria.
       I further accept and find that the children do not have  any  contact
      with their grandparents or other relatives in Nigeria, which I  accept
      having heard from the Appellant in this  regard,  given  the  fall-out
      between both the Appellant and his wife and their respective  families
      in Nigeria, given that the families disagreed with the couple  getting
      married, given that one was from the north of the country and one  was
      from the south.  I also accept the evidence from the Appellant that he
      and his wife have not specifically taught the children  about  Nigeria
      or Nigerian culture, and they have  grown  up,  although  having  some
      Nigerian friends, and within the Nigerian community in the  UK,  their
      knowledge of Nigerian life  and  culture  is  limited,  and  that  the
      children do not have any knowledge of the local languages  other  than
      English, spoken in Nigeria.  I therefore do find that although English
      is taught at school, both children would have linguistic  difficulties
      in adapting to life in Nigeria in terms of being able  to  communicate
      with people in the local languages, other than in English.

  53. Indeed, it was conceded by Mr Tufan, that it could  not  realistically
      be said that it was not in the  best  interests  of  the  children  to
      remain in the United Kingdom, and I  find  that  it  is  in  the  best
      interests of the children to remain in the United Kingdom, where  they
      have been born and brought up, even though they are Nigerian  citizens
      and do have full rights as Nigerian citizens, but having I find  never
      studied in Nigeria, and having lived all their lives  in  the  UK  and
      having been brought up in the UK, it is in  their  best  interests  to
      remain in the UK.  I further find it is in their best interests  given
      their young ages to remain with both parents.

  54. However, the fact that it is in the Patricia's best interest to remain
      in the UK as a qualifying child, does not mean that it is in answer to
      the question as to whether or not it would  be  reasonable  to  expect
      Patricia to leave the United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of  Section
      117B(6).

  55. In that regard, I fully have to take into account, which I do, all  of
      the relevant public interest considerations in this case, and  I  take
      account of the fact that the maintenance of an  effective  immigration
      control is in the public  interest  and  that  it  is  in  the  public
      interest and in particular in the interests of the economic  wellbeing
      of the country that people who seek to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
      are financially independent because such persons are not a  burden  on
      taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society.   I  bear  in
      mind  in  this  case  that  the  Appellant  and  his  family  are  not
      financially independent, as neither the Appellant  nor  Miss  Williams
      are working, and that they are dependent currently upon  charity  from
      the church, which I accept as  being  the  current  situation,  having
      heard from them in that regard.  I further accept  having  heard  from
      them that the church is currently paying their rent.

  56. I also accept and find that the Appellant would not be able to  easily
      find work in the UK given his blindness, although Miss Williams  would
      be able to if allowed to work (which currently she is not  because  of
      her status).   However,  the  situation  remains  that  they  are  not
      currently financially independent.

  57. I do consider, however, that both the  Appellant,  his  wife  and  the
      children are able to speak  English.   I  do  further  find  that  the
      relationship between the Appellant and his wife  started  in  1992  as
      claimed, and therefore that relationship was formed before  either  of
      them had come to  the  UK.   However,  I  do  bear  in  mind  that  in
      considering the public interest, little weight should be  given  to  a
      private life established at  a  time  when  a  person  is  in  the  UK
      unlawfully, and that the Appellant and his wife entered the  UK  on  a
      visit visa valid from the 3rd October 2006 until the 3rd  April  2007,
      after which time they overstayed, and although Miss Williams had  made
      a Human Rights application on the 1st June 2011, that application  was
      refused, and that therefore they have been in the UK unlawfully  since
      that date. In addition, both parents themselves and their children  do
      not have any Indefinite Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom, and  in
      such circumstances the status of the  Appellant,  his  wife  and  both
      children, including Patricia is that they are precarious.  I  bear  in
      mind in that regard  the  decision  of  the  President  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal Mr Justice McCloskey in the case  of  Kaur  (children's  best
      interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 at  [5  and  6]
      that:

      "5. The legislative instruction to  attribute  'little  weight'  to  a
      person's private life established or  developed  during  a  period  of
      unlawful or precarious residence in the United Kingdom is  unambiguous
      and unqualified.  This legal rule appears to have the effect,  in  the
      not untypical case, that while the child's  best  interests  have  the
      status of a primary consideration, the private lives  of  parents  and
      children developed during periods of precarious or unlawful  residence
      in the United Kingdom are automatically and compulsorily given  little
      weight.

      6.  Notably, neither section  117B  (4)  nor  (5)  makes  any  special
      prescription for children.  In  particular,  Parliament  has  made  no
      distinction between adults and children.  These  statutory  provisions
      embrace any person, irrespective of age, whose private life  falls  to
      be considered in any given case.  This is not without significance not
      least because, in practice, it is the conduct of parents  which  gives
      rise to unlawful and precarious periods of private life  developed  by
      children."

      58.   Mr Justice McCloskey's found that although the precariousness of
      a child had to be ignored when assessing  a  child's  best  interests,
      that was still a relevant factor that had to be taken into account  in
      conducting the reasonableness assessment.  However, as was  stated  by
      the President of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Kaur,  the  "little  weight"
      provisions in Part 5A of the 2002 Act do not entail an absolute, rigid
      measurement or concept; "little weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,
      within its self-contained boundaries, will result in  the  measurement
      of the quantum of weight considered appropriate in the fact  sensitive
      context of every case.

      59.   In that regard, I do bear in mind that apart  from  overstaying,
      there has been no other illegality on the part of the Appellant or his
      wife, and that neither child is to be blamed for  the  sins  of  their
      parents and that neither child has  deliberately  overstayed  or  been
      here illegally, and that therefore the concept of little  weight  does
      not mean that no weight should be attached  to  the  private  life  of
      Patricia that she has formed in the  UK,  through  her  attendance  at
      initially Rainbow, then Brownies, and her active involvement with  the
      church to the degree that she is an alter girl at the church, and  her
      schooling, where from her school reports, she is doing  very  well  at
      school.  I further do bear  in  mind  in  that  regard  that  she  has
      developed close friendships with children in the UK,  with  whom  that
      her father said she went  for  sleepovers,  and  that  although  those
      friendships could be maintained to some degree,  by  modern  means  of
      communication, such as telephone,  Skype,  etc.,  they  would  not  be
      maintained at anywhere near the same level as fact-to-face contact  on
      a regular basis, and that Patricia would, if removed, not be  able  to
      partake  with  her  friends  in  the  Brownies  activities  or  church
      activities which they currently do in the UK.  However, I do  bear  in
      mind that there are churches in Nigeria which she  would  be  able  to
      attend.   I do bear in mind in this regard that during the first years
      of her life, she was more likely to be focussed upon her parents  than
      her surroundings, but now that she is 8 years old, she  has  I  accept
      and find as a fact formed a significant private life together with her
      family life in the UK.

  58. I further do bear in mind in terms  of  consideration  of  the  public
      interest that the Appellant himself is likely to be a continual burden
      on the public finances, as if the church reaches a time where they are
      no longer prepared to fund him, then it is likely that he will end  up
      being on benefits, given his blindness, even if his wife were working.



  59. I further do bear in mind in this regard,  in  considering  the  major
      consideration of the public interest that it was not until  2011  that
      the Appellant and his wife sought to regularise  their  position,  but
      that application in  itself  failed  with  no  right  of  appeal,  and
      thereafter no further application was made until 2015.

  60.  However,  even  taking  into  account  all  of  the  public  interest
      considerations, which I do, bearing in mind in this case that Patricia
      is now 8 years old, and although a  Nigerian  citizen  and  not  a  UK
      citizen and therefore not entitled as of right to be educated  in  the
      UK, she has now been in the UK education system for in the region of 4
      years. Further, she has never been to Nigeria and  I  accept  has  not
      been taught about the country or the culture by her parents and  there
      is no evidence that she had obtained such information from school.   I
      further do bear in mind that she only  speaks  English  and  does  not
      speak any of the local languages of Nigeria, so would have  difficulty
      communicating with local children other than in English, although I do
      bear in mind that English in taught in the schools and I find  is  the
      primary language for teaching  in  Nigeria.   However,  given  that  I
      accept that Patricia does not have contact with family in Nigeria  and
      has no friends there, I do find that it is not reasonable, in light of
      all of the circumstances and fully taking account of all of the  wider
      public interest considerations in this  case  for  her  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom, given her private life in the UK.

  61. Although Mr Lam referred me to the Immigration Directorate Instruction
      from August 2015, that direction was not in force as at  the  date  of
      decision and I have not taken account of the same.

  62. I therefore do find that it is not reasonable to  expect  Patricia  to
      leave the United Kingdom as a qualifying and that therefore the public
      interest does not require the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom, and that in such circumstances, I find that  section  117B(6)
      is satisfied. I find that the decision reached is disproportionate  to
      the legitimate public  end  sought  to  be  achieved  and  is  thereby
      unlawful as being contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998,
      in terms of being in breach of the Appellant's right to a family  life
      in the UK, bearing in  mind  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect
      Patricia to leave.

Notice of Decision

I allow the Appellant Mr Ejembi's  appeal  on  Human  Rights  grounds  under
Article 8;

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before me.

Signed

R F McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 1st February 2017





TO THE RESPONDENT

Fee Award

The Appellant having succeeded in his appeal, any fee paid by him should  be
refunded to him in full.

Signed

R F McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 1st February 2017
