
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17779/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th October 2016                     |On 31st October 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   EUN [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr U Khan, Amazon  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Eun [J] against the decision of Judge Moxon  made
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12th April 2016.

 2. The appellant was born on [~] 1938 and is a citizen of North Korea. She
    came with her son to the UK on 15th  May  2008  and  with  him  claimed
    asylum.  Her son's application was allowed. Whilst  hers  was  refused,
    she was granted discretionary leave until 28 October  2011,  which  was
    then extended until 1st November 2014.

 3. She submitted an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  16th
    October 2014 which was refused on 25th  April 2015  and  this  was  the
    decision which came before the Immigration Judge.

 4. The judge recorded that he had had sight of the  respondent's  decision
    allowing discretionary leave dated 2nd November 2011.  It  states  that
    the appellant  was unable to  care for her self, requiring a high level
    of personal assistance in basic self-care tasks.  Since  being  granted
    leave in 2008 the appellant has had a  heart  bypass  and  also  had  a
    pacemaker fitted, in 2009. She has also been diagnosed  with  hepatitis
    C.  She suffered from slurred speech, memory problems, minimal mobility
    and lack of urinary control.

 5. On that basis the respondent considered that the appellant's  situation
    remained the same as that in 2008. Indeed her dependence on her son had
    increased as her self-care capabilities and health had deteriorated. It
    was decided to make a discretionary grant of limited  leave  to  remain
    for three years.

 6. In relation to the present application, it is said  by  the  respondent
    that she sent out a letter in March 2015 to the appellant asking her to
    provide medical evidence about her present  condition.   There  was  no
    reply to that letter; it is probable that the lack of reply  in  itself
    led to the present refusal.

 7. When the matter came  before  the  Immigration  Judge  there  was  some
    medical evidence from her GP, dated 2 June 2015,  setting  out  briefly
    the appellant's complex medical history.

 8. The judge stated that the medical evidence was minimal.  There  was  no
    specific evidence from the appellant  as  to  her  care  needs  and  no
    evidence whatsoever from her son or daughter-in-law.  The assertion  in
    the grounds  of  appeal  that  she  had  Alzheimer's  disease  was  not
    supported by the medical evidence. Since he did  not  have  any  cogent
    evidence of continuing care needs and no cogent evidence that any  such
    needs could not be catered for in  North  or  South  Korea,  she  could
    reasonably return there.  She had lived in Korea for over 60 years  and
    could maintain  contact  with  family  members  in  the  UK  by  modern
    technology or through visits.  On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

 9. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds
    relating  to  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  medical   evidence.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Colyer on 9th September 2016.



10. At the hearing Mr Duffy helpfully acknowledged that the conditions from
    which the appellant suffered, which were accepted  by  the  respondent,
    would not improve with time. He said that it appeared  that  the  judge
    had not  properly grasped the underlying facts of this case.

11. The decision is set aside on the basis that  the  judge  did  not  have
    proper regard to all  of  the  relevant  evidence,  in  particular  the
    evidence  accepted  by  the  respondent  in  2011  when  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave was made.

12. It is the appellant's case that she never received  the  letter  asking
    for further information and if it had  been  received  she  would  have
    responded.

13. Mr Duffy accepted that there was no record on the file  of  the  letter
    having been sent and he also accepted  that  it  was  normal  to  grant
    indefinite leave to remain after a six  year  period  of  discretionary
    leave.  It was seem that the appellant would be eligible for a grant of
    indefinite leave  under the policy and he had nothing  to  say  against
    the appellant although of course it would be a matter for the Secretary
    of State to decide whether indefinite leave should be granted.

14. Mr Khan argued that the appeal ought to be allowed. He referred  me  to
    the transitional arrangements in relation to those  appellants  granted
    discretionary leave before 9th July 2012. At 10.1 of the relevant  IDI,
    it is said that those granted leave under the DL policy in force before
    9th July 2012 will normally continue to be dealt with under that policy
    through to settlement, if they continue to qualify for further leave on
    the same basis as  their  original  discretionary  leave  was  granted.
    Normally they will be eligible to apply for settlement  after  accruing
    six years' continuous discretionary leave.

15. In this case  the  appellant  has  had  two  sets  of  three  years  of
    discretionary leave. The circumstances remain the same. The  medication
    list shows that she is receiving the same medication as she did in 2010
    with some additions. Mr Khan confirmed that she was still  being  cared
    for by her son and daughter-in-law.

16. It is quite clear that the appellant's medical circumstances  are  very
    similar to those from which she  suffered  in  2008  and  2011  and  if
    anything have got worse by passage of time. It would also  seem  to  me
    that she would be likely to succeed on  the  basis  of  fulfilling  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(6)  in   view   of   her   manifest
    difficulties in establishing herself in South Korea,  a  country  where
    she has never in fact lived.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal is therefore allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 31 October 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
