
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/17977/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 November 2017               |On 13 December 2017              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     o g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, Counsel, instructed by Elizabeth
Millar, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This appeal came before me for an error of law hearing on 11 September
2017, following which I found an error of law in the decision of First tier
Tribunal Judge Sullivan and adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing
before the Upper Tribunal. A copy of that decision is appended.

Hearing

2. The appeal came before me for a resumed hearing on 10 November 2017, on
the basis of submissions only, the Appellant having been assessed by a
chartered consultant psychologist, Dr Rachel Thomas, as not being fit to
give evidence [second re-examination report dated 6.10.17 at [35] & [36]].

3. I heard submissions from both parties, which I have recorded in full in
my typed record of proceedings. In brief, Ms Robinson argued that removal
of the Appellant would be contrary: (i) to article 3 of ECHR due to the
Appellant's very poor mental health and the high risk of completed suicide;
(ii) paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules, given that there are
very significant obstacles to his integration in Ukraine and (iii) Article
8 outside the Rules and section 117 NIAA 2002 considerations. She sought to
rely upon her skeleton arguments prepared for the hearing before the FtT on
2 November 2016; the error of law hearing on 11 September 2017 and for the
hearing before the Upper Tribunal, dated 9 November 2017.

4. Mr Melvin argued that the high threshold in respect of Article 3 had not
been met; that Dr Thomas is not a consultant psychiatrist and so is not
sufficiently qualified to diagnose that the Appellant would be at a
significant risk of suicide on return. He submitted that the Appellant has
parents and a brother in Ukraine and there are no very significant
obstacles to his integration there. In respect of Article 8 outside the
Rules, whist the Home Office accepted that he has been in the UK for 16
years he has had no leave since 2008; he is not financially independent, he
is accessing to a degree healthcare in the UK. The Home Office also accept
the Appellant speaks English and that there is little in the way of
criminality shown, but overall the interests of a firm, fair immigration
policy outweigh his article 8 private life cf.  Jeunesse v Netherlands and
there are no exceptional circumstances.

5. In her reply, Ms Robinson stated that she was surprised Dr Thomas'
expertise was being questioned, not least because her first report was
before the Respondent but nothing was raised as to her expertise or
diagnosis cf. [23] of the refusal letter.  Dr Thomas at page 3 of her
report clearly explains the difference between consultant psychiatrists and
psychologists and fully acknowledges at [43] that medication is not her
area of expertise. In each of her reports she has considered causation and
the consistency of reporting and that the Appellant is psychiatrically
credible. Ms Robinson further reminded me that, in respect of the
assessment of the Appellant's credibility, the
starting point is the determination of Judge Malins in 2008 cf. Devaseelan
[2002] UKIAT 00702.



The factual background and evidence

6. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in November 2001, with a
student visa and studied English and subsequently, for a degree in
Management. He then applied for leave to remain under the International
Graduate Scheme but this application was refused on the basis that the
Appellant's degree was not recognised in the UK as a qualifying degree.
Whilst his appeal to the First tier Tribunal was unsuccessful, the Judge in
the determination promulgated on 22 April 2008 expressly found the
Appellant to be a "sincere and credible witness" [8] and that it was unjust
that, although the Appellant's degree would be recognised for the purposes
of the HSMP, it was not recognised for the purpose of the IGS. The
Appellant then applied for a residence card based on his long term
relationship with his EEA national partner, however, this was mishandled by
his previous representatives an the relationship subsequently broke down,
thus the Appellant became an overstayer. A subsequent relationship with a
different EEA national also broke down.

7. On 19 February 2014, the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the
basis of his length of residence and private life. A report from Dr Thomas
was also submitted in which she opined that the Appellant was suffering
from entrenched symptoms of a Major Depressive Disorder and although he
presented a mild suicide risk, this would immediately increase to a severe
risk in the event of deportation to Ukraine. In a decision dated 29 April
2014, the Respondent refused the application without a right of appeal. A
request for reconsideration was made, due to the deterioration in the
Appellant's mental health and a new decision with the right of appeal was
made on 28 April 2015.

8. At the hearing before FtTJ Sullivan, the Appellant sought to rely upon a
second report by Dr Thomas dated 7.8.16 and a letter dated 4.7.16 in which
she opined that the Appellant's psychiatric symptoms were considerably
worse than when she had first examined him in 2014; background evidence
relating to Ukraine and letters of support from friends.

9. At the hearing before me, the Appellant sought to rely upon an
additional bundle of background evidence in relation to Ukraine and a short
second supplementary bundle contained a third report from Dr Thomas dated
28.10.17 and a short updating witness statement from the Appellant dated
8.11.17. I have taken all the evidence into account in reaching my
decision.

My findings

10. First, I turn first to the issue of the credibility of the Appellant's
account and reasons for seeking to remain in the United Kingdom. I accept
the submissions made by Ms Robinson that, following Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT
00702, the decision of Judge Malins and her finding at [8] that the
Appellant is a sincere and credible witness is the starting point. The
Appellant's credibility was not raised in issue in the Respondent's refusal
letter of 28 April 2015 and the Appellant did not attend to give evidence
or be cross-examined due to his poor mental health.

11. Whilst Mr Melvin sought to raise new issues viz that the Respondent
does not accept that the Appellant would not receive support from his
family in Ukraine or that the situation has deteriorated there, I do not
consider that there is anything inherently incredible in the issues raised
by the Appellant at [4] of his most recent witness statement to the effect
that his brother has been seriously injured in a chainsaw accident and in
unable to work and his father's condition, following a stroke, has worsened
and his mother is exhausted trying to look after him. I also bear in mind
that at [50] of her most recent report, Dr Thomas opines: "I do not
consider that in his current psychiatric condition with severe and
recurrent suicidality, that the presence of Mr G's family members in
Ukraine would have sufficient positive impact to mitigate the psychiatric
risk caused to him by returning there ... I consider that he is most
unlikely to be able to seek help from family members to whom he is
seemingly much less close than to his UK based friends and has not seen for
many years." And at [52] having had regard to the Appellant's witness
statement and his comments in respect of his family: "It does not seem
likely, therefore, that his family members would be able to provide the
level of considerable social and emotional support Mr G would require in
the event of his return."

12. I further accept Ms Robinson's submission in respect of the expertise
of Dr Thomas. At page 3 of her most recent report of 28.10.17 she sets out
clearly the distinction between a consultant psychiatrist and a consultant
clinical psychologist and the fact that both are trained in making clear
and accurate psychiatric diagnoses but whereas a consultant psychiatrist
has medical training and can prescribe and evaluate the effects of
psychiatric medication, a consultant psychologist cannot. It follows that I
accept that Dr Thomas is properly qualified to make a diagnosis and I
accept her diagnosis that the Appellant is suffering from entrenched
symptoms of Major Depressive Disorder and that the risk of suicide may well
become acute with the imminent risk of a further suicide attempt in the
event of a further negative determination and/or removal directions [56].
Dr Thomas also opined at [49] that if the Appellant is informed that his
appeal is dismissed he is "likely either to attempt suicide or to become so
severely depressed that he will require hospitalisation to prevent the
same."

13. Assessing the Appellant's credibility in the round and in light of the
expert medical evidence in the form of the reports of Dr Thomas, I proceed
on the basis that the Appellant is a credible witness.

14. I have given careful consideration to whether the clear and reasoned
concern set out by Dr Thomas that the Appellant would attempt to commit
suicide if it is attempted to remove him to Ukraine reaches the Article 3
threshold. I have had regard to the relevant jurisprudence viz J [2005]
EWCA Civ 629 per Dyson LJ (as he then was) at [26]-[31] and Y & Z [2009]
EWCA Civ 362 per Sedley LJ at [15]-[16], [46], [47], [61] and [63].
Following the principles set out therein, I find that there is a causal
link between the threatened act of removal and the feared treatment and I
find that the Appellant clearly has a subjective fear of return. In respect
of the question as to whether Ukraine has effective mechanisms to reduce
the risk of suicide, whilst it is clear from the background evidence that
there are psychiatric hospitals, I note from page 10 of the bundle of
background evidence (Health systems in Transition: Ukraine: Health system
review 2015) concerning the treatment of mental illness in Ukraine that the
supply of psychiatrists varies significantly and there are very few working
in the west (where the Appellant's parents live) and at page 11 that: "the
lack of a national system for supplying medication to psychiatric patients
creates a heavy burden for the patients' families, reduces access to
treatment, hampers compliance and decreases its efficiency." At pages 12-15
of the bundle of background evidence, the report by the Association of
Slavic East European and Eurasian Studies May 2016 makes clear that the war
in Ukraine has not only disrupted existing services for already vulnerable
populations and has created new forms and crises of vulnerability.

15. I bear in mind the fact that the Appellant has resided continuously in
the UK for the last 16 years and that, although he is in contact with his
parents and his brother, I accept and find that they are not aware of his
poor mental health nor are they in a position to support him, not because
of any lack of desire on either part but due to socio-economic factors.
Whilst there is some psychiatric provision available in Ukraine, I accept
and find that this provision is poor in the west of the country where the
Appellant's parents reside and generally provision has worsened since the
war began in April 2014. I further find that, applying the judgment in Y &
Z at [61] that, although some psychiatric care is available, particularly
in eg Kiev or other major cities where potentially the Appellant could go,
in light of the psychiatric reports he would not be capable of seeking the
treatment he needs. Moreover, the chances of him finding a secure base from
which to seek the palliative and therapeutic care that will keep him from
taking his own life is remote and the fact that that there exists a local
health service capable of affording treatment does not materially attenuate
this risk, which is subjective, immediate and acute. Thus, whilst in the
United Kingdom I accept that the risk of the Appellant committing suicide
could be managed and that he could be removed with medical escorts, I find
that, based on the reports of Dr Thomas, and the background evidence, that
once the Appellant is returned to Ukraine that there is a serious risk that
he would take his own life. There is no evidence before me that there exist
sufficient mechanisms in Ukraine to prevent this taking place.
Consequently, his appeal falls to be allowed on the basis that his removal
would be contrary to Article 3 of ECHR.

16. It follows that the appeal also falls to be allowed, in the
alternative, in respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules. I find that
the Appellant's mental health and the very high risk of suicide constitute
very significant obstacles to his integration into Ukraine both as factors
on their own and cumulatively when considered alongside the fact that the
Appellant has not lived in Ukraine since 2001, his qualifications have been
obtained in the UK and are in English. In any event his mental health is
preventing him from seeking and maintaining employment and would preclude
him from being able to support himself and integrate. I find that this
would be the case even if he were to reside with his parents or his
brother, in light of [50] of Dr Thomas' most recent report, set out at [11]
above.

17. In light of my findings above, it is not necessary for me to go on to
consider whether or not there are exceptional circumstances justifying
consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

Decision

18. For the reasons set out above the appeal is allowed both in respect of
Article 3 of ECHR and paragraph 276DE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

12 December 2017



