
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17275/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2016                          |On 11th November 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD ARIFUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. On 17th April 2015 a decision
    was made by the Secretary of State that he did not qualify for leave to
    remain under Part 6 of the Immigration Rules and a decision was made to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant had submitted a Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    (CAS) from Sanjari International College and the  Home  Office  advised
    him that the college were no longer listed as a  Tier  4  Sponsor.   On
    16th December 2014 he was allowed 60 days to obtain  a  new  sponsoring
    CAS but he did not  do  that.  He  was  therefore  given  0  points  in
    connection with the CAS or for maintenance purposes and his application
    was rejected.

 3. His subsequent appeal to First-tier Judge J Macdonald (not the  writer)
    was dismissed. The Appellant had moved to adjourn the  hearing  because
    he had a medical appointment and, for reasons given, the judge  refused
    to adjourn the  case  and  gave  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the Appellant had been denied  the  opportunity  of  attending  at  the
    hearing given his medical history.

 4. The Home Office lodged a Rule 24 notice indicating that the appeal  was
    decided on the papers. The issues we  clear.  The  Appellant  had  been
    granted 60 days leave to find a college but had failed to do so.  There
    was no unfairness to the Appellant and no material error in law.

 5. Prior to the case coming before me  on  the  above  date  there  was  a
    further application for an adjournment from the  Appellant  because  he
    was unwell. It was said that he had ongoing medical problems. He refers
    to a chronic history of cardiac difficulties. The  adjournment  request
    was refused because he had not indicated he would  be  able  to  attend
    within any specific timeframe. No medical evidence was available.

 6. Before me Ms Isherwood for the Home Office stated that the  fundamental
    issue was that the Appellant could not succeed in this  case.   He  had
    already been given 60 days to find a  new  sponsor.  The  Secretary  of
    State had followed her own policy. There was no error in  law  and  the
    decision should stand.

Conclusion

 7. Judge Macdonald gave various reasons for refusing to adjourn the  case.
    He noted that the Appellant had  longstanding  heart  difficulties  and
    given the long advance notice of the hearing the Appellant  could  have
    made arrangements to see his general practitioner on another  day.   He
    further took into account in deciding whether to grant  an  adjournment
    the  Appellant's  engagement  with  the  proceedings.   He  noted   the
    Appellant had not filed any documents in support of his claim  nor  had
    he filed a witness statement. He had known since 10th May 2015 that his
    appeal was to be heard on 29th March 2016.  The judge referred  to  the
    Tribunal Rules and the interests of justice and went  on  to  hear  and
    dismiss the appeal.

 8. In my view the judge cannot be faulted for proceeding with the  appeal.
    He gave clear reasons why  he  was  not  granting  an  adjournment.  By
    inference it can be concluded that he did  not  consider  it  would  be
    unfair to proceed and he therefore had regard  to  the  principles  and
    importance of fairness as set down in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 9. In addition the fundamental point made by Ms Isherwood that this appeal
    never had any prospect of succeeding is a good one.  This case  is  not
    about the extent of the Appellant's cardiac problems as  they  are  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal. Put simply, the  Appellant  does
    not come within the Immigration Rules. As explained by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge the Appellant raised no further issue in the appeal.  In
    these circumstances the judge  could  have  done  nothing  else  except
    dismiss the appeal.  There is no error in law  and  the  decision  must
    stand.  There is no need for an anonymity direction.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error in law.

11. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

