
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17402/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 August 2016                        |On 16 August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                            MARCELLA DAWN HAMMOND
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P. Yong, Counsel instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  24
    April 2015 to refuse to issue  an  EEA  residence  card  recognising  a
    retained right of  residence  following  divorce.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V. Jones  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 January 2016.

2.    The appellant applied for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision on the following grounds:

       i) The  judge  erred  in  refusing  to  issue  a  direction  to  the
          respondent to make checks with HMRC pursuant to the case of  Amos
          v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 55 and in refusing to adjourn  the  appeal
          to allow for such enquiries to be made. The  first  four  grounds
          repeated  the  same  point  in  different  ways  but  essentially
          amounted to a single ground of appeal.

      ii) The judge erred in apparently requiring  the  appellant  to  show
          that she was cohabiting with the EEA sponsor at  any  time  after
          the marriage contrary to the decision in  Diatta  v  Land  Berlin
          [1985] ECR 567.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig granted permission to  appeal  on  05
    July 2016 but limited the grant of permission to the second  ground  of
    appeal in the following terms:

            "2.  The grounds seeking  permission  are  extensive.  Ground  1
           complains that  the  judge  had  wrongly  refused  to  grant  an
           adjournment and  give  directions  that  the  respondent  should
           obtain information from HMRC regarding the former spouse of  the
           appellant exercising treaty rights and in that regard the  issue
           of fairness. It is understandable that the  judge  refused  that
           application because the decision had been made on 24 April  2015
           and the hearing was on 14 January 2016 and, apparently, no steps
           had been taken to obtain such a direction until the hearing. The
           judge  exercised  her  discretion  properly  and  her   decision
           discloses no arguable error of law. Grounds 2 and  3  flow  from
           that and require no further consideration. Ground 4  also  flows
           from that but also complains about the judge's approach  to  the
           appellant not being able to provide certain evidence  or  attend
           two interviews (which the appellant had  failed  to  do  but  on
           advice). The grounds referred  to  EEA  regulation  20B(4)  with
           regard to an individual having a good reason for not  doing  so.
           The judge rejected her evidence as a good reason.  I  find  that
           the judge was entitled to do so.

            3.   However, [she] found that there was no  evidence  that  the
           appellant had lived with her sponsor for three years.  Ground  5
           says that [this] is wrong, referring to  Diatta  v  Land  Berlin
           [1985] ECR 567 that there is no such requirement.  See  also  PM
           (EEA - spouse - "residing with") Turkey [2011]  UKUT  89  (IAC).
           This I find to be an arguable error of law and on this ground  I
           grant permission."

4.    At the hearing Ms  Yong  applied  for  permission  to  be  granted  in
    relation to the first ground of appeal. She made extensive arguments as
    to why she considered it was arguable. She applied for  an  adjournment
    in order for the respondent to consider the issues raised in the  first
    ground of  appeal.  I  refused  both  applications  for  the  following
    reasons:

       i) The proper procedure  for  appealing  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Pullig's     decision to refuse permission  in  relation  to  the
          first ground should have been to make a  written  application  to
          the Upper Tribunal within 14 days of the date  his  decision  was
          sent in accordance with rule 21 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008.  No  such  application  was  made  and  any
          attempt to do so by way of an oral application is,  without  good
          reason, woefully out of time.

      ii) Although the Upper Tribunal has power to exercise  discretion  to
          grant permission at a hearing on  grounds  where  permission  has
          been refused, it would only be granted in limited  circumstances.
          For example, where a decision to  refuse  permission  is  clearly
          wrong or there are other good  reasons  to  grant  permission  in
          accordance with the overriding objective.


          Despite the fact  that  there  was  evidence  to  show  that  the
          appellant wrote to the Home Office to ask for an  HMRC  check  it
          was clearly open to Judge Pullig to take into  account  the  fact
          that no request had been made to the First-tier Tribunal  for  an
          'Amos direction' until the date of the hearing. It  was  open  to
          Judge Pullig to refuse permission on that basis and I can see  no
          good reason to reopen an issue that has already been decided  and
          was  not  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  through  the  proper
          procedures.

     iii) The adjournment request was refused. Mr Wilding was able to  make
          oral submissions in relation to the application at the hearing.

Decision and reasons

5.    The consequence of refusing the preliminary application  is  that  the
    appeal against the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  limited  to  the
    second ground. I accept that  any  requirement  of  cohabitation  would
    amount to an error of law  in  light  of  the  decisions  cited  above.
    However, the judge found that the appellant did not produce  sufficient
    evidence to discharge the burden of proof  in  relation  to  regulation
    10(5)(b). The provision requires an appellant to  be  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom "in accordance with these regulations" at  the  date  of
    the termination of the marriage, which includes evidence to  show  that
    the EEA national sponsor was likely to be  exercising  rights  of  free
    movement at the date of divorce. The evidence was lacking. As such, any
    error the judge made in relation to cohabitation  would  have  made  no
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  The  consequence  of
    her  sustainable  and  unsuccessfully  challenged  findings   regarding
    regulation 10(5)(b) is that the outcome of the appeal would  have  been
    the same.

6.    I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    a material error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law
The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand
Signed   [pic]   Date  15 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
