
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17738/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 January 2018                         |On 21 February 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                           mr sunny onajite jakpor
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Simpson, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against  a  decision
    of the Respondent to refuse  him  leave  to  remain  with  his  alleged
    partner and child. That hearing took place at Taylor House on 10  April
    2017. It was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ruth who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 27 April 2017, dismissed it.

 2. At that hearing there was no appearance from either  the  Appellant  or
    his representatives. The appeal was put back in the Judge's list  until
    11:00am to give opportunity for attendance. The notice of  hearing  had
    been sent out by the Tribunal utilizing First Class mail on 15 December
    2016 to addresses that they both had given to the Tribunal. In fact the
    addresses given were the same in that they were that of the Appellant's
    solicitors. The address was 97 High Street Thornton Heath CR7 8RY.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. His  reasons  for  appealing
    were:-

         "The  Appellant  had  not  received  notification  nor  his   legal
         representatives had received any. Direction for  the  hearing  that
         was made on 10 April 2017. This is an interference of his Article 6
         ECHR and as such an error in law".

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Macdonald on 20 November 2017. His reasons for so doing were:-

         "The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose appeal  was  dismissed
         by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Ruth in a decision promulgated on 27th
         April 2017. I shall extend time in this case on the  basis  of  the
         principles set out in Onowu -v First Tier Tribunal IJR [2016]  UKUT
         000185 (IAC).

         The grounds of application state that neither the appellant nor his
         representative received notice of the hearing and as such this  was
         an error in law.

         The Judge noted that  Notice  of  hearing  had  been  sent  to  the
         appellant; there was no request for an adjournment  and  the  judge
         went on to hear the appeal.

         It does appear that the Notice was sent to both the  appellant  and
         his representatives at the same  address  (97  High  Street)  which
         appears to be the address  of  the  representatives  -  accordingly
         there may be merit in the grounds which therefore  do  disclose  an
         arguable error in law in terms of procedural unfairness".

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 6. Ms Simpson initially sought to address me in relation to the outcome of
    Judicial Review Proceedings but was  unable  to  furnish  me  with  any
    documentation in relation  thereto.  I  explained  that  that  Judicial
    Review was not a matter for me today as I was seised only of  resolving
    the matters in the grant of permission to appeal.  She  indicated  that
    she had no other documentation and accordingly I gave her a copy of the
    Tribunal's core bundle and stood the matter down   to  enable  her  the
    opportunity not only of reading it but also contacting  her  solicitors
    to see if further information could be  elicited  in  relation  to  the
    Judicial Review  that  she  indicated  had  been  pending.  No  further
    information was obtained by her and accordingly  we  proceeded  on  the
    basis of considering whether there was here a  material  error  of  law
    consequent upon the Judge proceeding with this appeal in the absence of
    the Appellant and his representative.

 7. Ms Simpson submitted that there  was  a  procedural  unfairness  and  a
    breach of the Appellant's Article 6 rights because of the absence of  a
    fair trial. Neither he nor his representatives had received the  notice
    of hearing. She submitted that the Appellant was in a genuine  marriage
    and that the decision of Judge Ruth should be set  aside  and  a  fresh
    hearing afforded.

 8. I asked if  there  was  any  witness  statement  from  the  Appellant's
    representatives, or any other evidence, to support the suggestion  that
    the notice of hearing had not been received by them. I was  told  there
    was nothing.

 9. Ms Everett  submitted  that  this  was  a  discrete  issue  and  whilst
    appreciating the difficulty to prove "non-service" the address that the
    Tribunal had used  was  the  one  that  the  Appellant  had  throughout
    provided  not  only  to  the  Tribunal  but  also  to  the  Respondent.
    Accordingly, she urged me to find  that  there  was  here  no  material
    error.

10. In response Ms Simpson urged me to accept that on occasion  "mail  goes
    missing" and that I should take account of the fact that the  Appellant
    had attended interview on two occasions and today's hearing.

11. I find that there is here no material error of law. The Tribunal's file
    confirms that both the Appellant and his representatives were  notified
    of the hearing. It was sent to the address that each  had  consistently
    provided to the Tribunal and there is no suggestion on  the  Tribunal's
    file that any other address should be used. This is another example  of
    an Appellant using the address of solicitors, instead of a  residential
    address, which is both inappropriate and unsatisfactory. Nonetheless it
    was the address at which the Tribunal served the Appellant with  notice
    of hearing. There was no appearance at the hearing and it was therefore
    open to the Judge, being satisfied that  notice  of  hearing  had  been
    served to proceed in absence. This issue is dealt with at paragraphs 13
    to 15 of the Judge's decision.  In  those  circumstances  there  is  no
    procedural unfairness and it cannot be said that the Appellant has been
    denied a fair trial. There is no more  before  me  other  than  a  bare
    assertion of non-service. I consider  the  absence  of  any  supporting
    witness statement from those representing the Appellant, or indeed  any
    other evidence, to give weight to this bare assertion that neither  the
    Appellant nor his  representatives  were  made  aware  of  the  hearing
    detracts from the Appellant case.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order in relation to  anonymity  and
I find there is no reason why one should be made today.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14 February 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
