








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17599/2014
                                                               IA/17600/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on      |
|On: 9 April 2015                  |On 28 April 2015                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SG
                                     DS
                       (No anonymity Directions made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr V Makol, legal representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the Secretary of  State  and  to  the
    respondents as the claimants.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission  from  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell, promulgated  on  18  November  2014,
    allowing the claimants' appeals against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State refusing to grant them further leave to remain.

 3. The background  to  this  appeal  is  as  follows.  The  claimants  are
    nationals of India.  The  second  appellant  is  the  first  claimant's
    dependant. The first claimant originally entered the UK  as  a  student
    and was granted further periods of leave until 24 May 2013.  On 20  May
    2013 he applied for further leave to remain in the UK as a student  and
    his dependant. On the same day his leave was curtailed to  expire  that
    day by reference to paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The claimants appealed that  decision,  which  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blundell. On 24 February 2014, he found [17] that  there
    was nothing before the Tribunal  to  establish  the  assertion  in  the
    curtailment letter that the two companies for which the first  claimant
    works, namely Aspire Solutions Ltd - Aspire - and Synapse Solutions Ltd
    - Synapse - run by a Mr [K], were shell companies which provided  bogus
    salary remittances for Tier 1 applications such as those  made  by  the
    claimants.  They were not  named  in  the  Court  of  Appeal,  Criminal
    Division, decision, involving Mr [K]. The Secretary of  State  had  not
    sought to provide any evidence from the proceedings  before  the  Crown
    Court to establish that Aspire and Synapse  were  anything  other  than
    legitimate companies run by a man who  was  also  involved  in  serious
    fraud [17].

 5. There was thus no evidential basis for the conclusion that  all  of  Mr
    [K]'s businesses were fraudulent. Judge Blundell allowed their  appeals
    against the curtailment decisions. The Secretary of State did not  seek
    to appeal that determination.

 6. The claimants' leave to remain  was  reinstated  and  the  applications
    dated 20 May 2013 were again considered by the Secretary of State.

 7. In a further decision dated 27  March  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    rejected their applications.

 8. I have had regard to the two decisions dated May 2013  and  March  2014
    respectively. It is evident that the same allegations were made, namely
    that the first claimant gained his leave to remain by  providing  false
    previous earnings  documents  issued  by  Aspire  and  Synapse.  It  is
    contended in the reasons of both refusals that Aspire and Synapse  have
    never participated in any legitimate trade in the UK.  Accordingly,  as
    false  representations  had  been  made  in  relation  to  a   previous
    application, the current  applications  were  refused  under  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell, the  Secretary
    of State produced a bundle  containing  a  witness  statement  dated  7
    August  2011  from  a  Detective  Constable  Protheroe-Jones   of   the
    Metropolitan Police.

10. The presenting officer contended at the hearing, that there had been  a
    change in  circumstances  since  the  original  refusal  which  had  no
    evidence to  support  it.  Now  there  was  a  witness  statement.  The
    presenting officer informed the First-tier Tribunal that the  statement
    was used in the criminal trial but conceded that there was no  evidence
    to support that submission. He noted that  Judge  Blundell  had  stated
    that the Secretary of State had failed to  produce  evidence  from  the
    proceedings before the Crown Court to establish that the companies  the
    claimant said he was working for were anything but legitimate.

11.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Russell  had  regard  to  the  Devaseelan
    guidelines [2003] Imm AR 1. He  noted  that  the  guidelines  had  been
    approved by the Court of Appeal in Djebbar v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 804.

12. Judge Russell directed himself at [10] that the first determination  is
    the starting point and does  not  bind  him.  However,  he  should  not
    revisit findings of fact made by Judge Blundell on evidence  which  had
    been available during the first  appeal.  Matters  arising  since  that
    determination and facts not  determined  by  Judge  Blundell  could  be
    determined by him.

13. Judge Russell stated that the matter should never have come before  the
    Tribunal: The reasons for refusal were substantially  the  same,  which
    had been found to be inadequate. It was not enough for the Secretary of
    State to append a witness statement from DC Protheroe-Jones as  it  did
    not meet the objections of Judge Blundell set out at  paragraph  17  of
    his determination.

14. Judge Russell accordingly allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

15. Mr Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State relied on the grounds  of
    appeal for permission to appeal. It was unclear whether Judge Russell's
    determination meant  that  the  statement  of  DC  Protheroe-Jones  was
    admissible or that no weight should be placed on it. He submitted  that
    the  only  rule  of  evidence  before  the  Immigration   Tribunal   is
    "relevance". There was no finding on the relevance of  that  statement.
    The exclusion was thus a misdirection and/or inadequately reasoned.

16. The Judge had minimised or reduced  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    statement solely by reference to an earlier IAC decision in  which  the
    statement had not been provided. Without some explicit consideration of
    the contents of the evidence, it cannot  be  discerned  why  the  Judge
    placed no or little weight only on the statement of the constable.

17. Nor did the Secretary of State  seek  to  circumvent  Judge  Blundell's
    decision. The claimants' leave was  reinstated  after  that  successful
    appeal.  The  decision  is  therefore  distinguishable.   The   Judge's
    assessment of the case "betrays a flawed approach".

18. Mr Clarke submitted by way of summary that the Judge did not deal  with
    the evidence of DC  Protheroe-Jones  properly.  The  contents  of  that
    statement should have been considered.

19. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Makol,  who  represented  the  claimants
    before Judge Blundell as well as  Judge  Russell,  submitted  that  the
    evidence of DC Protheroe-Jones  was  not  before  Judge  Blundell.  The
    evidence  of  DC  Protheroe-Jones  had  been  available  before   Judge
    Blundell. There had been  ample  time  to  adduce  that  evidence.  The
    witness statement in fact pre-dated the earlier reasons for refusal.

20. Even though the applications were refused for the same reasons in 2014,
    that was more than  six  months  later.  There  was  still  no  witness
    statement  of  Detective  Constable  Protheroe-Jones.   Moreover,   the
    evidence of DC Protheroe-Jones was, I was informed, part of the matters
    considered by the Court of Appeal which had considered the applications
    of seven applicants seeking to  renew  the  application  for  leave  to
    appeal against their convictions. The applications were all refused  on
    23 May 2013.

21. Mr Makol submitted that it was only on the date of the  actual  hearing
    before Judge  Russell,  namely  10  November  2014,  that  the  witness
    statement of DC Protheroe-Jones dated 7 August 2011, was produced.




    Assessment

22. I have had regard to the 'guidelines' set out  in  Devalseelan,  supra.
    The effect of that decision is  that  the  later  Tribunal  should  not
    revisit findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis
    of evidence that was available to the Secretary of State at the time of
    the first hearing. They may be revisited in the light of evidence  that
    was not available at the time of the first appeal.

23. Judge Blundell stated at paragraph 17 of his determination  that  there
    was no evidential basis for concluding before the Crown Court that  the
    two companies, Aspire  and  Synapse,  had  never  participated  in  any
    legitimate trading in the UK.

24. There is no dispute as to  the  date  upon  which  DC  Protheroe-Jones'
    statement was made, namely 7  August  2011.  That  pre-dated  the  2013
    decision by a lengthy period, almost two years.

25. Judge Russell has properly directed  himself  in  accordance  with  the
    guidelines. He stated at [10] that he should not  revisit  findings  of
    fact made by Judge Blundell on the evidence that was  available  during
    the first appeal. The statement tendered did not  meet  the  objections
    raised by Judge Blundell at paragraph 17 of his determination.

26. It is evident that  the  witness  statement  sought  to  be  relied  on
    constituted evidence that had been available during the  first  appeal.
    No evidence was presented by or on behalf of the Secretary of State  as
    to why that  statement,  which  clearly  pre-dated  the  first  refusal
    decision, had not been available. The Secretary of State had  contended
    that the  claimants'  wage  slips  were  false,  as  confirmed  in  the
    conviction of Mr [K] at the criminal trial.

27. There was however nothing to show that it had been confirmed before the
    Court that Aspire and Synapse  had  never  participated  in  legitimate
    trading in the UK.  There was thus no  evidential  basis  that  all  Mr
    [K]'s businesses were fraudulent and that the  claimants'  reliance  on
    the Aspire and Synapse payslips were part of that scheme managed by  Mr
    [K].

28. In the circumstances Judge  Russell  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    evidence of DC Protheroe-Jones was available during  the  first  appeal
    and that the earlier  findings  should  not  in  the  circumstances  be
    revisited.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Date 24/4/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
