
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/17768/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th June 2017                        | On 7th July 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOMR DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Halit hutja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D O'Callaghan and Mr P Bonavero of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar promulgated on  30  August
    2016, in which Mr Hutja's appeal against the decision  dated  27  April
    2015 to refuse his application for an EEA Residence Card  was  allowed.
    For ease, I continue to refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
    the First-Tier  Tribunal  with  Mr  Hutja  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 21  October  1992,  who
    applied to the Respondent for an EEA Residence  Card  as  the  extended
    family member  (partner)  of  Magdalena  Naworska,  a  Polish  national
    exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United   Kingdom.    The   initial
    application was made on 4 September  2013  which  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 10 February 2014 on the basis that she was not  satisfied
    that he was in  a  durable  relationship  as  claimed.   The  Appellant
    successfully appealed against that decision on 8 October 2014  and  the
    matter was remitted to the Respondent to consider the exercise  of  her
    discretion to issue an EEA Residence Card.

 3. The application was refused on 27 April 2015 on the basis of a  refusal
    to exercise discretion under Regulation  17(4)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  "EEA  Regulations")
    because the Appellant had previously  been  apprehended  attempting  to
    enter the United Kingdom clandestinely (on 23 October 2011 in Dunkirk);
    had been arrested by the police on 9 September 2012 for possession of a
    Class A drug with intent to supply and had  made  declarations  on  his
    application form which failed to mention his arrest.

 4. Judge Khawar allowed the  appeal  on  30  August  2016  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  He  found  that  the  Appellant  had  been  arrested  for
    possession of a class A drug but not of intent to supply and that there
    had been no failure to disclose the arrest  on  his  application  form.
    Overall, it was found that there were no issues of  character  for  the
    Respondent to refuse to exercise discretion to issue an  EEA  Residence
    Card.

 5. Judge Khawar also allowed the appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  grounds  for  the
    same reasons, despite the Appellant not having raised this and  despite
    hearing no submissions on it.

The appeal

 6. The Respondent appeals  on  two  grounds,  firstly  that  Judge  Khawar
    exercised personal judgment as to the Appellant's cocaine use and  good
    character; and secondly, that he erred in law in allowing the appeal on
    human rights grounds.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McCarthy on both  grounds  on
    22 December 2016.  The grant of permission to appeal  also  raised  the
    further issue of whether there was a valid appeal at all following  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
    411.

 8. A preliminary issue was raised by Counsel  for  the  Appellant  at  the
    outset of this hearing in relation to the Sala  point  which  is  being
    further  considered  both  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  a  possible
    preliminary reference to the European Court of Justice and  potentially
    by the Supreme Court who were invited to deal with the issue in case of
    SM (Algeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department.   The
    Appellant had previously applied to have his appeal joined with another
    in the Upper Tribunal raising the same issues that this was refused  on
    the papers and none of the paperwork concerning this was  available  to
    me at the hearing.

 9. Given the potential further detailed consideration  of  this  point  in
    other cases, it would serve no useful purpose for me  to  consider  the
    point in detail in the context of this appeal.   The  parties  were  in
    agreement as to a pragmatic way forward as follows.  Although the Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Sala is  not  binding  on  this  appeal,  it  is
    persuasive and, as indicated to the parties at the hearing, I follow it
    in this appeal.  The result is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal and it erred in law in doing  so.   For
    that reason I allow the appeal and substitute a decision that there was
    no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  However, the Appellant
    has put forward detailed objections to the findings in Sala  which  are
    being raised and considered in other appeal hearings and  clearly  have
    arguable merit.  In these circumstances, I set  out  below  what  would
    have been my findings on the substantive issues raised in  this  appeal
    had I jurisdiction to determine them.

10. As to the good character issue,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    confirmed that he had no knowledge of any relevant guidance on this and
    it should be determined on a case-by-case basis.  It  was  accepted  on
    the facts that the Respondent could not show  that  the  Appellant  had
    been arrested for possession with intent  to  supply,  however  it  was
    sufficient that he had been arrested for possession of a class  A  drug
    for his application to be refused  as  matter  of  discretion  on  good
    character grounds.

11. Counsel for the Appellant relied on his skeleton argument prepared  for
    the hearing and emphasised in his oral submissions that  the  Appellant
    had been arrested for possession of a small quantity of drugs  but  was
    never charged with any offence nor convicted.  That was 3  to  4  years
    ago and it is simply not  proportionate  to  refuse  to  issue  an  EEA
    Residence Card on that basis.

Findings and reasons

12. As above, the First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal and erred in law in doing so.   The  appeal  is  allowed  and  I
    substitute the decision that there was not a valid  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  If the First-tier Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to
    determine the appeal then I would have found a material error of law in
    the decision of Judge Khawar on both grounds of appeal.

13. As to the first ground of appeal, Judge Khawar's decision included  his
    view of the Appellant's  conduct  and  character  in  paragraph  22  as
    follows, "... In my judgement, the fact that  the  Appellant  may  have
    previously  used  cocaine  does  not  represent  adequate  evidence  of
    character which, within the context of Section 10  of  the  application
    form entitled "personal  history  (criminal  convictions,  war  crimes,
    etc)" and in particular Section 10.5 to 10.10 (which deal entirely with
    questions relating to  terrorism,  terrorist  acts  and  other  serious
    criminal acts), is clearly not intended to be referring to an applicant
    who may occasionally have used a prophylactic drug.  ...".

14. This part of the decision reads as a personal view of Judge  Khawar  as
    to the seriousness of  otherwise  of  personal  use  of  cocaine  as  a
    prophylactic drug and whether this was sufficient to consider a  person
    being of bad character.  However, the appeal was  formally  allowed  on
    the basis that the Respondent failed to undertake a proper exercise  of
    the discretion in accordance with the EEA Regulations, with  particular
    reference to the failure to address the material consideration  of  the
    likely impact of the free movement rights of the Sponsor in refusing  a
    Residence Card to the Appellant.  Had such an exercise been undertaken,
    Judge Khawar found that the Appellant would have been  granted  an  EEA
    Residence Card.

15. The Respondent submitted as part of the grounds of appeal that use of a
    class A drug plainly had a causative link to  the  wider  supply  drugs
    within United Kingdom and  serious  repercussions  resulted  from  such
    criminal activities.  In such circumstances  and  where  there  was  no
    evidence as  to  how  the  Appellant  could  have  used  cocaine  as  a
    prophylactic drug, it was submitted that Judge Khawar, was not entitled
    to consider that a person engaging in the use of cocaine  was  of  good
    character.

16. I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law  by  the
    combination of setting out his personal views as to the seriousness  of
    the use of cocaine in this particular case  and  his  own  view  as  to
    whether that amounted to bad character with a lack of reasons as to why
    the Appellant would have been granted an  EEA  Residence  Card  if  the
    proper exercise of discretion had been undertaken  by  the  Respondent.
    If I had jurisdiction in this appeal, I would have gone on to make  the
    following findings to remake the decision on appeal.

17. Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations provides  that  the  Respondent
    may issue a Residence Card to an extended  family  member  not  falling
    within regulation 7(3) who is not an EEA national on application if (a)
    the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family member  is
    a qualified person or  an  EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under regulation 15: and (b)  in  all  the  circumstances  it
    appears to the Secretary of State appropriate to  issue  the  residence
    card.   In  accordance  with  subsection  (5),  the  Respondent   shall
    undertake an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the
    applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the  application  shall  give  reasons
    justifying refusal unless this is contrary to the interests of national
    security.

18. The Upper Tribunal found in RH (UTIAC - remittals) Jamaica [2010]  UKUT
    423 (IAC) that the  proper  exercise  of  the  discretion  afforded  by
    regulation 17(4) requires the  decision  maker  to  take  into  account
    whether or not the effect  of  refusal  of  a  residence  card  to  the
    appellant would hinder or frustrate the  continuing  exercise  of  free
    movement rights of the EEA family member.

19. The exceptions to the right of free movement must also be  relevant  to
    any such consideration.  These are set out  in  Article  45(3)  of  the
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union that the rights to  (a)
    accept offers of employment, (b) move freely between States to take  up
    employment, (c) residing other Member States, and (d) the right to stay
    in another Member State of employment  has  finished,  are  subject  to
    'limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security  or
    public health' together with further  exceptions  set  out  in  Article
    45(4), 51 and 62 which are not relevant for present purposes.

20. There is no express reference in Regulation 17(4) as to the grounds  on
    which refusal  could  or  should  be  made,  but  Part  4  of  the  EEA
    Regulations  deals  with  refusal  of  admission  and  removal  of  EEA
    nationals and their family members in  line  with  the  limitations  in
    Article 45(3) of the TFEU and can usefully be read across  for  present
    purposes.  The grounds of refusal set out  in  Regulation  21  are  the
    grounds of public policy, public security  and  public  health  and  in
    Regulation 21B on the grounds of abuse rights and fraud.  In accordance
    with Regulation 21(5), where a decision  is  taken  grounds  of  public
    policy  or  public  security,  it  must  comply  with   the   following
    principles:

      a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

      b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
         the person concerned;

      c) the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

      d) that is isolated from the particulars of the case which  relate  to
         considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;

      e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

21. In accordance with Regulation 21(6), before taking such a  decision  on
    these grounds, the Respondent must take account of considerations  such
    as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic  situation  of  the
    person, the person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    person's social and cultural integration into the  United  Kingdom  and
    the extent of the person's links with his country of origin.

22. With regard to the permissible limitations on the free movement  rights
    of the Sponsor (as set out  above),  who  has  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom since at least March 2013 when she started
    living  together  with  the  Appellant  and  to  the   principles   and
    considerations which would apply to a decision taken on  public  policy
    or public security grounds, which is analogous  to  the  refusal  under
    challenge in this appeal, I would have found that  the  Respondent  has
    not  properly  undertaken  extensive  examination   of   the   personal
    circumstances of the Applicant not given sufficient reasons  justifying
    refusal.  The refusal on the grounds of the Appellant's use of a  class
    A drug three or four years prior to the decision under appeal for which
    he was not charged or convicted of any criminal offence  could  not  be
    proportionate to the impact on the ability of the Sponsor  to  continue
    to exercise a free movement rights in the United Kingdom; nor could  it
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    the fundamental interests of society even taking into account the wider
    societal problems caused by illegal drugs.

23. As to the second ground of appeal, as agreed  by  both  parties,  Judge
    Khawar erred in law in allowing the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    contrary to the Court of Appeals decisions in Amirteymour  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353 and TY (Sri Lanka)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal and erred  in
law in doing so, the appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is substituted  that  there  was  no
valid appeal to it.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson                            Date       6th  July
    2017


