
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17344/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2016                |On 6th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Salman Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th November 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.   He  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a British citizen but was refused on 29th April
    2015 on the ground that the Secretary of State did not accept that  the
    couple were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 3. The matter came before Immigration Judge Saffer.

 4. With respect to the marriage he said:

         "I accept that he and Mrs Begum have jointly produced a  child.   I
         accept they live together.  I am satisfied that she was correct  in
         the answers she gave in the interview as the marriage means more to
         her than  him.   I  am  satisfied  that  whilst  it  is  a  genuine
         relationship on her part it is not on his and he has  only  entered
         it to try and stay here."

 5. So far as the child was concerned the judge said that  his  nationality
    was not a trump card and that his best interests lay in remaining  with
    his mother.  He then said:

         "The only unusual about this case is how profoundly weak it is.  It
         borders on being abusive of  the  application  and  appeal  system.
         There is nothing compelling  or  exceptional.   There  will  be  no
         'unjustifiable hardship'.  The speed the family are  able  to  meet
         the requirements of the Rules is in their hands."

 6. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  rather  generalised
    grounds.

 7. On 11th July 2016 Judge Scott-Baker granted permission stating that the
    judge had failed to  give  any  consideration  to  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and had given no  reasons
    for finding that the relationship was genuine on the sponsor's part but
    not so far as the appellant was concerned.

 8. On 27th July 2016 the respondent served a reply defending the decision.

 9. At the hearing it transpired that the representative  was  on  holiday.
    Moreover no interpreter had been booked.  However, Mr  McVeety,  having
    initially considered that  the  brief  determination  could  have  been
    sustained, because the judge had found that the couple were  not  in  a
    genuine relationship, acknowledged its deficiencies.  He did not  argue
    against it being set aside.

10. The determination cannot stand. First, the judge gave no reasons at all
    for concluding that  one  party  to  the  marriage  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship but the other was not. Second there is no proper  analysis
    of the best interests of  the  British  citizen  child,  all  the  more
    surprising in the light of the respondent's  own  guidelines  in  these
    cases.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Saffer is set aside.  It should be remade afresh by  a
judge other than Judge Saffer in the First-tier Tribunal at  Bradford  on  a
date and time to be fixed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]    Date 5 September 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
