
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17334/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st October 2014                          |On 5th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR PRINCE BOADU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr E Akohene of Afrifa & Partners acting as agents for
KA & Co Law Practice

Interpretation:
Ms Linda Ofori in the Twi language.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I will refer to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  16th  June  1983.  He
       married Ms Larissa Dogbo, a citizen of France, by proxy on the  12th
       September 2012. He applied for an EEA residence card  in  accordance
       with Regulation 7 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  His
       first application was refused on 26th April 2013. He  appealed  this
       refusal and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burns found that  there
       was no legal marriage and no arguable Article 8 ECHR case before him
       in a  determination  promulgated  on  12th  September  2013.  A  new
       application was made by the appellant on 24th  December  2013.  This
       application was refused on 28th February 2014,  again  it  was  said
       that there was no legal marriage although in addition  it  was  also
       implied that there were doubts  about  the  genuine  nature  of  the
       relationship as well. The appellant appealed. His appeal against the
       decision was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 4th July 2014 on the basis that  he
       found that the appellant and his wife  were  lawfully  married.  The
       Secretary of State was given  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. I found that Judge McGinty had  erred  in
       law, for the reasons set out in my decision  which  is  appended  to
       this determination at Annex A, and set his decision aside.

    4. The matter came before me to remake the appeal de novo.

Evidence & Submissions

    5. Mr Akohene informed the Tribunal that the  appellant's  partner,  Ms
       Dogbo, had gone to France on 28th October 2014 with a return  ticket
       for 6th November 2014. The Tribunal was shown evidence  of  Eurostar
       tickets to Paris for Ms Dogbo corresponding to these dates. She  was
       not therefore able to give evidence. She had gone to  see  her  sick
       mother. The appellant did not want to adjourn the hearing,  but  the
       respondent applied for this to happen  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       necessary to hear the evidence of the  appellant's  wife  to  assess
       whether this was a durable relationship.

    6. The appellant informed the Tribunal that his wife's mother had had a
       stroke which was affecting her right side. She only had a brother in
       France (who did not live nearby), and her husband was in Africa  but
       would join her after his wife left France. Ms  Dogbo  was  her  only
       child. He did not know when Ms Dogbo would return as his  mother-in-
       law was getting worse. She had four weeks  holiday  she  could  take
       from work, and he did not know if his wife would return  after  this
       period. She had initially booked a return ticket  for  6th  November
       2014 as her mother had not been so unwell, but  she  had  got  worse
       after she travelled. His mother-in-law was in hospital. He had  been
       in text contact with his wife since she left. He could not  be  sure
       that his wife would attend if the hearing was adjourned for  another
       date of their choice as he believed that his wife would  not  return
       even for a day to give evidence if her mother was unwell.

    7. On the basis of this evidence I  refused  to  adjourn  the  hearing.
       Ultimately it was the appellant's decision as to which  evidence  to
       present to the Tribunal and according to the appellant there  seemed
       to be no real likelihood in the foreseeable  future  that  his  wife
       would attend if the matter was adjourned.

    8. The appellant attended the Tribunal and gave evidence. He  confirmed
       he understood the Twi interpreter. He adopted his statements of  the
       13th June 2014 and 15th  October  2014.  In  brief  summary  in  his
       statements he says as follows. He met Ms Dogbo  (a  French  citizen)
       when he was on a business visit to the UK.  They  were  both  buying
       second hand shoes and clothes in a warehouse in  Hainault.  She  was
       shipping  them  to  her  parents  in  Ghana  where  they  lived.  He
       discovered that her parents lived in Ghana not far from  his  family
       home. They became lovers and were married proxy  in  Ghana  on  12th
       September 2012. Their Ghanaian customary  marriage  is  valid  under
       Ghanaian law. This was the appellant's second  marriage  and  he  is
       determined to make it work.  They  continued  to  live  together  as
       husband and wife. The appellant and his wife  lived  at  17  Garratt
       Road until April 2013 (where the appellant had lived  prior  to  his
       relationship with Ms Dogbo) when they moved to  28  Lonsdale  Avenue
       due to hostility from the landlord at Garratt Road. They do not have
       documentation to show they lived together at 17 Garratt Road.

    9. In summary in oral evidence the appellant added  the  following.  He
       and Ms Dobgo had been in a  relationship  for  two  years  and  four
       months. They do not go out with other friends.  His  wife  does  not
       have close friends.  The  appellant  produced  four  photographs  of
       himself with his wife taken on one day in June  2012.  They  had  no
       photographs relating to their wedding as it  was  performed  without
       them in Ghana. They were planning to have a white wedding  after  he
       got his status documents. He had no further photos, and no photos in
       his telephone. His wife is not religious but he goes to  church.  He
       had  no  evidence  of  himself  and   his   wife   celebrating   any
       anniversaries or special events.  The  appellant  said  he  was  not
       literate so he did not write his wife cards, and  they  were  always
       together and she knows he cannot read so she did not send him  cards
       either. He and his wife went out together. The appellant's  previous
       wife lives in Ghana. His wife's name was added to their bills by him
       calling the utility company (BT and Thames Water) and their agreeing
       to do this. She was helping to pay the bills and this was  why  they
       did this.  She was known as Mrs Dogbo on the utility bills and  Miss
       Dogbo on her payslips and bank statements as the latter just related
       to her. He had supported himself from money he  bought  from  Ghana,
       and his wife helped him survive. The only evidence  he  had  of  his
       relationship was the documentation, which included the utility bills
       in the bundle, together with the four photographs. He did not have a
       tenancy agreement.

   10. At 17 Garratt Road there were two dwellings: he and his  wife  lived
       at the top with another man called Mr Cefa; and a man, with his wife
       and child lived at  the  bottom.  This  man  downstairs  was  called
       Cosmos. He did not know anyone called Osafo-Bio.

   11. The appellant said he had not wanted to adjourn the  hearing  as  it
       was the third hearing, and he wanted it done and dusted. His  wife's
       mother had been in Africa when he met  his  wife  but  had  gone  to
       France when she was unwell.

   12. Mr Armstrong submitted that the  appellant  was  not  in  a  durable
       relationship. He relied upon the refusal letter  and  the  statement
       from Mr Kenneth Muir,  which  I  had  indicated  I  accepted  was  a
       statement from an Immigration Officer.  The  statement  of  Mr  Muir
       supported the fact that the appellant and Ms Dogbo had not cohabited
       at 17 Garratt Road. We had not heard evidence from  the  appellant's
       wife or any friends; and there was no tenancy agreement, council tax
       or electoral roll evidence.  The only evidence was  from  bills  and
       this could be obtained simply by calling the company and asking them
       to put the name on the bill. If the appellant and his wife  were  in
       genuine relationship he would have asked for a short adjournment  so
       that she could give  evidence  particularly  as  she  had  a  return
       ticket. He submitted that this had not been  done  as  the  evidence
       would have been contradictory.

   13. Mr Akohene submitted it was reasonable not to adjourn the hearing as
       it was unclear when Ms Dogbo's mother would be well enough  for  her
       to leave her or when another  relative  might  be  available  to  be
       present. It was reasonable for Ms Dogbo to want to be with her  sick
       mother all of the time and  not  to  attend  the  Tribunal.  It  was
       accepted that the appellant could not show he was the spouse  of  Ms
       Dogbo, in EU law terms, due to  TA  and  Others  (Kareem  explained)
       [2014] UKUT 316 and the marriage being by proxy, but it  was  argued
       that the appellant was entitled to a residence  card  as  a  durable
       "unmarried" partner of Ms Dogbo.

   14. Ms Dogbo's identity card was in the bundle and she looked  like  the
       woman in the photos taken in 2012. (Mr Armstrong indicated  at  this
       point that he did not think she was necessarily the same person.) It
       was quite possible that the appellant had lived at 17  Garratt  Road
       despite what was said by Mr Osafo-Bio as he may not have  known  the
       appellant. There was evidence of cohabitation in this  case  in  the
       form of bills, and also in terms of the  marriage  certificate.  The
       Secretary of State had not produced any real evidence that this  was
       a sham relationship. As such it was not for the appellant  to  rebut
       any such allegation.

   15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

   16. I accept that Ms Larissa  Laure  Dogbo  is  a  French  citizen.  The
       appellant has provided a copy of her French identity  card.  I  also
       accept that she is in employment with ICM Ltd as a cleaner.  I  have
       seen a letter from her employer and her payslips. I  therefore  find
       that Ms Dogbo is a  qualified  person  under  Regulation  6  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (henceforth the EEA  Regulations)
       as she is a worker in the UK.

   17. The appellant does not qualify for a residence card  as  the  family
       member (spouse) of Ms Dogbo, a qualified person, under Regulation  7
       of the EEA Regulations because it is conceded by Mr Akohene that the
       marriage does not  entitle  the  appellant  in  this  way.  This  is
       because, in accordance with TA and Others  (Kareem  explained),  the
       appellant could not show his Ghanaian proxy marriage  was  valid  in
       French law.

   18. The appellant argues that he is entitled to a residence  card  under
       Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations on the basis that Ms Dogbo is
       his partner, and they are in a durable  relationship.  The  evidence
       which is said to support this is the oral and statement evidence  of
       the appellant, a statement from Ms  Dogbo,  marriage  documents  and
       four photographs of the couple in June 2012.  There are  also  bank,
       work documents and utility bills placing Ms  Dogbo  at  28  Lonsdale
       Avenue in 2013 and 2014. There  is  also  an  Aviva  life  insurance
       document, EDF Energy bills and British Gas bills in both  names  for
       2014 for this address; and a Mastercard document for  the  appellant
       dated 2014. The evidence placing Ms Dogbo at 17 Garratt  Road  is  a
       receipt  from  Paks  Business  Services  and  another  from  Peckham
       Cosmetics dated 2012. There are also BT bills for the appellant  for
       2012 for this address. In joint names for 17 Garratt Road  for  2012
       there is a Thames Water bill.

   19. As set out in TA and Others (Kareem explained) durable  relationship
       is not defined in the EEA Regulations and must be  determined  on  a
       "case-by-case" basis. The burden  of  proof  is  of  course  on  the
       appellant  to  establish  this  is  the  case  on  the  balance   of
       probabilities.

   20. I accept that there are  Ghanaian  marriage  documents  between  the
       families of the appellant and Ms Dogbo from September 2012, and some
       photos of the appellant and a woman whom I am prepared to accept  is
       Ms Dogbo on one occasion before their marriage in June  2012.  There
       is however no detailed personal account of their relationship  since
       their marriage given in the statements, but simply a bald  assertion
       that their relationship is genuine and subsisting. The appellant did
       not call any witness evidence to support  his  contention  that  his
       relationship with Ms Dobgo was durable and had  subsisted  for  over
       two years; he had no photos of them together since their marriage to
       show the Tribunal; he adduced no evidence of the proxy  marriage  in
       Ghana  in  terms  of  personal  statements  from  the   parents   or
       photographs; and was unwilling to adjourn the hearing to a date when
       Ms Dogbo was able to leave her unwell mother in France for a day  to
       give evidence, despite the fact that his mother-in-law has a brother
       in France and a husband who is  expected  to  join  her  there.  The
       appellant also did not give any detailed  oral  evidence  about  his
       relationship with Ms Dogbo in response to a number of questions from
       Mr Armstrong seeking this. Ultimately,  when  all  the  evidence  is
       considered, I do not find the  appellant  a  credible  witness  with
       respect to the nature of his relationship with Ms Dogbo; or that the
       photographic and marriage documents together with the statement  and
       oral evidence show that he is in  a  durable  relationship  with  Ms
       Dogbo.

   21. I now turn to the other documentary evidence submitted.  Whilst  the
       appellant and Ms Dogbo may have  shared,  and  perhaps  continue  to
       share, accommodation at the two  addresses  given  the  evidence  in
       terms of bills, bank statements and payslips for Ms Dogbo this  does
       not mean they are in a relationship at  all  beyond  that  of  flat-
       sharers. There is only one document which is  not  in  the  category
       that flat-sharers might have, which is  the  life  insurance  policy
       which was taken out very recently on 2nd June 2014. I  do  not  find
       that  this  document,  when  placed  with  the  statement  evidence,
       marriage documents  and  in  the  light  of  my  assessment  of  the
       appellant's credibility, suffices to show  the  appellant  is  in  a
       durable relationship.

   22. I do not place much weight on Mr Cosmos Osafo-Bio's denial that  the
       appellant and Ms Dogbo had lived at 17 Garratt Road (as recorded  by
       Mr Muir) as he may have had his own reasons for saying this in terms
       of  not  wishing  to  be  involved  with  the  Immigration  Service,
       particularly as we know nothing about him and his status in the  UK.
       It is also clear that the appellant had left the address after  some
       issues with the landlord by  the  time  "West  London  Arrest  Team"
       visited, so his and Ms Dobgo's absence at that point  is  consistent
       with the history he gives.

   23. However when consideration is given to the documentary evidence as a
       whole and taken with the other oral and statement evidence  examined
       above I do not  find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
       appellant has shown he is in a durable relationship with Ms Dogbo.

   24. As I do not find that the appellant is in a durable  or  genuine  or
       subsisting relationship akin to marriage with Ms Dogbo I do not find
       that his removal can affect his right to  respect  for  family  life
       under Article 8 ECHR (as embodied in Appendix FM or otherwise) as  I
       do not find he has family life in the UK. The appellant is also  not
       able to show that he has private life in the UK which would  entitle
       him to remain in the UK as he  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  at
       paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. He has not lived  in  the
       UK for 20  years  and  has  not  shown  that  there  would  be  very
       significant obstacles to his integration in  Ghana  if  he  were  to
       return there. I do not find it is necessary  to  examine  Article  8
       ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules as I do not  find  that  there
       are any arguable good grounds for so doing, Gulshan (Article 8 - new
       Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640.

Decision

   25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   27. The appeal is remade and dismissed under the EEA Regulations.

   28. The appeal is remade and dismissed under Article 8 ECHR.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
3rd November 2014

Annex A
                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

     1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer
        to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  16th  June  1983.  He
       married Ms Larissa Dogbo, a citizen of France, by proxy on the  12th
       September 2012. He applied for an EEA residence card  in  accordance
       with Regulation 7 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  His
       first application was refused on 26th April 2013. He  appealed  this
       refusal and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burns found that  there
       was no legal marriage and no arguable Article 8 ECHR case before him
       in a  determination  promulgated  on  12th  September  2013.  A  new
       application was made by the appellant on 24th  December  2013.  This
       application was refused on 28th February 2014,  again  it  was  said
       that there was no legal marriage although in addition  it  was  also
       implied that there were doubts  about  the  genuine  nature  of  the
       relationship as well. The appellant appealed. His appeal against the
       decision was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 4th July 2014 on the basis that  he
       found that the appellant and his wife were lawfully married.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Page on 22nd July 2014 on the basis it was arguable that the  First-
       tier Tribunal had erred in law as Kareem (proxy marriages - EU  law)
       [2014] UKUT 00024 had not been properly applied, as  the  First-tier
       Tribunal should have assessed whether the appellant's  marriage  was
       lawful in accordance with French law.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Mr Akohene conceded that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in
       the application  of  Kareem.  In  these  circumstances  it  was  not
       necessary for me to ask Mr Nath for submissions.

    6. Mr Akohene said he was not ready to proceed with re-making as he had
       requested a Twi interpreter from the Tribunal for the error  of  law
       hearing (he produced a Tribunal letter which confirmed this) and the
       Tribunal had refused to book one, saying the re-making hearing would
       be adjourned if one was needed. He  said  that  he  needed  to  call
       evidence from the appellant which,  as  there  were  clearly  issues
       raised about the genuine nature of his relationship with his  French
       wife and their cohabitation, I found to be correct. In addition  the
       appellant's wife had not been well enough to attend, and was clearly
       also needed as a witness with regards to this issue. Mr Nath opposed
       the adjournment request but in the circumstances I found it just  to
       adjourn the re-making hearing.





Conclusions

    7. Judge McGinty interpreted Kareem  as  meaning  that  if  a  marriage
       certificate  from  a  competent  authority  was  issued  this  would
       normally suffice to show a marriage in relation  to  an  application
       for a residence card, see paragraph 9 of the determination.  However
       the case of TA and Others ( Kareem explained) [2014]  UKUT  316  has
       clarified that in fact: "the determination of  whether  there  is  a
       marital relationship for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006 must always be examined in accordance with the laws
       of  the  Member  State  from  which  the   Union   citizen   obtains
       nationality". It is therefore clear that it was necessary to  assess
       whether the appellant's marriage was valid in accordance with French
       law. This was not done by Judge McGinty, and constituted an error of
       law.

    8. I also note that Judge McGinty did not deal with  issue  as  to  the
       genuineness of the relationship raised in the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter (at paragraphs 61 and 62) either.

    9. In these circumstances I set aside the determination of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Decision

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  will  be  re-made  on  31st
       October 2014 in accordance with directions set out below.

Directions

   13. The matter is to be listed before me on Friday 31st October 2014 for
       1 hour and 30 minutes.

   14. A Twi interpreter is required.

   15. If the Secretary of State wishes  to  rely  upon  what  is  said  at
       paragraph 62 of the refusal letters  she  should  produce  a  signed
       report from the Immigration Office who visited  the  address  at  17
       Garratt Road and serve this on the appellant and file this with  the
       Tribunal 14 days prior to the hearing date.

   16. The appellant should file  and  serve  with  the  Tribunal  and  the
       respondent  14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  date  any  additional
       statements from the  appellant  and  his  wife  and  any  additional
       material regarding their cohabitation, the genuine nature  of  their
       relationship or the validity of their marriage in French law.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

9th September 2014


