
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17989/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 2nd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         ANGELA LILIANA GOMEZ PULIDO
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Kilic & Kilic
                  Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury allowing the Claimant's  appeal  on
    human rights  grounds  with  reference  Article  8  ECHR,  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse her human rights application in
    relation to her right to private and family life  and  against  removal
    directions set for the claimant's country of origin, Colombia.

 2. The refusal letter failed  to  engage  with  Article  8  ECHR  and  the
    Claimant  appealed  outwith  the  rules   on   the   basis   of   Nagre
    exceptionality.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury allowed the  Claimant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds with reference Article 8 ECHR on  the  basis  that
    the decision was a disproportionate interference with  her  family  and
    private life.

 4. The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  The  grounds  may  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in failing to consider the decision of  Kugathas  v
         SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  which  confirmed  that  there  is   no
         presumption of family life  and  family  life  is  not  established
         between an adult child and their parent or sibling unless something
         more exists  than  normal  emotional  ties.  The  judge  failed  to
         identify any circumstances above  and  beyond  normal  family  ties
         other than a "shared experience of trauma in Colombia" at paragraph
         48, which falls short of identifying issues of dependency;

     ii) The judge has erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8  private
         life but has failed to give reasons for doing so at paragraph 52.

 5. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Simpson by way of a decision which stated inter alia as follows:

         "Although the judge  found  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM or Paragraph  276ADE  and  went  on  to
         consider MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and MT (Zimbabwe)  [2007]
         he did not give adequate weight to the respondent's  concerns  and,
         in particular, did not give  adequate  consideration  to  paragraph
         117B. The reasoning was terse and lacked clarity, particularly  the
         finding that the appellants' removal would be disproportionate".

 6. I should observe that the section 117B (not paragraph 117B)  point  was
    not taken by the Appellant in her grounds seeking permission  and  were
    not said to be Robinson obvious either. It is unclear  to  me  how  the
    original grounds correlate  to  that  new  point  at  all;  however  as
    permission was granted on that basis, I entertained submissions on  the
    grounds as well as Judge Simpson's grant.

 7. I was provided with a Rule 24 response from Ms Harris  who  represented
    the Claimant at the First-tier also.

    Submissions

 8. In advancing the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal,  Ms  Isherwood
    submitted inter alia that the Claimant has joined her aunts, uncles and
    cousins in the UK via a student application  and  only  after  numerous
    other forms of leave did she make a family and private life application
    and raise that she has been adopted by her family in the  UK  when  she
    was 3 months old (see Annex E of the Secretary of State's Bundle before
    the First-tier which rehearsed the  lawful  immigration  history).  She
    highlighted that the Claimant was  in  her  home  country  without  her
    immediate family and the family in the UK remain in contact with  other
    family in Colombia.  She  submitted  that  if  approaching  the  matter
    through Kugathas, this Claimant does not live  with  parents  but  with
    cousins. In short, Ms Isherwood stated that a shared experience is  not
    enough to engage family life. She highlighted that the  judge  did  not
    explicitly state he was approaching family life with the knowledge that
    the Claimant  was  an  adult.  The  Claimant  had  not  shown  Kugathas
    dependency and she sees her family  only  once  or  twice  a  week.  Ms
    Isherwood criticised the Article 8 assessment and  submitted  that  the
    weight of not  meeting  the  immigration  rules  gives  weight  to  the
    Secretary of State's position (pursuant to [48] of Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387).  In  short,
    the evidence presented does not show that this appeal, which  does  not
    meet the Rules, should be allowed on Article 8. Ms  Isherwood  accepted
    that  the  judge  did  consider  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Act at paragraph 50 of the decision but
    reiterated that AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) confirmed that
    the Claimant cannot retain the right to remain  due  to  her  financial
    independence. She finally criticised the judge for looking at the facts
    that prevailed in the past.

 9. I then heard submissions from Ms Harris  who  relied  on  her  Rule  24
    Reply. Ms Harris submitted in reply that the test cited in the  grounds
    of appeal originated from Kugathas at [25] and such  ties  might  exist
    due to dependency, meaning that this was not the only manner  in  which
    family life could be engaged. This was confirmed  in  MT  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 455  at  [8]
    wherein the applicant had to show "her relationship with her cousin and
    his family is "Beyond what would normally  be  accepted  between  adult
    family members in an adult child and parent"".

10. Ms Harris submitted that as the judge had applied the test,  the  judge
    implicitly assessed the Claimant as an adult, otherwise the test  would
    not  have  been  applicable.  The  judge's  findings  particularly   at
    paragraph 48 demonstrated the strength of family life being engaged. Ms
    Harris highlighted that these findings were made after the judge  heard
    evidence from several members of the family and after  a  full  day  of
    oral testimony. It was submitted that on the basis of the evidence of a
    shared history, a legitimate reason was given to  find  that  a  closer
    bonding process existed.

11.  Furthermore,  Ms  Harris  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submissions were  a  mere  disagreement  rather  than  highlighting  an
    approach outside the remit of what the judge  was  entitled  to  do  or
    find. All of the information given in the witness statements before the
    judge was accepted and the Presenting Officer  had  accepted  that  the
    question of adoption was not in issue and it seemed to be accepted that
    the Claimant's parents and  siblings  were  who  they  claimed  to  be.
    Regardless of  financial  dependency,  there  is  emotional  dependency
    anyhow which  remains  ongoing.  Concerning  section  117B,  Ms  Harris
    contended that paragraph 50 demonstrates that the judge has  regard  to
    the considerations she is required to and  nothing  therein  shows  the
    judge is deriving a right for the Claimant  to  remain  solely  on  the
    basis of section 117B considerations. Finally, concerning private life,
    the judge found arguably good grounds for granting  outside  the  Rules
    and the fact of little consideration of private life does not undermine
    the position concerning family life which still resulted in success. In
    short, Ms Harris submitted that the appeal amounted to  a  disagreement
    with the factual analysis  falling  well  below  the  standard  set  at
    [90(2)] in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke in  R  (Iran)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and  did
    not amount to an error of law. In response to my query  concerning  the
    living arrangements, Ms Harris confirmed that the Claimant  was  living
    with her family as confirmed in oral  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

12. I enquired of both parties whether they wished to  address  me  on  the
    relevance if any of the most recent  reported  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal concerning family life, namely that of Ghising (family life  -
    adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC), wherein the  Upper
    Tribunal discussed the leading authorities on family life  at  [48-62],
    including the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Kugathas.

13. In relation to that authority, Ms Harris asked me to note [48]  onwards
    and [54] in particular, regarding Kugathas at [17] where  Lord  Justice
    Sedley  confirmed  that  dependency  is  not  limited   to   'economic'
    dependency. She also asked me to note [56] concerning the weight to  be
    given to Kugathas but submitted that in  any  event  the  Claimant  met
    Kugathas according to the judge's decision. Finally, she  asked  me  to
    note that [62] of Ghising confirms that the family life  assessment  is
    fact-sensitive and that there are exceptional facts here.

14. Ms Isherwood submitted that the Rule 24  reply  does  not  address  the
    grounds and Kugathas requires a case by case assessment, and there  are
    a number of authorities addressing  Article  8  where  the  immigration
    rules are not met and as stated in SS (Congo) at [33 and 55] there have
    to be compelling reasons why a person should be granted  leave  outside
    the rules, which the decision does not take into account.  Finally,  Ms
    Isherwood  submitted  that  emotional  ties  could  be  defeated  in  a
    proportionality assessment when looking  at  the  Appellant's  position
    against that of the Claimant.

15. I asked both parties at the close of submissions whether they had
    anything further to add and both confirmed that they did not.

    No Error of Law

16. At the close of submissions, I indicated that I would reserve my
    decision, which I shall now give. I do not find that there was an error
    of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. My reasons for
    so finding are as follows.

17. In relation to the first ground (repeated  at  paragraph  4(i)  above),
    family life does not surreptitiously or suddenly expire  when  a  child
    turns 18 years of age, as noted by Sir Stanley Burnton  in  the  recent
    decision of Singh &  Anor  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [24]. Here, at paragraphs 45-48,  the
    judge made findings in light of well-trod authority and concluded  that
    the Appellant has "much more than the normal, emotional ties".  I  find
    that the judge approached the fact-sensitive question of family life in
    an entirely appropriate and lawful manner, giving due consideration  to
    all the relevant facts and in particular giving consideration to  those
    facts stated to be more important than others by higher court authority
    before finding, with evidenced reasons, that family life  was  engaged.
    The assessment of the facts engaging family life are a matter  for  the
    fact-finding Tribunal having heard the evidence and considered  all  of
    the documentation before it on that issue.

18. In relation to the submission  that  the  weight  of  not  meeting  the
    Immigration Rules gives weight to the  Secretary  of  State's  position
    (pursuant to [48] of Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387), this skews  the  interpretation  of  this
    passage in SS (Congo) somewhat. In the instant appeal, the  Rules  were
    not live in the appeal (as the Rules do not cater for family life  save
    as set out in  paragraphs  276ADE  and  Appendix  FM).  Therefore,  the
    reliance  upon  SS  (Congo)  is  misplaced  in  the  present   context.
    Notwithstanding that, the weight to be given to the public interest  is
    given statutory voice in the form of section 117B(1) for all Article  8
    matters arising before the Tribunals. The judge  rightly  assessed  the
    relevant factors before her and her  decision  is  compliant  with  the
    observation in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) that not  every
    subsection of section 117B need be examined explicitly in turn as  what
    matters is substance not form. The  judge  independently  assessed  the
    evidence of family ties and all relevant factors going for and  against
    the  refusal  decision  but  ultimately  decided  the  issue   in   the
    Appellant's favour as she was unarguably entitled to do.

19. Finally, in relation to the private life issue, whilst the decision  in
    this regard is robust, I find that the judge gave consideration to that
    life in the context of family life findings  already  made  as  to  the
    quality of her private life overall, and the statutory presumptions  at
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. Having considered the nature  and  quality  of
    the Appellant's life in the UK, nothing more was required of the judge.
    The decision is not  devoid  of  reasoning.  The  reasons  are  proper,
    intelligible and adequate to sustain the conclusions drawn.

20. The grounds do not reveal an error of law such that the decision should
    be set aside.

21. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.

    Decisions

22. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
