
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th October 2016                  |On 18th October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  QAMAR [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G McIndoe (instructed by Latitude Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Chambers
    promulgated on 10th November 2015 by which he dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to
    remain as a partner.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who first entered the UK in March
    2006 as a visitor. He overstayed thereafter.

 3. In 2007 the Appellant met a British woman and they had a  son  together
    born on 7th January 2010. The appellant made an application  for  leave
    to remain on the basis of his relationship  with  her  and  their  son.
    That application was refused on 7th  October  2013.  That  relationship
    ended in 2012 and the Appellant currently has, through a  court  order,
    only indirect contact with his son twice a year.

 4. In late 2012 the Appellant met his wife who is a British citizen. Their
    daughter was born on 16th September  2013.  The  couple's  relationship
    started in an unusual manner in that at the time his wife  was  married
    to someone else but wanted a child and the Appellant obliged. They have
    however been cohabiting since December 2014.

 5. The Appellant made his current application on 24th  February  2015  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his  relationship  with  his  wife  and
    daughter. He and his wife were married on 30th January 2015.

 6. The Secretary of State refused the application on 29th April 2015.

 7. The Secretary of State did not accept that the Appellant's relationship
    with his wife was genuine and subsisting and refused  the  application.
    The Secretary of State also considered the parent route under  Appendix
    FM and found that the Appellant could not meet that requirement because
    he  lived  with  the  child's  mother.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
    considered paragraph 276ADE and refused that also.

 8. It was the Appellant's appeal against that  decision  that  was  before
    Judge Chambers in the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Judge Chambers did not consider whether the Appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and moved straight to  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules. He found in paragraph 24 of  his  Decision
    and Reasons that the Appellant and his wife were married and that  they
    were in a genuine relationship of marriage. He found  at  paragraph  25
    that the Appellant was caring for his daughter while his  wife  worked,
    although he had only exercised parental care for the past year. He  did
    not consider whether the Appellant met the requirements of section 117B
    (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Had  he  done
    so, in line with MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  he  ought  to  have
    found that sufficient to allow the appeal.

10. However, Judge Chambers found Article 8 not a basis  for  circumventing
    the Immigration Rules and dismissed the appeal.

11. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
    arguably erred in  applying  the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  in
    circumstances  where  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with a British child and in failing to consider  the  best
    interests of the child and the factors in section 117B,  in  particular
    section  117B(6)  and  that  furthermore  the  judge's  conclusion  was
    contrary to the Secretary  of  State's  guidance  relating  to  genuine
    relationships with British national children.

12. Permission to appeal was also granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge
    arguably erred in proceeding straight to a consideration of  Article  8
    outside the rules rather than first considering it within the Rules and
    in particular Appendix FM.

13. I endorse the view of the Judge who granted  permission  and  find  the
    First-tier Tribunal did make a material error  of  law  in  failing  to
    consider whether the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  Appendix  FM
    before proceeding to a consideration of Article 8 outside the rules. In
    so doing he also erred in failing to  consider  section  117B  (6).  Mr
    McVeety offered no contrary argument.

14. Those errors going to the core of the Judge's decision, I set aside the
    decision and it was agreed that I should proceed to re-decide it on the
    evidence referred to in the Decision and Reasons.  The factual findings
    were not challenged.

15. Mr McVeety accepted that the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting.  He
    accepted that the Appellant had a British child and that the  Appellant
    lived with his wife and British child.

16. The first matter to consider therefore is  whether  the  Appellant  can
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM, which provide:-

         "Section R-LTRP: Requirements for limited leave to remain as a
         partner


         R-LTRP.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a partner are-


             (a)  the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;


             (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application for
                  limited or indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and
                  either


             (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section
                  S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and


                  (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of
                  Section E-LTRP: Eligibility for leave to remain as a
                  partner; or


             (d)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section
                  S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and


                  (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                  LTRP.1.2-1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2.; and


                  (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies.


17. In this case it is accepted by Mr  McVeety  that  the  Appellant  comes
    wihin R-LTRP.1.1(d).  He does not fall for refusal under section  S-LTR
    and he meets the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2-1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1.

18. The remaining issue then is whether EX.1 applies.

19. EX.1 provides:-

         Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent


         EX.1. This paragraph applies if


             (a)  (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a child who-


                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;


                      (bb) is in the UK;


                      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                      continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and


                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the UK; or


             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
                  settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
                  humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
                  obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
                  outside the UK.


         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner.


20. The Appellant meets the requirements of EX.1(a)(i).   The  question  is
    thus, in accordance wish EX.1(a)(ii) whether it would be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

21. In that regard I  consider  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction,
    Family Migration: Appendix FM section 1.0b Family Life (as a Partner or
    Parent) and Private Life: 10 year Route dated August 2015.    Paragraph
    11.2.3 of that guidance states:-

         "save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force the British child to leave the EU, regardless of the  age  of
         that child.  This reflects a European Court of Justice Judgement in
         Zambrano."


22. Later the guidance states:-

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,  it  must
         always be assessed on the basis that it would  be  unreasonable  to
         expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that parent  or
         primary carer. In such cases it  will  usually  be  appropriate  to
         grant leave to the parent or  primary  carer,  to  enable  them  to
         remain  in  the  UK  with  the  child,  provided  that   there   is
         satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship."


23. In this case there is no dispute that the Appellant has a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his child

24. The guidance goes on to give examples  of  occasions  when  it  may  be
    appropriate to refuse such leave which would include criminality  or  a
    very poor  immigration  history  where  a  person  has  repeatedly  and
    deliberately breached Immigration Rules.

25. In this case there is no element of criminality. Whilst it is true that
    the Appellant became an overstayer when his visitor  visa  expired,  he
    has made attempts to regularise his status  based  on  his  family  and
    private life. He has not "gone underground"  or  sought  to  avoid  the
    authorities.

26. Despite the fact that  recent  case  law,  the  most  recent  being  MA
    (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  has  addressed  the  question   of
    reasonableness  and  the  fact  that  the  various  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and s.117B  indicate  that  even  where  a  child  is
    British, reasonableness must be assessed, the Secretary of State's  own
    instruction is that generally it would not be reasonable  to  remove  a
    British child from the United Kingdom.

27. The Court of Appeal confirmed in MA  (Pakistan)  that  s.117B(6)  is  a
    complete  answer.   If  an  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect that child to leave the UK the public interest does not  require
    removal and there is no other basis on which removal can be  justified.
    S.117B(6) must be read as a self-contained provision.

28. It does appear extraordinary  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    amended her IDI.  However, she has not and if that is the Secretary  of
    State's policy then I give my Judgment in line  with  it  and  find  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.   On  that
    basis the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

29. Even if the Appellant did not meet Appendix FM, he would succeed on the
    basis of s.117B(6).

    Decision

    The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


Signed   Date 17th October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

