









Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17904/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 11th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Mr Ansar Abbas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mahmood of Nationwide Law Associates

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this appeal, the Secretary of State is the Appellant  and  Mr  Ansar
    Abbas is the Respondent. For the sake  of  clarity  however  throughout
    this determination, I will refer to the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    Respondent" and Mr Abbas as "the Appellant", as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 22nd February 1978. On
    13th November 2012, he applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.  That  application  was
    refused for the reasons given in a notice of  decision  dated  3rd  May
    2013. At the same time the Respondent decided to remove  the  Appellant
    under the provisions of Section 47 Immigration and Nationality Act 2006
    as amended. The Appellant appealed that  refusal  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Meah) sitting at  Taylor  House
    on 11th March 2014. The Judge allowed the appeal for the reasons  given
    in his determination promulgated on 18th  March  2014.  The  Respondent
    sought leave  to  appeal  that  decision  and  on  6th  May  2014  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains an error on a point of law such that it should  be  set  aside
    and the decision re-made. The  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
    remain was refused because the Respondent considered that the Appellant
    had failed to score sufficient points for access to funds  as  required
    by paragraph 245DD (d) and Appendix A of HC 395. This was  because  the
    Appellant relied upon third party funding but he had failed to  provide
    the documentary evidence as required by paragraph 41-SD of  Appendix  A
    to the Rules. The relevant part of the refusal is set out here.

         "In relation to  the  refusal  under  the  Attributes  heading  the
         Respondent stated as follows:

             "...You  have  not  provided  sufficient  evidence  with  your
             application as specified under Appendix A of  the  Immigration
             Rules. Alongside your application you  must  provide  a  Third
             Party Declaration with the date of the declaration on a  Legal
             Representative  Letter  which  includes  the   third   parties
             passport or national identity  document  with  the  issue  and
             expiry dates and a Bank letter confirming the funds available.

             You  have  provided  a  Third  Party  Declaration,   a   Legal
             Representative Letter and a Bank Letter.  However,  the  Legal
             Representative Letter does not include the issue date and  the
             expiry date of the national identity document.

             The Secretary of State is not satisfied, therefore,  that  you
             qualify for the award of points in this area.  The  acceptable
             evidence as defined in the Immigration Rules must be  provided
             in order for you to meet the criteria and be awarded points.

             On the basis of the documents you have provided, however,  the
             Secretary of State  is  not  satisfied  that  these  meet  the
             requirement specified under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
             Rules and you do not qualify for the award  of  25  points  in
             this area.

             In line with Appendix A of the  Immigration  Rules,  we  have,
             therefore, been unable to award any points for access to funds
             as required..."

 4. The FtT Judge in his determination in [10] under the  heading  Findings
    said the following;

         "On the first point of refusal  under  the  Attributes  heading  Mr
         Mahmood argued  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact  submitted  the
         evidence which  the  respondent  stated  was  missing,  namely  the
         identity cards of the third parties which included the  issue  date
         and the expiry date of these documents. I was provided with  copies
         of these documents which clearly showed both issue and expiry dates
         which Mr Mahmood circled for me.

         The evidence was credible and the dates showed clearly on these. It
         is therefore unclear why the respondent refused the application  on
         these grounds given that the information was readily available  and
         put before them. I therefore find that the appeal must  be  allowed
         given that the application should not have been reused in the first
         place".

 5. Mr Saunders submitted that this is where the Judge  erred  because,  as
    set out in the grounds seeking permission, there was a failure  on  the
    part of the Appellant to follow the specific wording of paragraph 245DD
    (d). This meant that the application must be refused.   The  Judge  had
    erred in accepting the evidence contained in the  identity  cards.  The
    identity cards did not form part of the legal representative's  letter.
    That letter therefore did not contain the required information  as  set
    out in the Rules.

 6. Mr Mahmood on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the Respondent had
    confused herself on the requirements to be met. He submitted there  was
    no requirement under the Rules  that  the  third  parties  passport  or
    national document with issue and expiry should be written in the  legal
    representative's letter. He further submitted (and I take this to be in
    the   alternative) that the Secretary of State's refusal decision is  a
    violation of the Appellant's Article 8  rights  under  his  family  and
    private life. In setting out particulars, he said the Appellant came to
    England originally on 28th February 2011. He has lived  and  worked  in
    the United Kingdom during his stay here.  He  has  also  completed  his
    higher education in this country and made many friends.   Therefore  he
    has established a very strong  private  life.   I  will  refer  to  the
    Article 8  submission  made  by  Mr  Mahmood  in  the  course  of  this
    determination.

Has the Judge Erred?

 7. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set
    aside for error. Where third party financial support  is  relied  upon,
    the requirements of paragraph 41-SD are very precise.

 8. The relevant part of the Rules states as follows:

         "(d) If the applicant is applying using money from a  third  party,
         he must provide all of the following specified documents:

         (i) ...

         and

         (ii) A letter from a legal representative confirming  the  validity
         of signatures  on  each  third-party  declaration  provided,  which
         confirms that the declaration(s) from the third  party  or  parties
         contains the signatures of the people stated. It can  be  a  single
         letter covering all third-party  permissions,  or  several  letters
         from several legal representatives. It must be an  original  letter
         and not a  copy,  and  it  must  be  from  a  legal  representative
         permitted to practise in the country where the third party  or  the
         money is. The letter must clearly show the following:

               1) the  name  of  the  legal  representative  confirming  the
                  details,

               2) the registration or authority of the legal  representative
                  to practise legally in the country in which the permission
                  or permissions was or were given,

               3) the date of the confirmation letter,

               4) the applicant's name (and the name of the applicant's team
                  partner's name where relevant)  and,  where  (b)  applies,
                  that the applicant is a director of the business named  in
                  each third-party declaration,

               5) the third party's name,

               6) that the declaration from the third party  is  signed  and
                  valid, and

               7) if the third party is not a Venture Capitalist Firm,  Seed
                  Funding  Competition  or  UK  Government  Department,  the
                  number  of   the   third   party   or   their   authorised
                  representative's identity document (such as a passport  or
                  national identity card), the place of issue and  dates  of
                  issue and expiry".

 9.  It  is  clear  to  me,  that  looking  at  the  terms  of  the   Legal
    Representative's letter it did not  contain  the  dates  of  issue  and
    expiry of the third party's  national  identity  document  as  required
    under the  Rules.  The  Judge  erred  in  not  following  the  specific
    requirements of the Rule and taking into account identity cards of  the
    third parties, which it can be seen, are separate documents and thereby
    cannot form part of the Legal Representative's letter. It was not  open
    to the Judge to consider the identity cards as being  able  somehow  to
    supplement the Legal Representative's letter.   As  a  consequence  the
    Judge fell into material error and the determination must be set  aside
    and the decision re-made. I find I am in  a  position  to  re-make  the
    decision on the evidence which was before the FtT.

10. So far as Article 8 is concerned, the Judge noted that this  was  cited
    in the grounds of appeal, but Mr Mahmood made no arguments  under  this
    heading during his submissions at the hearing before the FtT Judge. The
    Judge therefore quite properly made no findings under this heading.  Mr
    Mahmood now submits before me that in the alternative, the  Appellant's
    appeal should be allowed under Article 8 (Private life). This issue was
    not argued before the Judge and no evidence was produced in respect  of
    it. It therefore must be the case that the Judge would  have  concluded
    that there were no arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules, nor  any  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under them. Nothing has been put before  me  to
    show this to be the case. Therefore following the decision  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  the
    Judge would not have been required to consider the Appellant's  Article
    8 ECHR rights. It is hard to see how it can be claimed that  the  Judge
    erred here.

11. For the foregoing reasons I am satisfied that  the  appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 41-SD of Annex A of the  Immigration
    Rules and his appeal against that decision must be dismissed.

DECISION

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    of law on a material point. I set aside the  decision  and  remake  it.
    This appeal is dismissed.

13. Appeal dismissed.


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I find no
reason to do so.


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

