
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17104/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 October 2016                         |On 29 November 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR SATWINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Haji, Counsel instructed by S Z Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision promulgated  on  14  January  2016  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Hollingworth which allowed the appeal against refusal of leave
    as a Tier 4 student.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary of State as
    the respondent and to Mr  Singh  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant had leave as a student until 6 January 2014.  He  applied
    on 4 January 2014 for  further  leave  as  a  student.  The  respondent
    refused the application in a decision dated 15 April 2015. It was found
    that his CAS submitted with his application on 4 January 2014 had  been
    withdrawn on 22 January 2014. The appellant therefore  could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant maintains that he was never informed  that  the  CAS  had
    been withdrawn until the decision of 15 April 2015.  His  understanding
    was that very soon after he  obtained  the  CAS  the  respondent  began
    action either to suspend or remove the college from  the  register.  He
    was informed by the college that something was going on and  he  should
    wait. He received a letter from  the  respondent  dated  5  March  2014
    telling him that there were exceptionally complex issues in his case so
    that a decision would take  longer  than  usual.   Other  students  had
    received notice of curtailment of their leave and were afforded 60 days
    leave to obtain a new CAS but not the appellant; see [7]  and  [8].  He
    considered that material unfairness arose where he was not told of  the
    withdrawal of his CAS and was not afforded 60 days  to  obtain  another
    one.

 5. Judge Hollingworth found for the appellant regarding  that  unfairness;
    see [26]. He appeared to take the view that the  respondent  had  acted
    unfairly in not informing the appellant about  the  withdrawal  of  the
    CAS, something the respondent must have known about by 5 March 2014  in
    his view, given  the  contents  of  her  letter  of  that  date.  Judge
    Hollingworth also found unfairness arose from  the  respondent  in  not
    allowing the appellant time to obtain a new CAS and in failing to  make
    a decision until April 2015. He allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    unfairness  and,  at  [26],  under  Article  8,   notwithstanding   the
    precariousness of the appellant's leave at all times.

 6. The respondent challenged the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the judge was  wrong  to  find  on  the  facts  for  the
    appellant as regards the CAS being withdrawn  because  of  Home  Office
    intervention at the college. The college had withdrawn the  CAS  on  22
    January 2014, not the respondent and the respondent was not in error in
    placing weight in the refusal on the withdrawn CAS; EK (Ivory Coast)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  1517  applied.  In  any  event,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not have statutory power to allow an appeal on the grounds
    of fairness. The judge also erred  in  the  decision  under  Article  8
    because of the factual error set out  above  and  because  the  Supreme
    Court had indicated in see Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72  that
    Article 8 was not  intended  to  allow  for  leave  to  be  granted  in
    circumstances such as these, the private life of a  student  not  being
    capable of engaging the ECHR.

 7. There was no dispute between the  parties  that  in  so  far  as  Judge
    Hollingworth allowed the appeal as not being in accordance with the law
    this was no longer a disposal open to the Tribunal under its  statutory
    powers.

 8. It is also my judgement that an error arose in allowing the  appeal  on
    Article 8 private life  grounds.  The  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules without a valid CAS and his precarious  leave  for  a
    very limited period was not something that amounted to a  private  life
    that could engage Article 8.

 9. The decision must therefore  be  set  aside  to  be  re-made.  I  heard
    submissions at the end of which the parties agreed that in order to re-
    make the appeal I should be provided after the hearing with information
    from the respondent as to the dates in 2014 that she engaged with Metro
    College of Management Sciences and took them off the register. This was
    relevant as the appellant's claim before me was that the withdrawal  of
    his CAS on 22 January 2014 was because of the respondent's  actions  in
    seeking to take the college off the register, thus triggering his right
    to a curtailment decision and 60 days' notice to obtain a new CAS.  The
    material was not forthcoming as directed at the hearing and nor was  it
    provided in a response to  a  direction  dated  9  November  2016.  The
    direction indicated that if the respondent did not provide the material
    the Tribunal would deem that it was the action of the respondent  which
    led to the applicant's CAS being withdrawn.

10. I find the facts before me to be as follows. The applicant  applied  in
    time on 4 January 2014 for further  leave  as  a  Tier  4  student.  He
    provided a valid application including a CAS.  His  CAS  was  withdrawn
    because of  the  respondent's  intervention  at  the  college  but  the
    appellant was not notified of  this  clearly  by  his  college  or  the
    respondent. He was told almost  immediately  by  the  college  when  he
    attended for classes that "he did not have a visa" and that there  were
    "issues" with the respondent. He understood this  to  mean  that  there
    were difficulties with the college's status on the register and he  was
    bolstered in that belief by the respondent's letter of 5 April 2014. He
    was at no time told by the college that his CAS had been withdrawn.  He
    did not receive any further information from the respondent  until  his
    application was refused. He has never had his leave curtailed  and  was
    not afforded 60 days to find another CAS when his CAS was withdrawn  in
    January 2014.

11. It remains the case that there was no valid  CAS  when  the  respondent
    refused the application on 15 April 2015.  I  cannot  allow  an  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules as they were not met.  From the facts as  I
    have found them the appellant here was entitled to 60 days to obtain  a
    new CAS but was not given that opportunity. I do not have jurisdiction,
    however, to find that the detriment arising from that  should  lead  to
    the appeal being allowed. As above, Article 8 is not engaged here.

12. I accept that it is an unsatisfactory position for the  appellant  here
    but my conclusion is that the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8 must both be refused. The only positive outcome  I  can
    provide for him is the finding that the respondent  acted  unfairly  in
    failing to follow her policy in affording him 60 days to obtain  a  new
    CAS. He can expect the respondent to take that into account if he makes
    another application for leave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law.

The appeal is re-made as refused on all grounds.

Signed   [pic]                               Date: 24 November 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
