
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/17090/2015
     ia/20078/2015
     ia/20082/2015
     IA/20086/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th July 2016                        |On 22nd August 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     m L
                                   M J D O
                                    C C O
                                     O O
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Dixon, Counsel instructed by the Bar Pro Bono
Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents, mother, father and two children who  are  citizens  of
    Nigeria appealed against the decisions of the Secretary of State, dated
    21st April 2014 to refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the
    basis of family and private lives.  Regard was had to Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The appeals were  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walker sitting at Hatton Cross on 21st
    January 2016.  The appeals could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. There is no issue about that but the judge went on  to  consider
    the matter, having regard to the wider application of Article 6,  taken
    together with Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. Following the guidance in Razgar v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 the appeals were allowed.

 2. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 2nd  February  2016  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal.  The grounds are lengthy but in short Mr Walker accepts  that
    the essence of the grounds was that there was no sufficient  basis,  it
    was contended, for the judge to look outside the Immigration Rules  and
    to the wider application of Article 8 ECHR.

 3. On 24th June 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ransley  granted
    permission.

 4. I have looked with care at the Decision and Reasons  of  Judge  Walker.
    Insofar as it is suggested  that  there  were  no  sufficient  findings
    justifying looking to the  wider  application  Article  8,  and  having
    regard  to  the  guidance  in  SS  (Congo)   [2015]   EWCA   Civ   387,
    notwithstanding that which is set out at some length in the grounds,  I
    come to the view that there  is  sufficient  to  be  found  within  the
    decision.

 5. There were found to be educational needs with respect to  [M].   He  is
    autistic and experiences all the problems and  difficulties  associated
    with it.  That appears at paragraph 31 of the decision.   Judge  Walker
    was  quite  right  to  have  regard  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 because the interests of  children
    are a primary consideration. At the time of the application made to the
    Secretary of State, [M] was not a qualifying child.  He had been in the
    United Kingdom since birth in 2008 but had not quite "clocked up" seven
    years.   At  the  time  of  the  hearing  the  situation  was  somewhat
    different.  The child, [M] had "clocked up" seven years and  of  course
    the judge was concerned with the situation as it was at the date of the
    hearing.

 6. The proper approach to  cases  such  as  this  was  considered  by  the
    President, McCloskey J, in the case of PD & Others (Article 8 conjoined
    family claims) (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT 101.  It is not necessary for me
    to quote passages from that guidance, the President has done that  very
    well indeed and it is not for me to even seek to try and  improve  upon
    it, but insofar as the judge had established that there was  sufficient
    basis to go outside the Rules, I am satisfied that it was open  to  her
    to do that.

 7. I remind myself that when it comes to findings of  fact  (and  this  is
    what this is) the question for me is  whether  the  judge  acted  in  a
    manner which was perverse, irrational or  against  the  weight  of  the
    evidence. Clearly this was a decision, as I have said, that was open to
    her.  When one stands back from this decision focusing as the judge did
    on [M] she has followed the guidance in PD even though she may not have
    been aware of it.

 8. There is, I accept, a distinction to be drawn from the case of  PD  and
    the facts in the instant case because in the case of PD the child was a
    qualifying child. However the distinction is small and in  my  view  an
    insignificant difference on the facts of this case because by the  time
    of the hearing, the child had, as I have said, now  lived  continuously
    in the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than  seven  years;  if  any  fresh
    application were to be made would have to be viewed through  the  prism
    of a qualifying child.

 9. In all the circumstances, and I  am  grateful  to  Mr  Walker  for  the
    brevity of his submissions in this matter and the realistic approach he
    has taken to this appeal notwithstanding the fact that he is  not  able
    to make a concession with respect to it, I find that the  appeal  falls
    to be dismissed.  In those circumstances the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal will stand.

10. Given  the  child  and  the  medical  condition  I  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 19 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
