

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/17283/2015

                                                 ia/17287/2015

                                                 ia/17296/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On Tuesday 30 August 2017                 |On Friday 1 September 2017       |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                  MS A O A
                                  MS N O A
                               MASTER A A S A
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Oshunrinade, Counsel instructed by Samuel & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Two of the Appellants in this case are minor children.  Accordingly,  it  is
appropriate that their details and those  of  their  parents  be  protected.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellants or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies amongst others to all  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This matter comes before me on a third  occasion.   The   Appellants
       appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keith
       promulgated on  22  July  2016  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  their
       appeals against the Secretary of State's decisions  dated  21  April
       2015 curtailing the First Appellant's leave to remain and  directing
       their removal to Nigeria under section 47  Immigration,  Asylum  and
       Nationality Act 2006.  The  Second  and  Third  Appellants  are  the
       children of the First Appellant born respectively  on  28th  January
       2011 and 14th September 2007. As her dependents,  the  Secretary  of
       State also sought to remove those children.


    2. On the first occasion, I  heard  submissions  whether  the  Decision
       disclosed any material error of law.  Following the hearing, and  by
       a decision promulgated on 10 January 2017, I identified  two  issues
       which were concerning me and which are set out in my decision  which
       is annexed to this decision for ease  of  reference.   I  asked  for
       written submissions on those issues.  The Appellants  complied  with
       those directions and provided  written  submissions  on  30  January
       2017.  The Respondent failed to comply.


    3. However, the Appellants' written submissions did not appear to me to
       answer the concerns which I had about, in particular,  the  validity
       of the appeals.  For that  reason,  I  called  for  a  further  oral
       hearing for submissions on this point.  That was listed on  30  June
       2017.  I adjourned the hearing on that day  on  the  basis  that  Mr
       Melvin agreed that he would take instructions whether the Respondent
       would withdraw her decision under appeal and reconsider in light  of
       the concerns which I expressed as summarised at [4] of  my  decision
       promulgated on 3 July 2017.  That decision also is annexed  to  this
       decision.


    4. The hearing was then relisted before me on 30 August  2017.   On  29
       August 2017, I received  written  submissions  from  the  Respondent
       addressing the two issues raised by my  decision  in  January  2017.
       The Appellants did not object to those  submissions  being  admitted
       (very) late in the day and  did  not  seek  an  adjournment  of  the
       hearing.

Decision and Reasons

    5. As is evident from my decision promulgated on 10 January  2017,  the
       main issue of  concern  in  this  case  is  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider  and  determine  the  appeals.
       For the reasons set out at [9] to [16] of that decision, it appeared
       to me that the decision under appeal in these  appeals  is  not  one
       which confers a right of appeal at all.  Since my  reasons  are  set
       out there by reference to the relevant legal  provisions  I  do  not
       repeat those provisions.  In very short summary, the first issue  is
       whether  the  appeal  provisions  which  apply  are  those  in   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")  prior
       to  amendment  by   the   Immigration   Act   2014   ("pre-amendment
       provisions")  or  post  amendment  by  that   Act   ("post-amendment
       provisions").


    6. The jurisdiction issue was  not  a  point  raised  by  either  party
       directly in the grounds of appeal  or  Rule  24  response.   It  was
       though raised obliquely by the Respondent  who  submitted  that  the
       "Zambrano issue" on  which  the  Appellants  sought  to  rely  might
       potentially be a "new matter".  That gave me cause  to  consider  at
       the error of law hearing whether the appeals  were  under  the  pre-
       amendment provisions (in which case the issue of a "new matter"  did
       not arise)  or  the  post-amendment  provisions.   That  led  me  to
       identify the concern which is expressed in my decision of 10 January
       2017.  As the Court of Appeal recognised  in  Virk  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 652, it is open  to  a
       Court or Tribunal to take a point on its  jurisdiction  of  its  own
       motion, provided the parties  are  given  the  opportunity  to  make
       submissions on the point ([23]).  Similarly,  the  Court  of  Appeal
       accepted that this Tribunal's jurisdiction extends to whether  there
       was a valid appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  even  if  it  is
       determined that there is in fact no  right  of  appeal  against  the
       Respondent's decision ([10]).


    7. The Appellants' written submissions were  to  the  effect  that  the
       decision  under  appeal  did   confer   jurisdiction   because   the
       Appellants' Article 8 family and private life rights were considered
       in the latter part of page one and first paragraph of  page  two  of
       the decision dated 21 April 2015 ([1] of the  submissions  dated  30
       January 2017). That position is however ambiguous as it is  said  at
       [7] of those submissions  that the Respondent had considered private
       and  family  life  "though  not  specifically   mentioned   in   the
       curtailment of leave decision" [my emphasis].


    8. It appears from those submissions that the Appellants  rely  on  the
       post-amendment provisions. Save for the apparent contradiction which
       I identify in the preceding paragraph, the  Appellants'  submissions
       (at least in writing) appear to be that  the  Respondent's  decision
       was a refusal of a human rights claim.  They therefore say that they
       had a valid appeal on that basis.


    9. The  Respondent's  position  is  also  confused.   At  [14]  of  the
       submissions dated 29 August 2017, the Respondent  submits  that  the
       caseworker who made the decision under appeal "granted  a  right  of
       appeal as the previous grant was based on Private/Family life".   It
       is then said that it is accepted that the decision would  impact  on
       private/family life and so it is accepted  that  it  is  a  decision
       "relating to the refusal of a human rights claim  and  comes  within
       the transitional provisions".


   10.  That  submission  raises  the  following  difficulties.   First,  a
       caseworker cannot confer jurisdiction by intention.  The  Tribunal's
       jurisdiction is conferred by statute and cannot be extended  by  the
       parties (see [23] of judgment in Virk).  Second, if it was  accepted
       that the decision would impact on private/family life, it is unclear
       why the Respondent did not then go on deal with those matters.   Had
       she done so, there would undoubtedly have been a  right  of  appeal.
       Third, the Tribunal's jurisdiction, following the amendments made by
       the Immigration Act 2014 is limited  (in  the  current  context)  to
       whether there is a refusal of a human rights claim not whether there
       is a decision "relating to" one.  Fourth,  although  the  submission
       appears  to  be  that  the  transitional  arrangements  apply   (and
       therefore presumably that the pre-Immigration  Act  2014  provisions
       remain applicable), there is no indication  on  what  provision  the
       Respondent there relies. I note that the decision-maker  (at  least)
       appears to have thought that the pre-amendment provisions applied as
       is apparent from the fact that the decision  refers  to  grounds  of
       appeal in section 84 of the 2002 Act which are  those  contained  in
       the pre-amendment provisions.


   11. I canvassed the difficulties with the Respondent's submissions  with
       Mr Melvin at the outset of the hearing.  He accepted the  following.
       First, there was no application made by  these  Appellants  for  any
       extension of their leave made prior to 6 April 2015.   The  decision
       is not therefore one refusing an  application  for  a  variation  of
       leave made prior to the date when the  new  appeal  provisions  came
       into force (see transitional arrangements referred to at [14] of  my
       decision promulgated on 10 January 2017). There was  an  application
       made by the Appellants' partner/father but the Appellants  were  not
       named as dependents in that application and he is  not  one  of  the
       Appellants in these appeals.  I was told also that  he  has  made  a
       further application for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds
       which remains pending but, once  again,  these  Appellants  are  not
       dependents in that application.


   12. Second, Mr Melvin accepts that there was no human rights claim  made
       by these  Appellants,  even  in  response  to  the  one-stop  notice
       contained in the decision under appeal.  Had there been, that  might
       have conferred jurisdiction on the Tribunal as being a human  rights
       claim to which any response would have been a refusal  (if  it  were
       rejected).  Mr Oshunrinade similarly accepted  that  the  Appellants
       had not submitted any statement of additional grounds  or  otherwise
       made a human rights claim to the Respondent.  The  only  mention  by
       the Appellants of Article  8/family  and  private  life  is  in  the
       grounds of appeal.  That cannot amount to  a  "human  rights  claim"
       (see [22] below) and there is no refusal of such by the Respondent.


   13. When I asked Mr Melvin to explain why he said there was a  right  of
       appeal, he directed my attention to [15] of the submissions where it
       is said that there is a right of appeal because the  decision  under
       appeal included also a decision to remove the Appellants.   However,
       that assumes that the pre-amendment provisions apply.  When I  asked
       Mr Melvin on what basis that was  so  given  that  the  commencement
       orders provide that  the  post-amendment  provisions  apply  to  all
       decisions made after 6 April 2015, his response was  only  that,  if
       there were no right of appeal, then the Appellants would  be  unable
       to appeal a curtailment decision or notice to remove them.  That  is
       correct.  However, that arises  because  the  appeal  provisions  in
       section 82 of the 2002 Act have been amended and  now  depend  on  a
       decision refusing a (human rights or protection) claim.  They are no
       longer generated by particular "immigration decisions".  Of  course,
       a person aggrieved by a decision may still challenge  that  decision
       by way of judicial review.


   14. Mr Melvin did not point me to any of the  transitional  arrangements
       which might apply  in  this  case.   Further,  the  raising  by  the
       Respondent in the  Rule  24  notice  of  the  question  whether  the
       "Zambrano issue" was a new matter suggests strongly that the drafter
       of that  response  considered  that  the  post-amendment  provisions
       apply.


   15. Having listened to the discussions,  Mr  Oshunrinade  accepted  that
       there are no rights of appeal in these cases.  He submitted  however
       that  the  Respondent  has  acted  unfairly  in  this  case  by  not
       considering human rights as if there were an implied claim  and  the
       Respondent ought therefore to reconsider her decision.  That is  not
       a matter for me in these appeals.  If the appeals are valid,  I  may
       go on to determine whether there is an error of law  in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal's Decision and if so re-make the Decision.   If  there
       were no valid appeals, the most I can do is to set aside the  First-
       tier's Decision on the basis of error of  law  on  the  jurisdiction
       issue and find that there were no valid  appeals.    The  Appellants
       will then have to seek to persuade the Respondent to  reconsider  by
       other means (judicial review, a response to the one-stop  notice  or
       another application for further  leave  on  human  rights  grounds).
       Although Mr Oshunrinade complained that the  need  to  make  a  paid
       application would be unfair on the Appellants, as Mr Melvin  pointed
       out in  response,  if  their  leave  had  not  been  curtailed,  the
       Appellants would have had to make a paid application before now  for
       further leave as their previous leave expired in July 2016.


   16. At the end of the hearing, I ruled that there are no  valid  appeals
       in these cases.  For that reason, I also indicated that I set  aside
       the Decision of Judge Keith on the basis that it discloses an  error
       of law and substitute a decision finding that there  were  no  valid
       appeals before the First-tier Tribunal.   I indicated that  I  would
       provide reasons for that decision in writing which I now turn to do.


   17. The decision under appeal is dated 21  April  2015.   It  is  headed
       "Points Based System - Variation of Leave".  It is neither.  As  the
       heading  below  that  acknowledges  it  is  a  curtailment  decision
       applying paragraphs 323(i) and 322(2) of the Immigration Rules ("the
       Rules") removing the Appellants' leave on the basis that it had been
       granted because the First Appellant was believed at the time  to  be
       the sole carer of the children whereas in fact  she  had  reconciled
       with her partner.  The decision also includes a passage recording  a
       decision  to  remove  under  section  47  Immigration,  Asylum   and
       Nationality Act 2006 ("section 47").  The decision then goes  on  to
       make reference to section 55.   There  is  a  passing  reference  to
       family and private life in that context.  What there is  not  though
       is any substantive consideration of the family's  human  rights  or,
       more importantly, a refusal of a human rights claim.


   18. There was no  human  rights  claim  made  expressly  at  that  point
       (although a one-stop notice was given as part of  the  decision  and
       the Appellants could have made one).  It may have been open  to  the
       Respondent to deal with the decision as involving an  implied  human
       rights claim (particularly given the basis of the earlier grant) and
       refusing that claim.   If that were the Respondent's intention,  one
       would expect consideration to be given to whether the Appellants met
       the Rules on the basis of their family and  private  lives  and,  if
       not, whether their circumstances outside  the  Rules  justified  the
       grant of leave; otherwise concluding that removal would  not  breach
       their Article 8 rights.  That was  not  done.  I  do  not  read  the
       paragraph at the end of page one as being a refusal of  any  implied
       human rights claim.  That is only a section 55 consideration of  the
       children's best interests.


   19. In fact, what the decision-maker appears to have thought is that the
       pre-amendment provisions applied.  A  section  47  decision  was  an
       "immigration decision" which gave rise to a right  of  appeal  under
       the pre-amendment provisions.  That  the  decision-maker  considered
       those to be the relevant provisions is apparent, as I indicated  (at
       [10] above), from the grounds of appeal set out as  being  available
       to the Appellants.


   20. The relevant commencement orders are set out at [14] of  my  earlier
       decision.   In  general,  Article  8  of  Commencement  Order  No  4
       commences the post-amendment provisions for all decisions made after
       6 April 2015.  Those then apply to this decision unless one  of  the
       transitional provisions apply.  I was not directed to any  which  do
       apply and I have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  one  which  I
       initially thought might  apply  cannot  apply  (Article  9(1)(a)  of
       Commencement Order No 4) because there was no application made prior
       to 6 April 2015. The appeals could arise therefore  only  under  the
       post-amendment provisions.


   21. It is perhaps unsurprising that, so shortly after  the  coming  into
       force  of  the  final  transitional  arrangements  and   given   the
       complexity of  the  transitional  arrangements  bringing  the  post-
       amendment provisions into force, that a caseworker might  have  made
       an error in relation  to  the  appeal  provisions  which  apply.   I
       accept,  however,  that  this  error  has  had  an  unfortunate  and
       potentially unfair  consequence  for  these  Appellants.    Had  the
       caseworker recognised that the  post-amendment  provisions  applied,
       he/she would no doubt have treated the curtailment  differently  and
       substantively considered human rights in a way which  would  entitle
       the Appellants to appeal the decision to remove them.  As it is, the
       Appellants are now left  in  the  position  of  having  to  ask  the
       Respondent to consider their human rights  by  a  further  decision,
       over two  years  after  the  decision  curtailing  their  leave  was
       initially made.


   22. However, as a matter of law,  since  the  post-amendment  provisions
       apply, a right of appeal is generated only by the refusal of a human
       rights claim.   Human rights claim is not defined by section  82  of
       the 2002 Act.  The definition of "human  rights  claim"  appears  in
       section 113 of the 2002 Act and reads as follows:-
           "human rights claim" means a claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
           Secretary of State at a place designated  by  the  Secretary  of
           State that to remove the person from or require him to leave the
           United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act contrary to
           Convention) as being incompatible with his Convention rights"
           [my emphasis]


   23. In this case, it is common ground that the Appellants have not  made
       a human rights claim leading to the decision under challenge.   They
       have not made one since in response to the one-stop notice.  Whilst,
       as I observe, it may have been open to the  Respondent  to  dispense
       with a claim and to deal with the Appellants' human  rights  on  the
       basis of an implied claim, that is not what has been  done  in  this
       case.  There is in consequence no refusal of a  human  rights  claim
       which could generate a right of appeal.


   24. For those reasons, I conclude  that  there  were  no  valid  appeals
       before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Decision  contains  a  material
       error of law because Judge Keith had no  jurisdiction  to  determine
       the appeals.  Accordingly, I set aside the Decision.  I substitute a
       decision that there were no  valid  appeals  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

Decision
The Decision discloses an error of law as the Judge had no  jurisdiction  to
determine the appeals.  I set aside the Decision of Judge Keith  promulgated
on 22 July 2016.  I substitute a decision that there were no  valid  appeals
before the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
       Dated:  1 September 2017

                        APPENDIX: PREVIOUS DECISIONS

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17283/2015
      ia/17287/2015
      ia/17296/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 21 December 2016                 |On Tuesday 10 January 2017   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                  MS A O A
                                  MS N O A
                               MASTER A A S A

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Oshunrinade, Counsel instructed by Samuel & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Two of the Appellants in this case are minor children.  Accordingly,  it  is
appropriate that their details and those  of  their  parents  be  protected.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellants or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                           DIRECTIONS AND REASONS

DIRECTIONS

I make the following directions:-

    1. Within 28 days from the date of promulgation of this  decision,  the
       parties shall file with the Tribunal and serve on each other written
       submissions directed at the two issues set out at [9]  to  [16]  and
       [17] and [23] below.
    2. Within 14 days from service of  their  respective  submissions,  the
       parties may if they so wish file and  serve  written  submission  in
       reply to the other party's submissions.
    3. If either party requires a further oral hearing as a result of  this
       decision, they are to notify  the  Tribunal  (copied  to  the  other
       party) within  28  days  from  the  date  of  promulgation  of  this
       decision.  For the avoidance of  doubt,  the  request  for  an  oral
       hearing  shall  not  dispense  with  the  requirement  for   written
       submissions as above.
    4. If neither party requests an oral hearing  within  the  time  limits
       stated above, the Tribunal will proceed to decide the  case  on  the
       papers including the written submissions filed.
    5. Either party may apply to the Tribunal on notice to the other  party
       if they seek a variation  of  these  directions  or  any  additional
       directions.

REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellants appeal against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Keith promulgated on 22 July 2016 ("the Decision")  dismissing
       their appeals against the Secretary of State's  decisions  dated  21
       April 2015 curtailing the First  Appellant's  leave  to  remain  and
       directing her removal  to  Nigeria  under  section  47  Immigration,
       Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Second  and  Third  Appellants
       are the children of the First Appellant born  respectively  on  28th
       January 2011  and  14th  September  2007.  As  her  dependents,  the
       Secretary of State also sought to remove those children.


    2. The First Appellant has another older child born in the UK  on  10th
       February 2006. He  is  no  longer  an  appellant  in  these  appeals
       although the Secretary of State  also  sought  his  removal  at  the
       outset.  He is no longer liable to removal as he is  now  registered
       as a British citizen.  His situation is however highly pertinent  to
       the position of these Appellants.


    3. Finally, for completeness, I note that the First Appellant is  in  a
       relationship with another  Nigerian  national.   He  is  in  the  UK
       without leave. He is the father of the minor Appellants.  The  First
       Appellant was previously granted leave as  the  sole  carer  of  the
       children. It was as a result of that claim being found to  be  false
       that the Secretary of  State  curtailed  her  leave.   However,  the
       children's father is not an appellant in these appeals and the  only
       relevance of his situation is that he  remains  in  the  UK  without
       leave.


    4. The First Appellant arrived in the UK as a visitor.  She claims that
       this was in October 2004.  That is disputed by the Respondent on the
       basis that an application was made for  entry  clearance  using  the
       First Appellant's passport in March 2005.   Whatever  the  position,
       the First Appellant has been in the UK for over ten years since  the
       Respondent has accepted, by registration of the eldest  child  as  a
       British citizen, that he was born here  in  February  2006  and  has
       lived here ever since.


    5. On 19th April 2010, the First Appellant claimed  asylum  in  the  UK
       with her (then two) minor children as dependents.   That  claim  was
       refused and her appeal dismissed.  She was however granted leave  to
       remain on 14th January 2014 until 14th July 2016 as the  sole  carer
       of  her  (three)  children.   As   noted   above,   the   Respondent
       subsequently asserted that the First Appellant's claim to no  longer
       be in a relationship with the children's father was  fabricated  and
       she curtailed the Appellants' leave.


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge McCarthy on 16 November 2016. The matter comes  before  me  to
       determine whether the Decision contains a material error of law  and
       if I so find, to either re-make the decision or remit the appeal for
       re-determination by the First-tier Tribunal.


    7. I received oral submissions from the parties' representatives  at  a
       hearing on 21 December 2016.  I reserved my decision  and  indicated
       that I would provide this with  reasons  in  writing  based  on  the
       papers before me.  The Appellants' representatives indicated that  I
       could re-make the Decision if I found there to be an error of law as
       the Appellants did not seek to put forward any further evidence. The
       parties accepted that it would not be necessary  or  appropriate  to
       remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


    8. In the course of considering my decision, it has become apparent  to
       me that there are two issues on which I require  clarification  from
       the parties before I reach my decision whether there is an error  of
       law in the First-tier Tribunal's Decision, as to the nature  of  any
       error and, if I find an error of law, as to the issues for me on re-
       making.





The Issues on which further submissions are required


      Jurisdiction


    9. As I indicated in the course of  the  hearing,  the  nature  of  the
       Respondent's decision dated 21 April 2015 and the grounds of  appeal
       challenging it are  relevant  to  my  consideration.   The  decision
       letter is  headed  "Points  Based  System  -  Variation  of  Leave".
       Whatever else that decision is, it is not a decision made under  the
       Points Based System.  It is though clear from the remainder  of  the
       decision that it varies the Appellants' leave by curtailing  it  and
       it is accompanied  by  a  decision  headed  "Notice  of  Immigration
       Decision" varying leave to  remain  accompanied  by  a  decision  to
       remove under section 47  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
       2006.  That latter decision (also  dated  21  April  2015)  includes
       reference to the right of appeal against both the decision  to  vary
       leave and the decision to remove.  The basis of the  curtailment  is
       under paragraphs 323(i) of the Immigration Rules with  reference  to
       paragraph 322(2).  The decision letter also deals  with  section  55
       Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests
       of the children.  There is no consideration of Article 8 ECHR either
       within or outside the Immigration Rules.  I  note  for  completeness
       that there also  appears  to  be  an  error  in  the  Home  Office's
       explanatory statement which refers  to  the  decision  under  appeal
       being that which was challenged in the  Appellants'  earlier  appeal
       namely the decision dated 18 November 2010 to refuse asylum.


  10. The Respondent in her rule 24 statement at [4] has raised the question
      whether what is in essence a "Zambrano" issue raised by the Appellants
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge could be  considered  by  him  as
      this was a "new matter" for which the Respondent's  consent  would  be
      required.  Consent was not sought.


   11. The Respondent's submission appears to be founded on the proposition
       that this is an appeal which proceeds under the  provisions  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  post
       amendment of those provisions by the Immigration Act 2014 ("the post
       amendment provisions").  I raised with Mr Tarlow during the  hearing
       whether this is correct as it seemed to me at that  stage  that  the
       appeal may fall  within  the  transitional  arrangements  under  the
       previous appeals provisions in the 2002 Act  (the  so-called  "saved
       provisions") and is therefore an appeal  which  proceeds  under  the
       2002 Act prior to amendment  ("the  pre-amendment  provisions").  Mr
       Tarlow did not concede this point  but  accepted  that,  if  I  were
       persuaded that the appeal was  under  the  pre-amendment  provisions
       then the Respondent's submission regarding the need for  consent  in
       order to raise a new matter would fail.


   12. Having considered this issue further, however, I am  concerned  that
       this may not be  an  appeal  which  falls  within  the  transitional
       arrangements and is therefore under the post  amendment  provisions.
       The consequence of that, though, is that there may not  be  a  valid
       appeal before the Tribunal.  If that is so, there was no valid right
       of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal in which case the  Decision
       would have to be set aside for want of jurisdiction and the  appeals
       dismissed.


   13. In order to assist the parties to consider that  issue,  I  set  out
       below my own preliminary observations on what I consider to  be  the
       relevant provisions.  I make clear however that  these  observations
       are only preliminary and are not intended to convey  the  impression
       that I have decided this issue one way or another.  Nor do I  intend
       by those observations to restrict the parties' consideration of  the
       issue to the provisions to which I refer below.  It may well be that
       there are other transitional arrangements which apply.


   14. There have been a number of commencement orders in relation  to  the
       changes to the appeal provisions brought about  by  the  Immigration
       Act 2014.  Those were introduced in several stages.  At each  stage,
       the commencement orders relate to "the relevant provisions" as being
       the post amendment provisions and "the saved  provisions"  as  being
       the pre-amendment provisions Those are defined  in  The  Immigration
       Act 2014 (Commencement No. 3, Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions)
       Order 2014 (SI 2014 No. 2771)  ("Commencement  Order  No  3").   The
       final stage of the changes was introduced  by  The  Immigration  Act
       2014 (Commencement No. 4, Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions  and
       Amendment) Order 2015 (SI 2015 No. 371) ("Commencement Order No 4").
        In general terms, Article 8 of Commencement Order  No  4  commences
       the post amendment provisions for all decisions made after  6  April
       2015.  Article 8 however amends paragraph 9 of Commencement Order No
       3 so as to apply the pre-amendment provisions to certain species  of
       decision.  The amended wording of Article 9 (so far as appears to be
       potentially relevant to this case) is as follows:-
   i. "9(1) Notwithstanding the commencement of the relevant provisions, the
      saved provisions continue to have effect and the relevant provisions
      do not have effect so far as they relate to the following decisions of
      the Secretary of State -
  ii. .....
               a decision made on or after 6th April 2015 (so far as that
               is not a decision mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or (b)) to
               refuse an application made before 6th April 2015, where that
               decision is -
                 (iv)  to refuse to vary a person's leave to enter or remain
                 and where the result of that decision is that the person
                 has no leave to enter or remain;
                 unless that decision is also a refusal of an asylum,
                 protection or human rights claim."


   15. The Respondent's decision includes one varying  leave  (rather  than
       refusing to vary leave).  That may not be fatal since the effect may
       be thought to be the same.  However, that was not a decision made in
       response to any application by the  Appellants  but  rather  on  the
       Respondent's own initiative.   Although  the  Respondent's  decision
       itself refers to the grounds of appeal available to  the  Appellants
       by reference to the pre-amendment provisions of the  2002  Act  that
       cannot be decisive of the question of jurisdiction.  The  Tribunal's
       jurisdiction arises by operation of statute and  not  by  one  party
       appearing  to  confer  it.   The  reference  to  the   pre-amendment
       provisions may  suggest  that  the  Respondent  thought  that  those
       provisions applied but that cannot be  determinative  of  the  issue
       concerning the interpretation and application  of  the  transitional
       provisions to the facts of these appeals.


   16. The post-amendment provisions confine rights of appeal  to  refusals
       of protection and human rights claims (and revocation of  protection
       status which does not arise here).  The Respondent's decision is not
       a refusal of a human rights claim.  If the post-amendment provisions
       apply therefore, it would appear that there was no right  of  appeal
       at all.


    Error of law and scope of re-making: human rights grounds


   17. Assuming that the parties submit and I accept that there is a  right
       of appeal (on the basis that the  pre-amendment  provisions  apply),
       there is a further  issue  regarding  the  errors  asserted  in  the
       Decision and the scope of re-making.


   18. The submissions before me and indeed some of the Appellants' grounds
       of appeal challenging  the  Decision  are  focussed  on  Article  8,
       including reliance on section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act.   However,
       although the Respondent's decision  refers  to  a  right  of  appeal
       including on human rights grounds, Article 8 ECHR is referred to  in
       the appeal form and the grounds of appeal raise the issue of whether
       the position of the eldest child (who was not at that time a British
       citizen) should entitle the  family  to  leave  to  remain  applying
       paragraph EX.1.1, the Appellants did not rely (for whatever  reason)
       on human rights in  their  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge.


   19. It appears from [12] of the Decision that the only issue  raised  by
       the Appellants was whether the Respondent was  entitled  to  curtail
       the Appellants' leave to remain as the First Appellant claimed  that
       she had not exercised deception but had simply failed  inadvertently
       to inform the  Respondent  that  she  and  her  husband  had  become
       reconciled.  That paragraph expressly states  that  the  Appellants'
       representative agreed that the  Appellants  were  not  appealing  on
       human rights grounds. The focus of  the  First  Appellant's  witness
       statement is also directed at the Respondent's finding that she  had
       exercised deception.  Although "Article 8  ECHR"  is  noted  in  the
       appeal form, there does not appear to be any reference  to  that  in
       the evidence.  It is also stated in the appeal form that a statement
       of additional grounds would follow but I can find none on file.


   20. That leads me on therefore to the second issue.  Assuming  that  the
       pre-amendment provisions of the 2002 Act apply, section 85  (in  its
       un-amended form), reads so far as relevant as follows:-
   i. "[85] Matters to be considered
           An appeal under  section  82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
           treated by the Tribunal  as  including  an  appeal  against  any
           decision in respect of which the appellant has a right of appeal
           under section 82(1).
           If an appellant under section  82(1)  makes  a  statement  under
           section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any  matter  raised  in
           the statement which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind
           listed in section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.
           Subsection (2) applies to a statement  made  under  section  120
           whether the statement was made before or after  the  appeal  was
           commenced.
           On an appeal under section 82(1)  ...  against  a  decision  the
           Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter which it  thinks
           relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including  evidence
           which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.
           ......"


   21. If as appears to be the case  here,  the  Appellants  have  not  put
       forward any statement of additional grounds raising Article 8  ECHR,
       that raises the question whether the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
       jurisdiction to deal with that issue and also whether he was obliged
       to do so, bearing in mind that the  Appellants  expressly  indicated
       that they did not pursue human rights grounds (as to which see Court
       of Appeal's judgment in Sarkar v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2014] EWCA Civ 195).  It also raises  the  issue,  if  I
       find an error of law, whether  I  have  jurisdiction  to  deal  with
       Article 8 at all in re-making the Decision  and,  if  so,  how  that
       arises.


Signed
            [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith                                      Dated:  10
January 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17283/2015
      ia/17287/2015
      ia/17296/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Friday 30 June 2017                        |On Monday 3 July 2017        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                  MS A O A
                                  MS N O A
                               MASTER A A S A

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Oshunrinade, Samuel & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Two of the Appellants in this case are minor children.  Accordingly,  it  is
appropriate that their details and those  of  their  parents  be  protected.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellants or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

DIRECTIONS

I make the following directions:-

   1. The hearing of  this  appeal  is  adjourned  to  be  listed  on  first
      available date after 21 August 2017 with a time estimate of two hours.
   2. By 4pm on Friday 28 July 2017  the  Respondent  shall  file  with  the
      Tribunal and serve on each other written submissions directed  at  the
      two issues set out at [9] to [16] and [17] and  [23]  of  my  decision
      promulgated on 10 January 2017.
   3. Within 14 days from service of the Respondent's  written  submissions,
      the Appellants shall, if so  advise,  provide  written  submission  in
      reply.

REASONS

   1. In my decision promulgated on 10 January 2017, I gave  directions  for
      submissions in writing to be made on two  issues  identified  in  that
      decision.


   2. By a letter dated 30 January 2017, the Appellant's solicitor  provided
      written submissions which  did  not  however  adequately  address  the
      issues.  In particular, it was unclear whether the Appellants  contend
      that this is an appeal under the new provisions  (ie  post-Immigration
      Act 2014) or the former provisions.  That is particularly relevant  in
      this case since, if it is an appeal  under  the  post-Immigration  Act
      2014, then the Appellants are unable to rely on the  "Zambrano"  issue
      as it would be a new matter requiring the Respondent's consent (as the
      Respondent identifies in her rule 24 notice).


   3. Unfortunately, the Respondent did not produce any written  submissions
      despite being given several opportunities to do so.  As a result,  the
      Respondent's position as to (a) whether there is a right of appeal  at
      all and (b) the governing provisions  and  ambit  of  that  appeal  is
      unclear.   Mr  Melvin  who  appeared  before  me  for  the  Respondent
      apologised for that oversight.


   4. Mr Melvin had not seen the  bundle  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing.
      Having seen it and having considered the provisional  views  expressed
      in my earlier decision, he indicated that he would like to discuss the
      cases with the relevant caseworker.  He appreciated the concerns which
      I expressed whether the  decision  (dated  21  April  2015)  correctly
      identified the relevant appeal provisions (if there were  a  right  of
      appeal  at  all),  whether  that  decision  properly  considered   the
      Appellants' case (in particular, whether  that  decision  should  have
      considered Article 8 ECHR since the leave  being  curtailed  had  been
      granted on the basis of private and family life) and the error in  the
      explanatory statement as to the decision under appeal.


   5. Mr Melvin indicated though that, in order to move matters forward,  he
      would need some time to discuss the case.  He undertook to inform  the
      Tribunal  of  the  Home  Office's  position  (in  particular,  if  the
      decisions under appeal should be withdrawn and reconsidered) within 28
      days.  I have made  provision  for  written  submissions  within  that
      period but, obviously, if  the  Respondent  decides  to  withdraw  the
      decisions, she should similarly inform  the  Tribunal  and  Appellants
      within that timescale. On that basis, he asked for an  adjournment  of
      28 days.


   6. Mr Oshunrinade did not object to the adjournment sought  if  that  was
      expected to bring the matter to a conclusion.


   7.  I  make  the  directions  set  out  above  in  discussion  with   the
      representatives.

Signed
            [pic]


Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
       Dated:  30 June 2017



