
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/17989/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 November 2013                            |On 28 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            KENNY OLAKUNLE YAHYAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stone, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a national of Nigeria, applied  for  a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in  this
    country, but this application was refused by the respondent on 12 April
    2013.  The appellant's appeal against this decision  was  dismissed  on
    the papers (the appellant not having asked  for  an  oral  hearing)  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies, in a determination promulgated on 2
    September 2013.

 2. The appellant now appeals against this decision, permission having been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb on 27 September 2013.

 3. In the refusal letter sent to the appellant, the respondent had set out
    her reasons for considering that the appellant had not established that
    his wife had been exercising treaty rights.  It had not been  suggested
    in the refusal letter that the marriage was not  a  genuine  subsisting
    marriage.  However, in his determination, Judge Davies  had  found,  at
    paragraph 11, that the appellant had "produced no credible evidence  to
    show that he is a partner or  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom" because, "firstly I do not  accept
    that there is any evidence to satisfy me on the balance of  probability
    that the appellant is genuinely in  a  relationship  with  his  claimed
    partner".

 4. Judge Davies had then gone on to find, at paragraph  12,  that  in  any
    event he was not satisfied that the appellant had established that  his
    partner was exercising treaty rights in the UK.  In the  course  of  so
    finding, Judge Davies stated that "the evidence submitted from  the  HM
    Revenue and Customs does not take the appellant's claim any further".

 5. When  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Gibb  stated  that  the
    respondent had not suggested in the  refusal  letter  either  that  the
    appellant and his wife were not in a genuine relationship, or that  the
    business documents were not genuine.  In  those  circumstances  it  was
    arguable that the appellant had had  no  notice  of  these  points  and
    should have been given an opportunity of dealing with them.  Judge Gibb
    also considered that it was arguable that the reasoning  for  rejecting
    all of the documentary evidence was inadequate.

 6. Having heard the arguments advanced by  Mr  Stone  on  the  appellant's
    behalf before us, we were satisfied that the determination did  contain
    material errors of law, such that the decision must be re-made.   Given
    that the respondent had not contested in the refusal  letter  that  the
    marriage was genuine, although this was a matter which  the  judge  was
    entitled to raise, he should  not  have  reached  a  finding  that  the
    appellant had not satisfied him  that  the  marriage  was  genuine,  in
    circumstances where the appellant was not aware that he was required to
    do so.  Certainly, until this point was taken by  the  respondent,  the
    appellant had no obligation to do so.

 7. Also, although there were inconsistencies within the evidence  provided
    on behalf of the appellant as to what  his  wife's  earnings  were,  we
    considered that the total rejection of the evidence submitted  from  HM
    Revenue and Customs was not adequately reasoned.  It followed  that  we
    must re-make the decision.

 8. The appellant's wife was not present at the hearing,  and  furthermore,
    the respondent applied to adduce evidence of a previous  determination,
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tipping  in  respect  of  an  earlier
    application by this appellant, which determination was  promulgated  on
    22 September 2011, following a hearing at Taylor House on 15  September
    2011. The appellant had chosen not to attend that hearing, although, as
    found by Judge Tipping, he had been served with notice of the time  and
    place of the hearing.  In that determination, Judge Tipping  had  found
    as a fact that the appellant had failed to establish that the  marriage
    was not one of convenience, having had "clear notice that  this  was  a
    concern of the respondent in  both  refusals"  (there  having  been  an
    earlier refusal as well).  Judge Tipping gave reasons for his  finding,
    including that there had been "no communications of  any  kind  between
    the appellant and sponsor ... nor were there any wedding or  subsequent
    photographs".  At paragraph 9, Judge Tipping had found as follows:

         "I conclude to the relevant standard of proof that the marriage  on
         which this appeal  is  based  was  one  of  convenience,  that  the
         appellant is therefore not within the definition  of  'spouse'  set
         out in the 2006 Regulations, and that he is therefore not a  family
         member of the sponsor entitled under Regulation 12 to the issue  of
         a residence permit."

 9. Although Mr  Stone  originally  objected  to  the  production  of  this
    evidence, he eventually accepted that he could not argue  that  it  was
    not relevant to these proceedings.  This evidence was certainly sent to
    the appellant, although Mr Stone  told  us  on  instructions  that  the
    appellant had not actually read the decision.   It  is  not  contested,
    however, that the appellant did not appeal against this decision.

10. Mr Stone applied on the appellant's behalf to  adjourn  the  appeal  in
    order to give the appellant an  opportunity  of  obtaining  his  wife's
    presence at the hearing.  The  reason  that  was  given  for  her  non-
    attendance at this hearing was that she had just  started  a  new  job,
    with a three months probationary period, and therefore could not  leave
    her job.  However, directions had previously been sent to the appellant
    that any evidence on which he intended to rely must be  served  on  the
    Tribunal prior to the hearing and that in the event that  an  error  of
    law was found, the Tribunal would go on to  hear  the  appeal,  and  no
    application had previously been made  for  an  adjournment.   In  those
    circumstances, and also bearing in mind the history of applications  by
    this appellant, we considered that  we  could  deal  justly  with  this
    appeal without granting  any  further  adjournment,  and  that  if  the
    appellant had  chosen  to  come  to  the  Tribunal  without  any  other
    evidence, that was a matter for him, but did not entitle him now  to  a
    further adjournment.

11. The appellant then gave evidence, in which he adopted the statement  he
    had previously made, and he was cross-examined.  Both  members  of  the
    panel took notes of his evidence, which are contained within the Record
    of Proceedings, and so I shall not set out everything which was said to
    us during the course of the hearing.   We  also  heard  submissions  on
    behalf of both parties, which were also recorded contemporaneously  and
    so will not be set out verbatim.  However, we  have  had  regard,  when
    reaching our decision, to everything which was said to  us  during  the
    course of the hearing, whether or not the same is specifically set  out
    below.

12. Mr Stone, on behalf of the appellant, suggested that, in light  of  the
    Tribunal decision in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038, there was no basis upon which the genuineness
    of the appellant's marriage could be challenged.  In our  judgment,  in
    light of Judge  Tipping's  previous  determination,  in  which  it  was
    recorded that the genuineness  of  the  marriage  had  previously  been
    challenged by the respondent, we do not consider this  argument  to  be
    tenable.  Judge Tippings' decision  was  not  appealed,  and  in  those
    circumstances it must be  the  starting  point  of  our  deliberations.
    There is no suggestion that his  determination  was  not  sent  to  the
    appellant, and we do not accept the suggestion that the  appellant  was
    not aware of its contents.  Indeed, it was the appellant's evidence  to
    us that he was advised by his solicitors that  he  should  just  go  on
    applying, because it was likely that an application on the  grounds  of
    his  marriage  to  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  would
    eventually be accepted.

13. It is also the case that even though Judge Davies should not have  come
    to a conclusion on the evidence before him that the  marriage  was  not
    genuine, without at  least  giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  of
    establishing that it was, by the time of  the  appeal  before  us,  the
    appellant was clearly on notice that whether or not  the  marriage  was
    genuine was in issue and we so find.  This finding is reinforced by the
    fact, as we have  found,  that  the  previous  determination  had  been
    communicated to him and this is now, as we  were  told,  at  least  the
    third application this appellant has made.  In those circumstances,  it
    was a matter for him as to whether or not he chose to adduce sufficient
    evidence  to  establish  that  his  marriage  was  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

14. As has been noted above, the two issues which had to be  determined  in
    this case were first, whether or not the marriage  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience, because if it was, then pursuant to  the  Regulations  the
    appellant is not entitled to a residence  card  (it  is  common  ground
    between the parties, as it must be  pursuant  to  paragraph  2  of  the
    Regulations, that if the marriage is  a  marriage  of  convenience  the
    appellant would not be entitled  to  a  residence  card)  and  secondly
    whether in any event the appellant's wife was exercising treaty  rights
    in this country at the relevant time.

15. With regard to whether or not  the  appellant's  wife  (a  ceremony  of
    marriage having been entered into on 21  December  2008,  to  which  we
    refer below) was exercising treaty rights, the documentary evidence was
    extremely confusing.  The various documents do not appear to marry  up;
    the entries in  the  appellant's  wife's  bank  account  do  not  match
    evidence as to payments she  received.   Mr  Stone  explained  this  by
    saying that this was a cash business; however, in light of our findings
    as to whether or not the marriage was genuine, we do not need to  reach
    any findings on this aspect of the case.

16. We turn now to consider the issue of whether or not  the  marriage  was
    genuine or a marriage of convenience.  Following Papajorgji,  in  light
    of the previous finding that the marriage was one of convenience (which
    must be our starting point) we consider that the burden of establishing
    that this was a genuine marriage was on the appellant, although for the
    avoidance of doubt, for  the  reasons  which  we  give  below,  we  are
    entirely satisfied that even if the burden had been on  the  respondent
    to establish that it was more likely than not that the marriage was not
    genuine, on the evidence which we have seen and heard, we would also be
    satisfied that the respondent had satisfied this burden.  On the  basis
    of the evidence which was put before  us,  we  consider  it  much  more
    likely that the marriage is not genuine than it is.  Our reasons for so
    finding are as follows.

17. When giving evidence, the appellant gave  inconsistent  answers  as  to
    what his wife had been doing to earn money at different  times.    When
    first asked, he said that she had been employed until  2011,  had  then
    been engaged in hairdressing and then in cleaning.  Later, he said that
    she had been engaged in cleaning first and had  then  been  engaged  in
    hairdressing.  He did not  know  who  it  was  she  employed,  and  was
    uncertain where she had been working from.

18. When asked when he had moved to London with his  wife,  he  first  said
    that that was in 2010.  Then, when it was pointed out to him  that  the
    Revenue had apparently been writing to his wife at an address in London
    in 2009, he said that his previous answer had been a mistake  and  that
    they had moved to London about a week after  their  wedding,  which  he
    then said had been in December 2008; so they had  moved  to  London  in
    January 2009.

19. The appellant confirmed that he had only been married  once,  yet  when
    asked when in December 2008 he had got married, after a lot of thought,
    he said first that it was December 24  and then that  it  was  December
    23, but he could not really remember.  Then when he was  asked  whether
    he could recollect more clearly, he said that he had got married "after
    Christmas".  When it was pointed out to  him  that  the  copy  marriage
    certificate which had been  exhibited  showed  that  the  date  of  the
    marriage had been on 21 December 2008, he initially said that this must
    have been a mistake, because he had lost his first marriage certificate
    when he had moved, which was why he was so uncertain of the  date.   He
    said  that  "they  needed  to  follow  the  number  of   the   marriage
    certificate" which was why a mistake  had  occurred  as  to  the  date.
    However, when it was put to the appellant that somebody  had  certified
    that the certificate which had been exhibited was a true copy and  that
    the date of his marriage had accordingly without doubt been 21 December
    2008, and he was asked whether that date rang a  bell  with  him,  even
    though he had earlier appeared certain that  this  was  a  mistake,  he
    replied that it did, and that he had got married in church.

20. When asked where he had got married, he replied that it was in Salford,
    but when asked what the name of the church was, he replied that it  was
    the "Church of England".  However, he could not remember  the  name  of
    that church.  When asked how many people were present,  he  said  there
    were a lot of people, all his family and his wife's family as well.  We
    noted that the photographs which had been exhibited only showed himself
    and his wife and nobody else.

21. When asked whether he had got married at the  church  he  attended,  he
    said that "[his] woman attended church", and that he had been a Muslim.
     However, he had converted and he told the Tribunal that he had been to
    this church every Sunday for about five months before the wedding.   In
    other words, he must have regularly attended over  twenty  services  at
    this church.  It may even have been more because he claimed to have met
    his wife in 2007 and said that he had been  obliged  to  go  to  church
    before he was married when he converted, which he then claimed had been
    in 2007.

22. Although the appellant claimed to have been a regular attender  at  the
    church in which he had got married, he still  could  not  remember  its
    name nor, when asked, could he even remember the name of its pastor.

23. In submissions, Mr Stone suggested that because  the  appellant  was  a
    Muslim who had come from Nigeria, he may not have known when  Christmas
    was, so that he may have thought that  21  December  was  indeed  after
    Christmas.  This suggestion is clearly risible; it is in  our  judgment
    quite inconceivable that if somebody had been going to church regularly
    for twenty weeks before Christmas, he would  not  know  when  Christmas
    was.  We also do not accept that if this was a genuine marriage, rather
    than a marriage of convenience, he would have been unable  to  remember
    the date of his marriage or even that it had been  before  rather  than
    after Christmas.  When we also take into consideration  that  his  wife
    did not attend the hearing to give evidence on his behalf, even  though
    it was clear from the determination being appealed, which had been sent
    to him, that he would need to establish that the marriage was  genuine,
    the overwhelming inference from the evidence we have heard is that  the
    marriage is not genuine.  Not  only  has  the  appellant  not  produced
    evidence to persuade us that we should depart from the previous finding
    made by Judge Tipping that this was a marriage of convenience, but  the
    evidence which he gave has reinforced our belief that it was  indeed  a
    marriage of convenience.

24. It follows that this appellant is not entitled to a residence card, and
    that his appeal must be dismissed, and we so find.

Decision

We set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Davies  as  containing
a material error of law, and substitute the following decision.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Dated:  6 November 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

