
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17360/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th April 2015                            |On 18th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD NAEEM
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Plowright of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12th December 1976.   He
    successfully appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Shamash) against a decision of the Respondent  dated  9th
    November 2013 to refuse to issue the Appellant with a residence card as
    confirmation of a right of residence as the family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.  The Home Office appeal with leave against that decision  and
    the matter therefore comes before me in the first place as an appeal by
    the Respondent. For the reasons I give below I have set  that  decision
    aside and remade the decision in this case. For the sake of convenience
    I will continue to refer to the parties as they  were  referred  to  at
    first instance.

2.   On 27th June 2013 the Appellant's father-in-law, Mr Khalid  Parvez  (Mr
    Parvez), an Italian national born on 24th December 1952, the  Appellant
    himself, the Appellant's wife, Bushra Khalid  (Ms  Khalid),  born  14th
    April 1985 and the couple's son, M, born 13th October 2009 applied  for
    residence cards.  This was on the basis  that  Mr  Parvez  was  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights and that the Appellant, Ms Khalid and
    M were dependents on Mr Parvez.  The application  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on the basis that Mr  Parvez  had  not  provided  sufficient
    evidence that he was exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.
    That decision was not appealed.

3.   On 11th December 2013 Mr Parvez, the Appellant,  the  Appellant's  wife
    and M made further applications for residence cards on the  same  basis
    that is that Mr Parvez was an EEA national exercising treaty rights and
    the others were his dependents.  Mr Parvez's application and that of Ms
    Khalid and M were all granted and they were issued with residence cards
    expiring in 2019.

The Explanation for Refusal

4.   The Appellant's application was refused because the Respondent was  not
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  shown  he  was  living  with   or
    financially dependent upon his Mr Parvez.  The Appellant had  submitted
    an Islamic marriage certificate to show his marriage to the  Ms  Khalid
    but the Respondent did not accept that as a  valid  form  of  evidence.
    The relationship with Ms Khalid was not accepted and thus the Appellant
    could not show a relationship to Mr Parvez, her father.  The Respondent
    considered the relationship between the  Appellant  and  Ms  Khalid  as
    unmarried  partners  and  thus  as  an  extended  family  member  under
    Regulation 8 of the of Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006.  The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant  and  Bushra
    Khalid could show that they  were  in  a  durable  relationship  within
    Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.

5.   The Respondent pointed to a number  of  what  were  termed  significant
    discrepancies:

    (i)  The Appellant had submitted a handful of British Gas  bills  dated
         between April and October 2013 that named the Appellant as  one  of
         the recipients.  These did not confirm any kind of relationship and
         at most indicated he was a housemate.

    (ii) Although  M  was  said  to  have  been  born  in  2009  M's  birth
         certificate was dated 13th March 2013 which indicated a possibility
         that the certificate  may  have  been  reprinted  and  issued  with
         additional information.

    (iii)    The Appellant had made a previous asylum application  in  July
         2010 but on that occasion he  had  failed  to  mention  having  any
         dependants here in the United Kingdom nor had he made any reference
         to a family life.

6.   The Respondent required  the  Appellant  to  make  a  separate  charged
    application under Article 8 using the appropriate specified application
    form.  Since the Appellant had not made a valid application for Article
    8, consideration had not been  given  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom would breach Article 8.   The  decision
    not to issue a residence card did not require the  Appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom if he could otherwise demonstrate he had a right  to
    reside under the Regulations.  As it  appeared  the  Appellant  had  no
    alternative basis of stay in the United  Kingdom  he  should  now  make
    arrangements to leave.  If he failed to do so voluntarily his departure
    "may be enforced".  In that event the Respondent  would  first  contact
    the Appellant again and he would have a separate  opportunity  to  make
    representations  against  the  proposed  removal.    Subsequently   the
    Appellant married Ms Khalid according to United Kingdom law.

The Hearing at First Instance

7.   It was conceded at the outset of the hearing that the  Appellant  could
    not establish prior dependence on  Mr  Parvez  as  an  extended  family
    member because the Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  before  Mr
    Parvez and was not dependent on him before his arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst he was currently dependent on Mr Parvez the  Appellant
    nevertheless fell outside the 2006 Regulations.  The issue in the  case
    was whether or not the Appellant should be granted discretionary  leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules based on his relationship  with
    his wife, son and his father-in-law.

8.   In his determination the Judge noted that although the  Respondent  had
    not considered Article 8 the case was put to the Judge as an Article  8
    claim.  At paragraph 14 of the determination the Judge  wrote  that  he
    had to decide:

         "Whether taking this case as a whole the Respondent ought  to  have
         taken a  pragmatic  view  and  considered  this  application  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR.  I was initially minded to make the decision
         but having looked at the refusal letter again I find that  there  a
         number of factors that the  Respondent  has  failed  to  take  into
         account which ought properly to be taken into account in reaching a
         decision under Article 8.  In particular I note that the Respondent
         has queried whether or not the Appellant and Ms  Khalid  are  in  a
         durable relationship.  I am satisfied that they are  married,  that
         their marriage was a civil marriage in the United  Kingdom.   I  am
         also satisfied from the birth certificate, from the photographs and
         from the oral evidence that the Appellant and Ms Khalid have a  son
         together [M].  The Appellant made his application with other family
         members."

9.   The difficulty for the Appellant under the 2006  Regulations  was  that
    he was in effect a dependent on his wife who in turn was a dependent of
    the EEA national. Case law  established  that  sub-dependency  was  not
    permitted. There were no  removal  directions  but  the  Appellant  had
    raised Article 8.  He was living in the United  Kingdom  illegally  and
    had lived here illegally for many  years.   The  Appellant's  wife,  Ms
    Khalid was not prepared to return to Pakistan  as  she  had  not  lived
    there since she was 15.  The Appellant could not go  to  Italy  without
    his wife and they had a child in full-time education.  The Judge  found
    that the failure of the Respondent to consider Article 8 meant that the
    decision was unlawful and remained outstanding before the Respondent to
    take.  The appeal was allowed to that extent.

The Onward Appeal

10.  The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing  that  there  was
    no requirement for the Respondent in deciding  an  EEA  application  to
    consider  Article  8.   The  Appellant  had  not  submitted   a   valid
    application for Article 8 on the appropriate application form.   Whilst
    that might be seen as a bureaucratic approach it was a lawful one.   In
    the case of Weiss [2010] EWCA Civ 803 the Court of Appeal had said that
    it was a bureaucratic approach but it was impossible to say that it was
    an unlawful approach.

11.  The duty under Section 55 of  the  Borders  and  Citizenship  Act  only
    arose when the Respondent knew that the  decision  to  be  taken  would
    affect a child in the United Kingdom.  Given that  the  Respondent  had
    disputed the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Khalid  the
    Section 55 duty was not triggered at the  time  of  decision.   If  the
    submissions made to the Respondent were not of a  nature  to  establish
    that Section 55 was engaged there was no requirement to consider it.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Designated Judge Coates on 16th February 2015.  In granting  permission
    to appeal he was satisfied that the grounds were arguable.   The  Judge
    had referred to Section 55 of the UK Borders Act although that was  the
    incorrect statute.

The Hearing Before Me

13.  The Presenting Officer indicated that he and Counsel for the  Appellant
    had had a useful discussion before the hearing to  narrow  the  issues.
    The Appellant had been unable to  satisfy  Appendix  FM  and  the  Home
    Office  grounds  were  relied  upon.    For   the   Appellant   Counsel
    acknowledged that the significant issue in the  case  was  whether  the
    Judge had jurisdiction to hear the Article 8 argument.  Counsel  relied
    on his response under Rule 24 of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules.
    Counsel distinguished the case of Weiss on the facts. The issue  before
    the Court of Appeal was whether or not the claimant in that case  ought
    to have  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  long
    residence provisions of the Immigration Rules or  merely  discretionary
    leave to remain.  It was not suggested by the Court of Appeal that  the
    Immigration Judge in that case had been wrong to allow the appeal under
    Article 8.

14.  In a more recent case of Ahmed (reported as NA [2013] UKUT  00089)  the
    Tribunal were prepared to consider Article 8 in  an  EEA  case  on  the
    basis that refusal of a residence card would result in  the  Respondent
    going on to direct the Appellant's removal to  Pakistan.   Furthermore,
    Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations  gave  an  Appellant  the  right  to
    appeal a decision to refuse to issue a residence card on  human  rights
    grounds. Section 84(1) of the Nationality, Asylum and  Immigration  Act
    2002 permitted an appeal to be brought on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    Schedule specified that Section 84 had effect in relation to an  appeal
    under the 2006 Regulations.

15.  In the current case it was clear that  the  decision  maker  was  aware
    that the Appellant's wife,  father-in-law  and  son  were  all  granted
    residence cards pursuant to the application on 11th December 2013.  The
    Respondent must therefore have  been  aware  that  issues  relating  to
    Article 8 and Section 55 of the Citizens, Immigration and  Borders  Act
    2009 would arise when it was  only  the  Appellant's  application  that
    would be refused.   In  circumstances  where  it  was  obvious  to  the
    decision maker that this would be an issue it was  incumbent  upon  the
    Respondent to go on to  consider  the  potential  consequences  of  the
    removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

16.  Counsel conceded in oral submissions that there  had  been  no  Section
    120 notice but the issue of Article 8 had been raised in the Grounds of
    Appeal and was therefore a matter for  the  Tribunal  to  consider.   I
    queried when Article 8 had first been raised with the Respondent  since
    if it had been raised for the first  time  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    against the Respondent's decision then it  would  not  be  possible  to
    argue it on appeal before the Tribunal.  Counsel  replied  that  whilst
    there appeared to be no covering letter with the original  applications
    that had been lodged (which would otherwise be an opportunity to  raise
    Article 8) the fact  of  the  matter  was  there  were  three  to  four
    applicants who had been granted residence cards, the Respondent  should
    therefore have adopted a cumulative approach to that many  applications
    all going in together.  The Judge by contrast had looked at all matters
    in the round.

17.  In  response  the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that  there  was  no
    definitive case law on whether Article 8 could be raised in an EEA case
    when there were no removal directions.  There was some suggestion  that
    the Upper Tribunal might be issuing guidance on the point in  the  near
    future but that had not  yet  been  given  (as  of  the  date  of  this
    determination it has still not been issued).

Findings

18.  The issue in this  case  is  whether  the  Judge  had  jurisdiction  to
    consider Article 8 at all given that the decision under  appeal  was  a
    refusal to issue a residence card. It is common  ground  in  this  case
    that the Appellant cannot succeed under the 2006 Regulations because he
    is  the  dependent  of  a  dependent.  He  cannot  establish  a  direct
    dependency upon an EEA national who is exercising treaty rights.  There
    had been no Section 120 notice with the Respondent's decision and there
    were no removal directions.  What there was was an indication from  the
    Respondent in  the  refusal  letter  that  the  Appellant  should  make
    arrangements to leave and if he did not do so voluntarily his departure
    may be enforced. I consider below whether that is sufficient to trigger
    a human rights consideration.

19.  The argument that Article 8 cannot be relevant and thus form the  basis
    of a valid appeal in an EEA case is premised on the submission that  an
    EEA decision is merely declaratory of the existing  position,  it  does
    not affect the individual's rights e.g. to remain.  The  applicant  was
    either always entitled to a residence card or was not and the  decision
    of the Respondent is merely declaratory  of  that  position.  Thus  any
    private or family life which an applicant may have established  at  the
    time of the residence card decision is not affected or interfered  with
    by the Respondent's decision.

20.  The Appellant has an established family life with his wife and son  and
    if he were to be removed from the United Kingdom it is plain that  that
    family life would be interfered with.  The Judge was concerned that the
    Respondent's  decision  might  disproportionately  interfere  with  the
    family life and therefore the basis of the Article 8  claim  which  had
    not been considered up until that point by  the  Respondent  should  be
    looked at before a final decision was made.   That  was  the  basis  on
    which the Judge  found  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law such that it remained outstanding to take.

21.  If I find that the Judge had jurisdiction to hear the Article 8  aspect
    of the appeal then his decision will stand and the decision will remain
    before the Respondent.   The  Respondent  will  need  to  consider  the
    situation in the light of the findings of fact made by the Judge (which
    are not challenged).  On the other hand if I find that  the  Judge  was
    not entitled to consider Article 8 then his decision indicates an error
    of law and must be set aside.  In those circumstances I can proceed  to
    remake the decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision since it is conceded that  the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed under the 2006 Regulations and Article 8 would then not  apply.



22.  As was briefly canvassed at the hearing before  me  guidance  from  the
    Upper Tribunal was awaited on the thorny issue  of  whether  Article  8
    could be raised in an EEA appeal where there were no removal directions
    or a Section 120 notice.  If the Appellant  did  not  raise  Article  8
    before the notice of decision it would not be  open  to  him  to  argue
    Article 8 at his appeal.   I  do  not  accept  the  argument  that  the
    Respondent should have looked at the applications cumulatively  because
    the Appellant was making an application with other family members.  The
    Respondent did not accept the family connections between the  Appellant
    and the others and therefore there was no  reason  why  the  Respondent
    would have considered the matter under Article 8.  The  Respondent  was
    not prepared to  consider  the  issue  under  Section  55  because  not
    accepting the relationship meant that the Respondent did  not  consider
    that the duty under Section 55 arose.  In hindsight in the light of the
    Judge's findings it is clear that there  are  a  number  of  Article  8
    issues in this case but before they can be considered the Appellant has
    to establish that the Tribunal is obliged to consider them. That  takes
    us back to the issue in dispute in this case.

23.  Is the wording of the refusal letter couched  in  such  terms  that  in
    effect it is similar to a removal  decision  such  that  the  Appellant
    should be entitled to raise Article 8?   I  have  quoted  the  relevant
    section (see paragraph 6 above) and there is no doubt that the  refusal
    decision makes it clear that if  the  Appellant  fails  to  voluntarily
    leave his departure may be enforced.  Importantly the letter goes on to
    say that before the Respondent removes  the  Appellant,  the  Appellant
    will be given an opportunity to make further representations.  In those
    circumstances it does not seem to me that there is such  an  indication
    in the refusal letter that the Appellant should be  entitled  to  raise
    Article 8 as if he had been served with a removal  decision.   Even  if
    the Appellant cannot argue Article 8 at this  stage  he  has  not  been
    deprived of his remedy under Article 8 as that will come later  with  a
    subsequent removal decision.

24.  Counsel relied on two matters for  his  argument  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to consider Article 8.   The  first  was  the  Upper  Tribunal
    authority of Ahmed.  Ahmed was a decision on a third country national's
    application for rights of residence following a  divorce  from  an  EEA
    national. The applicant in that case had children who  were  themselves
    EEA nationals and one of the questions for  the  court  to  answer  was
    whether the fact that the applicant's children were EEA nationals meant
    that the decision refusing to grant  the  applicant  a  residence  card
    violated the right to respect for family life under Article 8.  In  the
    Upper Tribunal  the  Presenting  Officer  conceded  that  although  the
    decision in the case (refusal of a permanent residence card) was not  a
    removal decision it would appear on the Court of Appeal authority of JM
    Liberia principles that the Tribunal should consider the  case  on  the
    basis that a putative consequence of the Respondent's decision was that
    the Respondent would proceed  to  direct  the  Appellant's  removal  to
    Pakistan.   The  Tribunal  considered  (at  paragraph   79   of   their
    determination) that they were entitled to deal with Article 8 "in  this
    type of appeal".  They also cited JM Liberia.

25.  The difficulty for the Appellant in  Ahmed  was  that  because  of  the
    domestic violence inflicted upon her by her EEA  national  husband  she
    was unable to obtain the necessary information to show that he had been
    exercising treaty rights at the  relevant  time.   In  consequence  she
    could not show that  she  had  a  retained  right  of  residence.   The
    Tribunal allowed her appeal on Article 8 grounds but not on EEA grounds
    (which potentially would have given her a better immigration status).

26.  The decision was appealed to  the  Court  of  Appeal  (reported  as  NA
    Pakistan [2015] EWCA Civ 140) but as paragraph 2  of  the  judgment  in
    that case makes clear  "the  Respondent  did  not  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal  to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds".  The Court of Appeal  was  thus  concerned  with  a
    purely EEA matter whether the Directive on which the  2006  Regulations
    were based did not in fact require an Appellant in the position of  the
    applicant in that case to have to show that she had retained rights  of
    residence.  That issue was referred to the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union but no reply has as yet had been provided.

27.  It  seems  clear  therefore  that  both  the  concession  made  by  the
    Respondent in the case of Ahmed and the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
    itself indicated that it was permissible  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    consider Article 8 grounds provided Article 8 had been validly  raised.



28.  The Respondent did not consider Article 8  in  this  case  because  the
    Appellant had not made a proper application on the appropriate form.  I
    interpret the case of Weiss as  an  indication  that  the  approach  is
    lawful.  There is therefore nothing to stop the Appellant  from  making
    an application under Article 8 if he so chooses even if it may be  that
    the Appellant cannot succeed under Appendix FM.

29.  Can the Appellant raise Article 8 for the first time in his  notice  of
    appeal?   The  Appellant  can  raise  Article  8   if   he   has   made
    representations  to  the  Respondent  under  the  Article  before   the
    Respondent's decision. However where the Appellant has  not  done  that
    but has only sought to raise Article 8 after the decision is made  (for
    example in his grounds) Article 8 cannot be argued,  see  the  case  of
    Nirula [2011] EWHC 3336 approved  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  (reported
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1436).

30.   There  is  no  indication  in  the  determination  that  the  original
    application to the Respondent was made under Article 8.   The  evidence
    on  the  file  was  that  the  application  was  made  on   form   EEA1
    (registration certificate for Mr Parvez) and EEA2 residence  card  (for
    the Appellant).  The  Respondent's  discussion  of  Article  8  in  the
    refusal letter appears to be premised on the obvious point that the EEA
    application was made on the basis of a family connection, it could  not
    be made otherwise. However that is not the same as saying that  Article
    8 had been raised by the Appellant before the decision was taken. There
    was no covering letter taking the point. The  Respondent  was  thinking
    ahead that if an Article 8 claim was to be made it should  be  done  in
    the authorised way.

31.  The Appellant also relies on Schedule 1 of the 2006  Regulations  which
    brings in Section 84  of  the  2002  Act.   The  difficulty  with  that
    argument is  that  the  ground  permitted  by  the  section  (that  the
    immigration decision would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Human Rights Convention) only applies where it is the removal
    of the Appellant in consequence of the immigration decision which would
    breach those rights.  In this case there is no removal decision  and  I
    do not accept the wording of the refusal  letter  as  equating  with  a
    removal decision.  The Tribunal would have had jurisdiction to consider
    Article 8 if it had been validly raised before the notice  of  decision
    but as it was not there was no jurisdiction for the  Tribunal  to  hear
    the Article 8 argument.

32.  It follows from what I have said above that the Judge was in  error  in
    considering that Article 8 and the duty under Section 55 arose in  this
    case.  In fact if the Judge considered that Article 8 did  arise  there
    was no reason why the Judge could not have gone on to make an Article 8
    decision himself.  It is not entirely clear why  the  Judge  wanted  to
    leave the matter outstanding before the Respondent since this was not a
    decision  under  Regulation  8  that  would  require  the  Respondent's
    consideration before a final decision could be made.  An  appeal  under
    Article 8 would be at large and it would be open to the trial Judge who
    had heard the witnesses and had seen the evidence to make  his  or  her
    own findings under Article 8. If the Judge was satisfied that there was
    family life and it would be interfered with (as apparently he was)  the
    only issue would be the proportionality  of  interference  taking  into
    account section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and existing case law).

33.  Be that as it may the Judge was not  prepared  to  consider  Article  8
    because it had not been considered by  the  Respondent.   That  was  an
    error.  The Judge should not have been prepared to consider  Article  8
    because he had no jurisdiction to hear it as it had been raised for the
    first time in the grounds of appeal.  He should  have  followed  Nirula
    and cases going back to SS Turkey.   There  was  therefore  a  material
    error of law in the Judge's decision and I set it aside.

34.  As the issue was a narrow one as to whether  there  was  an  Article  8
    jurisdiction in this case and I have found that there was not, I can go
    on to remake the decision by dismissing the Appellant's  appeal.   This
    does not prevent the Appellant from making a further application in the
    correct format.   The  Respondent  will  then  have  to  consider  that
    application in the light of the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  as  to
    relationship etc.  which  are  preserved  for  that  purpose.   In  the
    meantime however as I have set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it side.  I have remade the decision  by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse  to  issue  a
residence card.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so  doing.



Signed this 16th day of June 2015



.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE ORDER

No fee award was made in  this  case  and  I  do  not  disturb  the  Judge's
decision in that respect.


Signed this 16th day of June 2015



.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

