
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17112/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 17th July 2015                    |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MISS AMJAD ALIYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A White (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Cox, promulgated on 21st August 2014, following a hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent,  Bennett  House,  on  12th   August   2014.    In   the
    determination, the judge  allowed  the  appeal  of  Amjad  Aliya.   The
    Respondent Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 28th  July  1989.
    She made an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student under  the  points-based  system  (PBS).   The
    Respondent refused the application  on  3rd  April  2014.   It  is  the
    Appellant's case that she made her application in  time  by  completing
    and submitting an online application before the expiration of her leave
    and then sending supporting documents within the fifteen days which, as
    she maintains, was required by the Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge concluded both

      i) that the application had been made online as contended, and that

     ii) supporting documents were submitted by the Appellant within fifteen
         days (see paragraph 5).

 4. In the discussions by the respective legal representatives  before  the
    judge, it was explained that in the event that the Appellant was  found
    by the judge to have valid leave when she  made  her  application,  the
    maintenance (funds) requirements of the  Rules  was  the  lower  amount
    applicable to an applicant with "an established  presence  studying  in
    the United Kingdom", (see paragraph 14, Appendix C).

 5. The judge also observed that, "helpfully, Miss Aboni, conceded that the
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant was able to meet the lower level
    and did not pursue the refusal in respect of  maintenance  funds"  (see
    paragraph 12).

 6. The other issue before the judge  was  in  relation  to  the  Appellant
    having submitted the proper English language test  certificate.   Here,
    as the  judge  explained,  "the  remaining  issue  before  me  was  the
    Appellant's acknowledged error  in  failing  to  grant  access  to  the
    Pearson test results relating to her English language test certificate"
    (paragraph 14).  Here, as the judge went on to explain,

         "Her application made it clear she relied upon the same and as  set
         out at Appendix O to the Rules, the tests are accepted  but  as  no
         certificates are printed the responsibility is on any applicant  to
         provide a downloaded copy and to grant access to the website to the
         Respondent in order  for  the  test  certificate  to  be  verified"
         (paragraph 14).

 7. The judge went on to explain that the Appellant was  "clearly  required
    to provide evidence  of  her  ability  to  meet  the  English  language
    requirements under the PBS" but that she was "in fact able to meet  the
    same and  under  Appendix  O  provided  evidence  from  a  pre-approved
    provider but did not, as is agreed before  me,  grant  access  for  the
    Respondent to verify  the  certificate  that  she  had  provided"  (see
    paragraph 19).

 8. That being so, the judge went on to conclude that it was not  the  case
    that  there  was  no  "evidential  flexibility"  in  relation  to   the
    determination of this claim of the Appellant.  As the judge explained,

         "The Appellant had the relevant qualification and did  provide  the
         document as evidence of the same.  I find that common law  fairness
         in this matter does require the Respondent to contact the Appellant
         and allow her the opportunity to  grant  that  access.   There  was
         evidence  before  the  Respondent  that  the  required  information
         existed ...... .." (paragraph 21).

 9. This was a case where

         "The Respondent had correctly identified that this application  was
         made  in  time,  and  therefore  correctly  identified  that   this
         Appellant was able to meet the maintenance requirements  under  the
         PBS, and that the only issue related  to  access  to  the  relevant
         website as a matter of common law fairness ...".

    The judge concluded that this was a case where "the  Respondent  should
    have allowed an opportunity for that step to be taken" (paragraph 22).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the  judge  has  failed  to  take
    cognisance of the recent case of Marghia (procedural  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 366, where the Tribunal made it clear that

         "The common law duty of fairness is  essentially  about  procedural
         fairness.  There  is  no  absolute  duty  at  common  law  to  make
         decisions which are  substantively  'fair'.   The  court  will  not
         interfere  with  decisions  which  are   objected   to   as   being
         substantively unfair, except the decision in question falls foul of
         the Wednesbury test i.e., that  no  reasonable  decision  maker  or
         public body could have arrived at such a decision".

12. On 2nd October 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    the judge had misconstrued  the  application  of  common  law  fairness
    principles in a case such as the present.

13. On 24th October 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Appellant's
    legal representatives, which appears at section A  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.

Submissions

14. At the hearing  before  me  on  17th  July  2015,  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr D Mills and the Appellant was represented by  Miss  A
    White of Counsel.  Mr D Mills submitted that it was not challenged that
    the  Appellant  had  made  a  timeous  online  application.   What  was
    challenged was that for the Pearson test  certificate  to  be  properly
    acknowledged there had to be three requirements met, as is  clear  from
    the "Immigration Rules, Appendix O".  These are first,  a  printout  of
    online score report.  Second, scores must also  be  sent  to  the  Home
    Office online.  Third, the Pearson  test  certificate  does  not  issue
    paper  certificates.   Given  that  Pearson  did  not  issue  a   paper
    certificate, it was incumbent upon  the  Appellant  to  ensure  that  a
    certificate was sent in the appropriate manner.

15. Second, the judge was for this reason wrong to  say  that  "common  law
    fairness" required her to allow the appeal on the basis that  she  did.
    The case of Marghia [2014] UKUT 366 makes it clear  that  such  a  Rule
    only applies in relation to "procedural unfairness".

16. Third, and perhaps most importantly, there was no obligation  upon  the
    Respondent Secretary of State to make any enquiries of the Appellant on
    the basis of "evidential flexibility" because this was not a case  that
    was going to ever succeed.  The reason for this is that if one looks at
    the notes on Rule 245AA which are headed "Documents not submitted  with
    applications", these Rules make it  clear  at  subparagraph  (c)  that,
    "documents will not be requested where a specific document has not been
    submitted ... or ... (b) will lead to a grant because  the  application
    will be refused  for  other  reasons".   This  was  a  case  where  the
    application would have been refused for other reasons.  The reason here
    was the absence of an English language test certificate.

17. That only left Article 8.  The judge did not consider Article 8 because
    she had allowed the appeal under the Rules.  The  Appellant  could  not
    succeed now under Article 8.  If I found there to be an error of law, I
    should adopt the arguments put forward by Mr  Mills,  and  dismiss  the
    appeal substantively.

18. For her part, Miss White drew my attention to a recently reported  case
    of Sultana (rules: waiver/further enquiry; discretion) [2014] UKUT 540,
    where the president, Mr Justice McCloskey had  given  guidance  to  the
    effect that the mandatory nature of  these  Rules  has  the  effect  of
    causing  harsh  results  which  need  in  appropriate   cases   to   be
    ameliorated.  In particular, she drew my attention to paragraphs 23  to
    25  of  the  determination.   There  was,  she  submitted,  an  express
    reference to the fact that, "discretionary powers  of  further  enquiry
    and waiver promote the values of  fairness  and  common  sense,  whilst
    simultaneously minimising  unnecessary  dominance  of  an  emphasis  on
    bureaucratic formality" (see paragraph 25).

19. Miss White submitted that the judge, in allowing the  appeal  that  she
    did, was precisely having regard to the fact that the failure to make a
    further enquiry was "Wednesbury unreasonable" because the Appellant had
    made a timeous online application, and had  subsequently  submitted  by
    post her documentation, and it was the fact  that  the  caseworker  had
    erroneously then concluded that the Appellant attracted a high level of
    maintenance which was not the case, that led to further  complications.
    However, if one looks at paragraph 245AA(d) it is clear that an  online
    score report can be submitted.  The Appellant had not submitted a copy.
     She had complied as best as she could.

20. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that the Pearson test does not  allow  for
    the provision of a copy but requires an actual test certificate.

21. I have given careful consideration to all the documents before  me  and
    to the oral submissions.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  making  of  the
    decision by the judge did not involve the making of an error on a point
    of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I  should  set  aside
    the decision and remake the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

22. First, this is not a case which  falls  within  the  scope  of  Marghia
    [2014] UKUT 366.  This  is  because  the  Appellant  actually  met  the
    requirements under Part 6 of the Immigration Rules.  She  could  remain
    in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  The Respondent  Secretary  of
    State had clear evidence before her of the Appellant's English language
    test certificate confirming that the  Appellant  had  met  the  English
    language criteria under the Immigration Rules.

23. This was because the Appellant had submitted a copy of the same at  the
    time of making an application to extend  her  stay  within  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This was clearly a  case  where
    paragraph 245AA(b)(iv) and (d)(iii) of Part 6A applied.  This makes  it
    clear that

         "(b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which;

             (iv)     a document does not  contain  all  of  the  specified
                  information"

             then the officer in question "may contact the applicant or his
             representative in writing, and request the correct  document".



24. Accordingly, it is not  correct,  as  Mr  Mills  maintains,  that  this
    application never stood any chance  of  succeeding.   It  did  stand  a
    chance of succeeding because of two very clear reasons.

25. First, the caseworker had erroneously ascribed  to  the  Appellant  the
    wrong and higher financial requirement test.  The judge recognised that
    this was legally incorrect.  The Appellant could comply with the  lower
    standard.

26. Second, the Appellant  was  refused  because  of  questions  about  the
    English  language  test  certificate.   However,  the   Appellant   had
    submitted a copy of this at the time  of  her  application.   Paragraph
    245AA clearly applied.  All the Respondent Secretary of State had to do
    was to make the necessary enquiry and the information would  have  been
    made available.

27. It is  perhaps  unfortunate  that  this  entire  methodology  has  been
    described by the judge as "common law fairness" but  the  fact  remains
    that the appeal could have properly  been  allowed  by  the  judge,  as
    indeed it was, and it is  not  for  this  Tribunal,  as  a  supervising
    Tribunal, to intervene to upset that determination, unless there  is  a
    clear error of law.  There is none.

Notice of Decision

28. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

29. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd July 2015
