
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17595/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 23rd Oct 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                             Pratheepan Natrajan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  In very simple terms it was the  Secretary  of  State's  case
    that he had studied at graduate level in the United Kingdom too long to
    satisfy the requirements of the Rules for further leave.

 2. When the case came before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant did not
    appear.  He was ill.  He was  in  hospital.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    correctly did not  just  adjourn  but  considered  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's presence and how important it  was  that  he  was  able  to
    attend.  This was undoubtedly the right approach.

 3. Where the First-tier Tribunal fell into error was  in  concluding  that
    the appellant's presence could not have been material to the outcome of
    the case.  The case turned on credibility.  It turned  on  establishing
    just what periods of time the appellant  had  spent  studying  at  what
    particular level.  The First-tier Tribunal decided that  the  appellant
    could not be  expected  to  remember  dates  accurately.   That  is  an
    astonishing finding to reach without at least giving the  appellant  an
    opportunity to comment but as, Mr Martin has pointed  out,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, in what is in many ways a very careful determination has
    also missed a point of potential importance.

 4. At the start of the appellant's witness statement there is a chronology
    and in that chronology the appellant said that  in  September  2007  he
    enrolled at UEL to study level 4 at BITE BSc Hons. It may be  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal thought that this was a claim  to  be  studying  at
    degree level but that is incompatible with the claim to be studying  at
    level 4 which is study at below degree level.

 5. It could  be  that  the  chronology,  properly  explained,  proves  the
    appellant's case.

 6. The finding that the appellant's oral evidence could not have made  any
    difference was wrong.

 7. This is not a case where  there  was  any  reason  to  think  that  the
    appellant was going to be in hospital for a prolonged period. Indeed he
    attended the hearing before me.  It  was  a  case  where  having  asked
    itself if the appellant's presence could have  made  a  difference  the
    Tribunal should have found that it could and should have adjourned  the
    case for it to be heard when the appellant was better.

 8. Both parties agree, but I  do  not  think  that  this  is  in  any  way
    controversial, that the result of this decision is that  the  appellant
    has not had a fair hearing and so the case has to go back to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be decided again, and I so order  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The legal error was a  procedural
    irregularity of a serious kind and the only possible remedy is for  the
    case to be reheard. It should be reheard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the outcome depends on oral evidence  being  believed  and  the
    appellant is entitled to preserve his rights of appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2014                |










