
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17533/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 February 2014                         |On 12 February 2014        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR KWAKU AMPONSAH
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr P Deller a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: Mr T Bobb a solicitor
           from Aylish Alexander

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Ghana who was born on 3 August 1994. I will refer to him as
      the claimant. The Secretary of State  has  been  given  permission  to
      appeal the determination of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa
      ("the FTTJ") who allowed, on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds,  the
      claimant's appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  4
      June 2013 to remove him from the United Kingdom following the  failure
      of his application to remain on Article 8 human rights grounds. Whilst
      there is a removal decision there are no removal directions.


   2. The claimant came to the UK on 22 October 2000 with a valid visit visa
      which expired on 26 March 2001. He has committed a number of  criminal
      offences which are set out in  the  refusal  letter  of  4  June  2013
      addressed to the claimant's solicitors in the following terms; "On  12
      October 2007  your  client  was  reprimanded  for  common  assault  he
      committed on 6 September 2007. On 13  January  2009  your  client  was
      given a warning for theft he committed on  23  September  2008.  On  2
      September  2009  your  client   was   convicted   for   making   false
      representations to make gain for self or  another  or  cause  loss  to
      another/expose other to risk he committed on  23  July  2009  till  22
      August 2009. On the  same  day  your  client  was  also  convicted  of
      possessing knife blade/sharp pointed article in a public place. On  31
      March 2010 your client was convicted for attempted theft,  shoplifting
      on 18 March 2010. On 16 July 2010 your client was convicted for  theft
      from person on 14 May 2010. On 16 July 2010 your client was  convicted
      of robbery he committed on 14 October 2009  and  was  sentenced  on  6
      August 2010. On 12 March 2012 your client was convicted of theft of  a
      cycle on 24 May 2012 and for going equipped for  theft  on  7  October
      2011. On 3 May 2012 your client was convicted of  conspiring/supplying
      Class A controlled drugs, Heroin on 17 September 2010 till 8  November
      2011. On 13 March 2013 your  client  was  arrested  by  officers  from
      Croydon police station the theft (sic) of motor vehicle, no insurance.
      He was served with IS151A as an overstayer and detained at Brook House
      IRC. On 1 April 2013 your client was remanded  on  unconditional  bail
      for driving otherwise than in  accordance  with  a  licence,  using  a
      vehicle whilst uninsured and taking motor vehicle without  consent  on
      13 March 2013".


   3. This is not a conducive deportation case. The Secretary of  State  has
      not treated the claimant as a "foreign criminal" and there has been no
      decision to deport him. However, the Secretary of State  did  conclude
      that the claimant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public
      good because in her view his offending had caused serious harm and  he
      was a persistent offender who had shown a particular disregard for the
      law. She considered the application on Article 8 human rights  grounds
      as these are now contained in the Immigration Rules  which  came  into
      effect on 9 July 2012. He did not meet the family life requirements of
      Appendix FM as a partner or parent and had not developed a family life
      here, although he did have some family ties. He could go back to Ghana
      and his father could accompany him.


   4. It was accepted that the claimant had established a  private  life  in
      the UK and that removal would interfere with  this  but  his  criminal
      convictions weighed heavily against him and he could pursue a  private
      life in Ghana. He had not resided in the UK for a continuous period of
      at least 20 years. He was not under 18 but was between 18 and  25.  He
      had spent at least half of his life residing continuously  in  the  UK
      but because of his criminal history did not satisfy  the  requirements
      of paragraph 276ADE. The Secretary of State also  concluded  that  the
      claimant had not established that there were exceptional circumstances
      under paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules. His removal  would  not
      breach his Article 8 human rights either under the  Immigration  Rules
      or under the jurisprudence outside those rules, although the Secretary
      of State maintained her position that the Immigration Rules  contained
      a complete code for Article 8. She also concluded that  the  appellant
      was not entitled to succeed on Article 3 human rights grounds.


   5. The claimant appealed relying on broadly based and formulaic  grounds.
      Both parties were represented at the  hearing  before  the  FTTJ,  the
      claimant by Mr Bobb who appears before me.  The  FTTJ  heard  evidence
      from the claimant and his father. The FTTJ found that the claimant did
      not meet the Article 8 requirements in Appendix FM of the  Immigration
      Rules. She went on  to  apply  Article  8  jurisprudence  outside  the
      Immigration Rules by reference to  Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)
      [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) and the five-step principles set out in Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27.


   6. The FTTJ concluded that the claimant had  established  a  family  life
      with his father in this country and that he had a private  life  here.
      The first four of the Razgar tests were answered  in  the  affirmative
      leaving the appeal turning on the last, whether the interference  with
      his Article 8 human rights would be proportionate  to  the  legitimate
      public end sought to be achieved. After making findings  of  fact  and
      reviewing the evidence she concluded  that  his  removal  would  be  a
      disproportionate interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for  his
      private  and  family  life.  The  appeal  was  dismissed   under   the
      Immigration Rules but allowed on wider Article 8 human rights grounds.


   7. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal. She submits that the FTTJ erred  in  law
      in a number of ways. Firstly, she failed to take into account a number
      of factors relevant to the proportionality  assessment  including  the
      lack of a legitimate expectation to remain in the UK, the availability
      of other family members in Ghana,  the  possibility  of  the  claimant
      either receiving financial support from his father in the  UK  or  his
      father returning to Ghana  to  help  him  settle  there  or  that  his
      medication was available  in  Ghana.  Secondly,  by  failing  to  make
      adequate findings as to why the claimant failed on Article  8  grounds
      as these are contained in the Immigration Rules. Thirdly,  by  failing
      to give proper consideration to "exceptional circumstances"  as  these
      have been clarified as "an unjustifiably harsh outcome.


   8. The claimant has submitted a Rule 24 reply to the grounds of appeal.


   9. Mr Deller said that he did not criticise the way in which the FTTJ set
      out or dealt with the evidence before her. However, she gave no or  no
      clear  reasons  for  deciding  that  the  claimant  failed  under  the
      Immigration Rules. It was important for her to do so not only to  show
      why she agreed with the Secretary of State, if such was the case,  but
      to set out the framework for considering the Article 8 grounds outside
      the Immigration Rules. The Immigration Rules set out Parliament's view
      of what needed to be considered.  The  FTTJ  had  not  given  balanced
      consideration to the competing factors.  The  emphasis  was  on  those
      factors which assisted the claimant and  little  was  said  about  the
      public interest. The FTTJ should follow the dicta of the Supreme Court
      in HH v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic, Genoa  [2012]  UKSC
      25 (20 June 2012). I was asked to find that the FTTJ had erred in  law
      and to set aside her decision.


  10. Mr Bobb relied on the Rule 24 reply. He submitted that Mr  Deller  had
      strayed outside the ambit of the grounds of appeal. There was no  test
      of exceptionality  under  the  Article  8  jurisprudence  outside  the
      Immigration Rules. He accepted that there was a public interest to  be
      taken into account but argued that the FTTJ had done this  adequately.
      The statements of principle were set out in paragraphs 31 (4) and  33.
      It was important to emphasise that this was not a deportation case and
      the claimant was not a "foreign criminal". He argued that the FTTJ had
      properly balanced the factors  in  favour  of  the  appellant  and  in
      relation to the public interest. The claimant had been here  illegally
      for a number of years but that was not his fault; his father  had  not
      told him. He was only six years old when he arrived. I  was  asked  to
      find that there was no error of law and to uphold the decision.


  11. I reserved my determination.


  12. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State dealt with the claimant's
      grounds under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules at  length  and  in
      detail. It is clear from paragraph 30 of the  determination  that  the
      FTTJ agreed with both the reasoning and the conclusions. I  find  that
      this was sufficient. I  can  find  no  indication  that  it  was  ever
      seriously contended on behalf of the claimant that  he  could  succeed
      under Appendix FM. As the FTTJ agreed  with  both  the  reasoning  and
      conclusions of the Secretary of State I am not persuaded that any more
      detailed reference to them  was  necessary  or  that  it  should  have
      informed  the  FTTJ's  reasoning  in  relation  to   the   Article   8
      jurisprudence outside the Immigration Rules.


  13. Mr Deller stated that he did not criticise the way in which  the  FTTJ
      set out or dealt with the evidence. I agree. Whilst not every possible
      permutation of circumstances was set out I find  that  the  FTTJ  made
      proper findings of fact and  set  out  a  sufficient  outline  of  the
      factors taken into account which persuades me that no important factor
      was left out of account.


  14. I can find no indication that in relation to  the  Article  8  grounds
      outside  the  Immigration  Rules  the  FTTJ  applied   any   test   of
      exceptionality or  whether  there  would  be  an  unjustifiably  harsh
      outcome. The  grounds  assert  that  one  formulation  of  the  proper
      proportionality test is that set out by  Lady  Hale  in  HH  v  Deputy
      Prosecutor of the Italian Republic. Again I  can  find  no  indication
      that the FTTJ departed from these principles.


  15. The FTTJ took into account the extent and duration of  the  claimant's
      criminality, his age at the time the offences were committed, the fact
      that  none  of  them  attracted  custodial  sentences  and  the   risk
      assessment made in April 2013. I find that the reference to the fourth
      of the Razgar tests in paragraph 31, where the elements of the  public
      interest are set out, and what is said  in  paragraph  34  provides  a
      sufficient indication that the FTTJ had in mind and took into  account
      all aspects of the public interest.


  16.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  her
      determination.


  17. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and see  no  good
      reason to do so.








      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 8
      February 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

