
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA176552015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                                |On 17 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ABDUL AZIZ MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shah, Maz Shah Legal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Abdul Aziz Mohammed, is a  male  citizen  of
    South Africa who was born on  9  June  1975.   He  appealed  against  a
    decision of the respondent refusing his application for leave to remain
    as a partner and/or parent of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The application was refused on  23  April  2015.   The
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) in a  decision  promulgated  on  18
    September 2015 allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    The appeal was on the basis  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  satisfy
    paragraph E-LTRPT of Appendix FM of HC 395 (as amended)

         E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a parent all
         of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2. must be met.

         Relationship requirements

         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-

         (a)  under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or where
         the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant was  first
         granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a parent  under  this
         Appendix, must not have formed an independent  family  unit  or  be
         leading an independent life;

         (b)  living in the UK; and

         (c)  a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

         (d)  has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least  the  7  years
         immediately preceding the date of application and  paragraph  EX.1.
         applies.

         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

         (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for  the
         child or the child normally lives with the applicant and not  their
         other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in the UK); or

         (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be-



             (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here  includes  a
             person who has been in a relationship with the  applicant  for
             less than two years prior to the date of application); and

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
             to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

         (a)  The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-

             (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child, or  that  the
             child normally lives with them; or

             (ii) direct access (in person) to the child,  as  agreed  with
             the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives  or  as
             ordered by a court in the UK; and

         (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,  and
         intend  to  continue  to  take,  an  active  role  in  the  child's
         upbringing.




         Immigration status requirement

         E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

         (a)  as a visitor; or

         (b)  with valid leave granted for a period of  6  months  or  less,
         unless that leave was granted pending the outcome of  family  court
         or divorce proceedings;

         E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK-

         (a)  on  temporary  admission  or  temporary  release,  unless  the
         applicant has been so for a continuous period of more than 6 months
         at the date of application and paragraph EX.1.applies; or

         (b)  in breach of immigration  laws  (disregarding  any  period  of
         overstaying for a period of 28  days  or  less),  unless  paragraph
         EX.1. applies.

         Financial requirements

         E-LTRPT.4.1. The applicant must provide evidence that they will  be
         able to adequately maintain  and  accommodate  themselves  and  any
         dependants in the UK  without  recourse  to  public  funds,  unless
         paragraph EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.4.2. The applicant must provide evidence that there will be
         adequate accommodation in the UK, without recourse to public funds,
         for the family, including other family members who are not included
         in the application but who live in the same  household,  which  the
         family own or occupy exclusively, unless paragraph  EX.1.  applies:
         accommodation will not be regarded as adequate if-

         (a)  it is, or will be, overcrowded; or

         (b)  it contravenes public health regulations.

         English language requirement

         E-LTRPT.5.1. If the applicant has not  met  the  requirement  in  a
         previous  application  for  leave  as  a  parent  or  partner,  the
         applicant must provide specified evidence that they-

         (a)  are a national of a majority English speaking  country  listed
         in paragraph GEN.1.6.;

         (b)  have passed an English language test in speaking and listening
         at a minimum of level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
         Reference for Languages with a provider approved by  the  Secretary
         of State;

         (c)  have an academic qualification recognised by UK  NARIC  to  be
         equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or  Master's  degree  or
         PhD in the UK, which was taught in English; or

         (d)   are  exempt  from  the  English  language  requirement  under
         paragraph E-LTRPT.5.2.; unless paragraph EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.5.2. The applicant is  exempt  from  the  English  language
         requirement if at the date of application-

         (a)  the applicant is aged 65 or over;

         (b)  the applicant has a disability (physical or mental  condition)
         which prevents the applicant from meeting the requirement; or

         (c)   there  are  exceptional  circumstances  which   prevent   the
         applicant from being able to meet the requirement.

 2. The appellant accepted that he could  not  succeed  under  the  partner
    route of Appendix FM because the appellant and  his  partner  were  not
    married and  did  not  live  together.   The  Secretary  of  State  had
    considered the application of the  appellant  both  under  the  partner
    route and under the so-called parent route but found, in respect of the
    latter, that the appellant had "not provided  sufficient  evidence  you
    are taking and intend to continue  to  take  an  active  role  in  your
    child's upbringing."

 3. In his evidence to the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  explained
    that he had met his partner in August 201 and that she  has  one  child
    from a previous relationship and two children with the appellant.   The
    partner lives with the children.  The judge recorded [12] that:

         "The couple do not  live  together  because  that  would  adversely
         affect her benefit entitlement and cause financial  hardship.   The
         appellant wants to work but is prohibited from doing so by his lack
         of any status in the UK.  He will find a job  once  he  is  legally
         able to do so.  He is currently living rent free with a friend."

    The judge noted [13] that the appellant and his partner spend  most  of
    the time at home with the partner and that the appellant takes care  of
    the children whilst the partner is at work.

 4. The application by the appellant was refused by the Secretary of  State
    because the Secretary of State did not consider the appellant  met  the
    requirements of E-LTRPT 2.4(b).  No reasons were given in  the  refusal
    letter.  In a brief decision, Judge Hindson found  that,  although  the
    appellant  and  his  partner  had  shown  complete  disregard  for   UK
    immigration law, they had given truthful  evidence.   The  judge  found
    [22] that the appellant was taking and continued to take an active role
    in his children's upbringing.

 5. There is a difficulty with  the  appellant's  application  for  limited
    leave to remain as a parent.  The child requirements  (see  above)  are
    satisfied but it is difficult to see,  on  the  facts  of  the  present
    appeal, that E-LTRPT 2.3(b)(ii) is met in  this  case.   As  the  judge
    recorded, the children live with the appellant's partner.  However, the
    partner of an applicant is expressly  excluded  by  subparagraph  (ii).
    This requirement appears to underline  the  basis  of  the  appeal  now
    brought by the Secretary of State namely  that  "The  rule  is  clearly
    intended as an avenue for parents who  are  separated  from  the  other
    parent.  As such the appellant's application clearly could not meet the
    requirements of the Rules."  A requirement in the rule  that  a  person
    who is the parent or carer of the child or children  must  not  be  the
    partner of the applicant appears expressly to exclude those individuals
    living in the sort of circumstances described by the present  appellant
    in his evidence to the Tribunal.  It is clear from the  evidence  that,
    but for the financial implications, the appellant would live  with  his
    partner and the children.  However, the appellant's  partner  does  not
    cease to be his partner for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    simply because the two individuals are not living together in the  same
    house.  She is his partner who so happens to live (for reasons  not  at
    all connected with the subsistence of  their  relationship)  separately
    from the appellant at the present time.  It follows that the judge  was
    wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Hindson
    and have remade the decision.   For  the  reasons  I  have  given,  the
    appellant cannot succeed under the parent route.  The appellant accepts
    that he cannot succeed under the partner route.

 6. Judge Hindson did not address Article 8 presumably because  he  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The  appellant  might  perhaps
    argue that as a result of his present  living  arrangements,  he  falls
    between the parent and  partner  provisions  of  the  rules.  The  fact
    remains that he did not make any such  argument.  Indeed,  I  heard  no
    argument at all as regards Article 8. Although his living  arrangements
    do not fall squarely within the provisions of  the  rules,  that  is  a
    matter of choice for the appellant and his partner; if  they  chose  to
    live together, he may choose to apply again. However, that is a  matter
    for the appellant and, as matters currently stand, I cannot  find  that
    any   interference   caused   by   the    immigration    decision    is
    disproportionate. It follows that his appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  18
    September 2015 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.

 8. The appellant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

 9. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR)


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
