
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17959/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th August 2016                  |On 06th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                               MRS CHUNXIA XIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lam, Counsel for Ashtons Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  China  born  on  18th  May  1973.   She
    appealed  against  the  decision  of  the   Respondent   refusing   her
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
    spouse.  The decision was made on 1st May 2015.  Paragraph  287(vi)  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  states  that   an   applicant   must   provide
    satisfactory evidence  that  they  have  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
    English  language  and  although  the  Appellant  submitted   an   ESOL
    certificate when she was interviewed it was concluded that it  was  not
    credible  that  she  had  successfully  achieved   this   entry   level
    certificate.   The  Respondent  found  the  certificate  produced   was
    fraudulently obtained.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Jones on 28th January 2016.  The appeal  was  dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules and  under  Article  8  of  ECHR  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9th February 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pullig on 20th  July  2016.
    The permission states that there was an arguable error of law when  the
    judge found the Respondent had shown to the required standard, that the
    certificate had been fraudulently obtained.  There was a period of over
    a year between the test and the interview  and  the  permission  states
    that there was very little evidence from the Respondent that  the  test
    certificate was  fraudulent.  Also,  the  Respondent  referred  to  the
    Qualification Handbook which was actually issued  after  the  test  had
    been taken.  The permission states that the judge may  have  failed  to
    deal properly with the evidence and this may be  a  material  error  of
    law.

 3. The permission states that the decision relating to Article  8  in  the
    decision is satisfactory.  The judge directed herself properly and  did
    not make any arguable error of law on Article 8.

The Hearing

 4. I asked the parties if there is anything in this  claim  which  can  be
    agreed on.    Counsel  for  the  Appellant  stated  that  there  is  no
    verification report relating to the  ESOL  certificate  and  no  direct
    evidence that the certificate is fraudulent.   The  Presenting  Officer
    accepted that.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the assertion  is
    that the Appellant at no time went to the  test  centre  and  that  the
    certificate  is  forged.   Counsel  submitted  that  the  Qualification
    Handbook is dated in April 2014 but  the  Appellant  sat  the  test  in
    January 2014, so this is not the correct guidance for this claim.   The
    Presenting Officer accepted that that is the case.

 5. The Rule 24 response lodged by the Respondent refers to the  fact  that
    the Appellant was interviewed over a  year  after  taking  her  English
    language test so according to the appellant her answers in  respect  of
    it should not be relied on. The response states that this was  properly
    considered by the judge, who made cogent findings in paragraphs  31  to
    36 of the decision relating to this.

 6. Counsel submitted that although the Appellant answered 28 questions  at
    interview only 16 of these refer to the English language test, the rest
    refer to Life in the UK which has not been raised as an in issue in the
    refusal letter.

 7. I was referred to paragraph 36 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that he is satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that  the
    Appellant did not take the test at Whitechapel College.  She was unable
    to give accurate times for undertaking the test and was unable  to  say
    in which area of London, Whitechapel College  is.   She  also  did  not
    recall taking a speaking test.  The judge states "If she had taken  the
    test she  surely  would  have  remembered".   He  submitted  that  this
    reasoning is not sufficient.  I was referred to  paragraph  15  of  the
    decision which refers to the Appellant stating how long the test  took.
    He submitted that there is no evidence that the Appellant did not  take
    the test.  There are many parts to the test.  The test  might  normally
    take 30 minutes  but  perhaps  the  Appellant  finished  it  in  twenty
    minutes.  He submitted that  this  part  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
    cannot be relied on as the actual question she was asked was ambiguous.

 8. Counsel referred me to the case of  SM  and  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT  00229
    (IAC).  He submitted that the burden of proof to show that the test was
    taken fraudulently is on the Respondent  and  he  submitted  that  this
    burden has not been discharged.   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence is that she was nervous when she sat the test  and  also  when
    she was interviewed.

 9. I was referred to the Appellant's husband's statement.  He states  that
    when he went with the Appellant to Liverpool for the interview, it  was
    delayed and there were problems with the interviewer's accent.  Counsel
    submitted that it must be relevant that there was over a  year  between
    the test and the interview and this should be taken into  account.   He
    submitted that the Respondent has produced nothing else to support  her
    case.  She did not contact the college for its side of the story and he
    submitted that although the burden is on the Respondent  nothing  extra
    has been produced.

10. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's husband has diabetes and  has  a
    job in the United Kingdom and the Appellant has a  job  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I was referred to the case of Muhandiramge [2015] UKUT  00675
    (IAC) at paragraphs 9 to 11.  In this t is stated that where  there  is
    said to be deception by an Appellant, it is  well-established  that  in
    such cases the burden of proof rests on the Secretary of State and  the
    standard of proof is at the higher end of the balance of  probabilities
    spectrum.  He submitted that the Secretary of State  has  made  a  very
    serious allegation and the Appellant has  given  a  proper  explanation
    which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility  and  the  Respondent
    has produced nothing, apart from the interview record.

11. Counsel submitted that the interviewer was  not  a  qualified  language
    assessor and I was asked to give weight to the terms of the  permission
    granted  and  the  fact  that  the  wrong  guidance  was  used  by  the
    Respondent.

12. Counsel submitted that one of the reasons the English test  has  to  be
    passed is to ensure that the applicant integrates into society  in  the
    United Kingdom. He submitted that that is ironic as in  this  case  the
    Appellant is married to an Englishman and is friendly with her  mother-
    in-law, who is English, and  he  submitted  that  this  aspect  of  the
    English test  does  not  apply  to  the  Appellant.   She  has  clearly
    integrated into life in the United Kingdom.

13. Counsel submitted that  the  Respondent  has  not  produced  sufficient
    evidence to support her argument and so  she  has  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof and I was asked to set the decision aside and allow the
    appeal.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response and the grounds of application are merely a disagreement  with
    the judge's findings, which were open to him and adequately reasoned.

15. I was referred to paragraph 13 of the First-tier Judge's decision and I
    was asked to read the questions and answers  given  at  interview.   He
    submitted that it is clear from the interview that the Appellant either
    failed to understand the questions or if she understood them was unable
    to answer them in English.  He submitted that the judge was entitled to
    comment on this.

16. The Presenting Officer referred me to paragraph  15  of  the  decision.
    This is the paragraph about how long the test took.  Paragraph 14 deals
    with the cost of the test.  He submitted that because  of  the  answers
    given by the Appellant at the interview the Respondent  concluded  that
    on the balance of probabilities the Appellant had  not  sat  the  test.
    The Presenting Officer submitted  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is
    sustainable. The judge  maintained  that  decision  and  gave  adequate
    reasons for doing  so.   He  submitted  that  there  is  no  basis  for
    overturning the decision and it should stand.

17. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the evidence relied on by  the
    Respondent is flimsy and  is  not  material.   He  submitted  that  the
    evidential burden is on the Respondent and it is set at a high level of
    the balance of probabilities.   He  submitted  that  there  must  be  a
    material error of law in the First-tier Judge's decision,  particularly
    in view of the fact that when the Respondent made her decision she used
    the wrong guidance.  This is not in dispute.

18. I was referred to paragraph 31 of the decision. Counsel submitted  that
    this is not accurate as only sixteen  of  the  questions  at  interview
    related to the English test.  The other questions related  to  Life  in
    the UK.  Counsel  submitted  that  because  of  the  lack  of  evidence
    provided by the Respondent the burden of proof has not been discharged.
    The Respondent relied solely on a few questions at interview  and  that
    is not sufficient.

19. I was asked to set aside the decision and make a new decision  allowing
    the appeal.

20. Permission to appeal is based on one issue  and  that  is  whether  the
    Respondent showed, to the required  standard,  that  the  English  test
    certificate had been fraudulently obtained.  The permission  refers  to
    the long period between the interview and the test  and  the  Appellant
    stating she could not remember much about  the  test.   The  permission
    refers to the lack of evidence  from  the  Respondent,  that  the  test
    certificate  was  itself  fraudulent  and  also  to  the  Qualification
    Handbook referred to, which was in fact issued after the test had  been
    taken.  The permission states that the judge may well  have  failed  to
    deal properly with the evidence before him.

21. What is being asserted by the Respondent is that the Appellant did  not
    go to the test centre to sit the test.  The burden of proof relating to
    this is on the Respondent and is the balance of probabilities.

22. The answers given by the Appellant at interview are extremely poor  but
    there  are  mitigating  circumstances  being  that  the  Appellant  was
    nervous,  perhaps  had  problems  understanding  the  accent   of   the
    interviewer and it was over a year after she sat the  test  before  she
    was interviewed.

23. The Respondent has not provided any evidence to show that the Appellant
    did not attend the test centre.  It is not clear why  the  college  was
    not contacted about this by the Respondent.  I have also noted that the
    respondent and the judge relied on a handbook dated in April 2014 which
    must be an error as the test was sat on 7th January 2014.  There is  no
    evidence to contradict the Appellant when she states she  attended  the
    Whitechapel Test Centre to take the B1 test on 7th January 2014.  There
    is evidence that she took a course in preparation for the test.

24. I have to decide if the Respondent has discharged the burden  of  proof
    as to whether the Appellant acted dishonestly.  There is no issue about
    the authenticity of the B1 certificate.

25. Based on what was before the judge she concluded that the Appellant had
    not taken the test.  (Paragraph 36).  She states in this paragraph that
    if she had taken the test she surely would have remembered.  That  this
    is not enough  to  show  that  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the
    Appellant did not take  the  test.   I  have  considered  the  case  of
    Muhandiramge.  There is an evidential burden on the Secretary of  State
    which requires sufficient evidence to be adduced to raise an  issue  as
    to the existence or non-existence of a fact in issue.  I  do  not  find
    that the Secretary of  State  has  adduced  sufficient  evidence.   The
    Appellant has given an explanation which satisfies the minimum level of
    plausibility.

26.  Based  on  what  was  before  the  First-tier  Immigration  Judge  the
    Respondent has not discharged the burden of proof  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

27. I therefore find there to be a material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.



Notice of Decision

As I find there to be a material error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  I
direct that  the  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Jones,
promulgated on 9th February 2016, be set aside.

I am remaking the decision. I do not find there to  be  a  necessity  for  a
further hearing.

I allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction has been made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
