
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17686/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  6th March 2015                            |On 10th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          MR DHAYALAN KANAGARATNAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by KTS Legal Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 8th  March  1985.  He
       arrived in the UK on 25th September 2009 as a student. He  had  leave
       in this capacity until 6th September 2013. On 6th September  2013  he
       applied for an EU residence card  as  the  unmarried  partner  of  Ms
       Kristina Harlamova, a citizen of Latvia born on 22nd  April  1990  in
       accordance with Regulations 8(5) and 17(4) of the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006 (henceforth the EEA Regulations).

    3. This application was refused without a right of appeal. The appellant
       applied again on 2nd February 2014 and was refused on 31st March 2014
       with a right of appeal. His appeal against the decision  was  allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell in a  determination  promulgated
       on the 28th November 2014.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Mark Davies on 13th January 2015 on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  allowing  the  appeal
       outright rather than simply to the extent of finding the decision was
       not in accordance with  the  law  and  remitting  the  matter  for  a
       decision on the issuing of a  residence  card  to  the  Secretary  of
       State.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    6. Mr Kandola relied upon the grounds of appeal. These contend  that  it
       was not permissible for Judge Russell  to  have  allowed  the  appeal
       outright as the Secretary of State  had  not  considered  whether  to
       exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations  to
       grant a residence card. In such circumstances the appeal should  only
       have been allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law, see Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]
       UKUT 00340.

    7. Mr Bazini agreed that there was an error of law as contended  by  the
       Secretary of State. However he argued that the  way  in  which  these
       matters is dealt with by the Secretary of  State  causes  unnecessary
       delays. Consideration should be given to exercising discretion in the
       alternative in the initial refusal letter so that  the  whole  matter
       could be dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

    8. As the Secretary of State had  not  considered  whether  to  exercise
       discretion to issue  the  appellant  with  a  residence  card  as  an
       extended family member the correct legal approach,  once  the  First-
       tier Tribunal had found there was a durable relationship between  the
       appellant and his partner, was to remit the matter to  the  Secretary
       of State for a decision as to whether she would  exercise  discretion
       in the appellant's favour to  issue  the  residence  card  given  the
       finding he was in a durable relationship with Ms Harlamova.  This  is
       the approach to Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations as is set out
       in Ihemedu in the head note.

    9. Judge Russell therefore erred in law in allowing the appeal outright.

   10. It would be desirable in the future if the Secretary of  State  could
       consider in the alternative whether she would exercise discretion  to
       issue a residence card if the  applicant  qualified  as  an  extended
       family member as part of the first decision in the case so all issues
       could be dealt with on appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  one
       hearing.

Decision

   11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   12. The reasoning of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  preserved  up  to  and
       including paragraph 17 of the determination but the final decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   13. The final decision is remade  to  read  as  follows.  The  appeal  is
       allowed to the extent  that  the  refusal  is  found  to  be  not  in
       accordance with the law and the matter is remitted to  the  Secretary
       of State to consider whether she will exercise discretion to issue  a
       residence card  in  accordance  with  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA
       Regulations.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

6th March 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid I have
considered making a fee award. I have decided to make no fee award as I was
not requested to make one and this was also the decision of Judge Russell
in the First-tier Tribunal who determined the substantive issue in the
appeal.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

6th March 2015

