
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17373/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th August 2016                       |On 6th October 2016               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                             MR RAMESHBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Bazini; Instructed by E2W (UK) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr. S Kotas; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This decision, to which both members of the panel  have  contributed,
       determines the appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin promulgated on  30th  November  2015,  in
       which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
       respondent of 24th April 2015 to refuse Mr. Patel leave to remain  on
       Article 8, family and private life grounds.


Background


    2.  The  appellant  and  his  wife  are  both  Indian  nationals.    The
       immigration history of the appellant and  his  wife  is  set  out  at
       paragraph [4] of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
       appellant's wife first arrived in the UK in June 2003  with  a  visit
       visa valid until 10th December 2003.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       notes that the appellant's wife was later issued with a further visit
       visa on 14th August 2006, valid until 14th February  2007.   Although
       paragraph [8] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal records that
       the appellant claims that his wife has been residing in the UK  since
       2003, at  the  hearing  before  us,  Mr  Bazini  confirmed  that  the
       appellant's wife last entered the UK using the visa  issued  on  14th
       August 2006, valid until 14th February 2007.  She has remained in the
       UK unlawfully since 2007.  The appellant's wife has made a number  of
       applications for leave to remain in the UK, including an  application
       made on 13th December 2012 in which the  appellant  was  named  as  a
       dependant, all of which have been refused.  She  was  included  as  a
       dependant upon the application made by the  appellant  for  leave  to
       remain in the UK on 22nd February 2015.


    3. The appellant first entered the UK as a visitor in August  2006.   He
       has since had a number of visit visa's and each time he  visited  the
       UK and then left to return to the family home and his employment,  in
       India.  He last returned to the UK on  24th  July  2011  having  been
       granted a visit visa valid until 11th January  2012.   The  appellant
       has remained in the UK since that visit visa  expired.   He  too  has
       made applications for leave to remain in the UK that have  previously
       been refused.  An application made on 10th January 2012  was  refused
       on 17th April 2012, and was the subject of an appeal  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.  That appeal was dismissed on 6th  August  2012.    On
       the 22nd February 2012, the appellant made an application  for  leave
       to remain in the UK outside the immigration  rules  and  it  was  the
       respondent's decision of 24th April 2015 upon that  application  that
       gave rise to the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin.





The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin


    4.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin  summarises  the   respondent's
       decision of the 24th  April 2015, at paragraph [2] of  his  decision.
       The Judge heard evidence from the appellant and his daughter and  the
       evidence relied upon is set out at paragraphs [6] and [9] to [12]  of
       the decision.  The  relevant  legislative  framework  and  rules  are
       referred to briefly at paragraphs [13] to [17] of the  decision,  and
       the Judge sets out his findings at paragraphs [20]  to  [26]  of  the
       decision.


    5. The Judge starts  his  consideration  of  the  appeal  by  noting  at
       paragraph [22] of his decision that although the application was made
       only on human rights grounds, it is first necessary  to  address  the
       factual matrix through the perspective of the Rules.   At  paragraphs
       [22] to [25], the Judge addresses the evidence before  concluding  at
       paragraph [26]:


             "26. So far as Private Life beyond the household is concerned,
             the evidential canvas remains as blank  as  it  was  when  the
             Appellant's previous Appeal was determined on  the  papers  in
             July 2012. On the  face  of  it,  it  would  appear  that  the
             Appellant and his wife have  shown  no  desire  to  integrate.
             Their daughter is still married and living  with  her  husband
             and two daughters in their own home. The Appellant  spent  his
             first six decades in India, his wife  c.48  years.  They  have
             both lived here illegally for years. It remains unclear  where
             their son is currently living because it is claimed they  have
             no contact with him. However, what is clear is that 2 of their
             3 daughters are still in India.  I do  not  find  it  credible
             that they would let their parents live on the streets. Nor  do
             I find it credible that the Appellant  has  no  claim  to  the
             family home he left when he came here or that the one  brother
             he states he still has there, would leave him  destitute.  His
             wife is not a British citizen, has no settled status here  and
             I find that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  preventing
             them from resuming the marital  life  they  enjoyed  in  India
             until the wife decided to overstay in the UK. I do not  accept
             that they are reliant on  their  daughter.  If  anything,  the
             position would appear to be the  reverse.  The  true  position
             would appear to be that they presently  live  with  the  their
             daughter in return for the help they give her  and  for  which
             the daughter would presumably otherwise have  to  pay  someone
             who does have the right to live and work in the UK.  Both  the
             Appellant  and  his  wife  fall  well  short  of  the  20-Year
             requirement in relation to Private Life and the  circumstances
             are neither exceptional, nor  compelling,  nor  compassionate.
             They  can   maintain   contact   with   their   daughter   and
             grandchildren in the UK using modern methods of  communication
             and a return to India will allow them  to  re-establish  close
             relationships with their other daughters  in  India  and  vice
             versa.  The  Appellant,  I  conclude,  does   not   meet   the
             requirements of  the  Rules  and  the  nature  of  the  family
             relationship they have with the one daughter in the UK and her
             husband  and  children  is  such  that  it  would  be  neither
             disproportionate nor unreasonable for any of  them  to  expect
             the appellant and his wife now to return to India  where  they
             have other children.  Such an outcome would clearly be in  the
             interests of effective immigration control given the  flagrant
             disregard of all the adults concerned, for immigration Law."


The appeal before us


    6. Permission to appeal was granted on 27th June 2016 by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Goldstein.  The matter comes before us to consider  whether  or
       not the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the making
       of a material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to  re-
       make the decision.


    7. The appellant accepts in the grounds of appeal that  he  cannot  meet
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules insofar as they  relate  to
       family life.  Broadly stated, the appellant advances four grounds  of
       appeal.  The grounds of appeal were  adopted  by  Mr  Bazini  in  his
       submissions before us.


    8.  First,  the  appellant  submits  that  there  is  simply  no  lawful
       consideration within the determination of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
       the Immigration Rules, and as  such,  the  determination  contains  a
       material error of law. The appellant submits that at  paragraph  [26]
       of the decision, the Judge refers to there being nothing exceptional,
       compelling, compassionate or indeed no insurmountable obstacles - but
       these are not the legal tests under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  Rather
       the test is significant obstacles to integration, which the appellant
       submits, has not been lawfully addressed.


    9. Second, the Judge failed to follow the  five  steps  as  set  out  in
       Razgar.  Outside the Immigration Rules, the  appellant  submits  that
       any consideration of Article 8, required a consideration  of  whether
       there is family life between the  appellant  (and  his  wife),  their
       daughter and their son-in-law.  Furthermore,  Article  8  required  a
       consideration of the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
       grandchildren and the best interests of the  children  under  Section
       55. It is submitted that consideration of the best interests  of  the
       appellant's grandchildren should have been considered by the Judge in
       his assessment of proportionality. The  appellant  submits  that  the
       Judge failed to consider how removal of the  appellant  would  impact
       upon the family in circumstances where the appellant's son-in-law, is
       registered disabled and suffering from spondylosis such  that  he  is
       unable to work or move or walk long distances.


   10. Third, it was incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge to address
       s117 of the 2002 Act, but beyond the reference to s117  at  paragraph
       [20] of his decision, it  is  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider   the   relevant   provisions,   in   any   assessment    of
       proportionality.


   11. Finally, the appellant submits that the Judge erred in his assessment
       of the facts.  The appellant challenges the Judge's assessment of the
       evidence of the appellant and his daughter at paragraph [24]  of  the
       decision and the finding at paragraph [26] of the  decision  that  he
       does not find it credible that the  appellant's  two  daughters  that
       remain in India, would let their parents live on  the  streets.   The
       appellant submits that in reaching that finding, the Judge has failed
       to have regard to the cultural context in  that  the  daughters  that
       remain in India, would have no say in  permitting  their  parents  to
       live with them.  The two daughters that remain in India live in homes
       owned by the parents of their husbands, and would not be permitted to
       have their parents join them.  The appellant submits that  the  Judge
       similarly errs in his finding at paragraph [26]  as  to  whether  the
       appellant has a claim to his former family home.


Discussion


   12. Before turning to the appellant's grounds of appeal, it is as well at
       this stage to set out the relevant legal framework.  Paragraph 276ADE
       of the Immigration Rules sets out the requirements to be  met  by  an
       applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private life. Insofar
       as is relevant to this appeal, the rules provide:


             276ADE (1). The requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for
             leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are
             that at the date of application, the applicant:


                  ....


              (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK..


   13. S55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires the
       respondent to make arrangements for ensuring that  her  functions  in
       relation to immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged  having
       regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children
       who are in the UK.


   14. Finally, the relevant provisions of ss.117A-117B of the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") are as follows:


              117A: Application of this Part


          (1) This part applies where a court or  Tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Act -


              (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and


              (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.


          (2) In considering the  public  interest  question  the  court  or
             Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -


                   (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
       117B, and


                   ...


          (3) In sub-Section (2), "the public interest question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).


              117B: Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in
       all cases


          (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.


          (2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -


                   (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.


          (3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -


                   (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.


              (4)  Little weight should be given to -


                   (a) a private life, or


                   (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


                       That is established by a person at a  time  when  the
                  person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


          (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.


              ...


   15. We take the first and fourth  of  the  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant together.  Mr Bazini accepts that the appellant could  only
       succeed in establishing a material error of law  as  to  the  Judge's
       consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  if  the  appellant  can
       establish that the findings made by the Judge at paragraphs  [24]  to
       [26] of his decision were not properly open to him.


   16. The issue for us to decide is  whether  or  not  the  Judge  properly
       considered whether the appellant is able to meet the requirements  of
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The assessment  of
       whether the requirements of the rules are met must  be  completed  in
       light of the evidence before the Judge and the findings made by  him.
       In that respect we follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R  &
       ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that
       a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of
       perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding
       that  is  "perverse"  embraces  findings  that  are   irrational   or
       unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact  that  are
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
       should not overturn a judgment at first instance,  unless  it  really
       could not understand the original judge's thought process when he was
       making  material  findings.   We   apply   that   guidance   to   our
       consideration.


   17. We accept the  general  submission  made  by  Mr.  Bazini  that  when
       findings are made, actions which may appear implausible if judged  by
       the standards of what one might consider appropriate in the UK, might
       in fact be plausible  when  considered  within  the  context  of  the
       applicant's social and cultural background.  In HK  -v-  SSHD  [2006]
       EWCA Civ 1037, the Court of Appeal confirmed  that  rejection  of  an
       appellant's account simply because the facts  he  described  were  so
       unusual as to be thought unbelievable, is not a safe basis upon which
       to reject the existence of events that were  said  to  have  occurred
       within an environment  and  culture  that  were  wholly  outside  the
       experience of the decision-maker.


   18. We have carefully considered the findings made by the  Judge  and  in
       our judgment it is plain that the Judge was  entitled  to  reach  the
       findings that he did.  The Judge set out at paragraphs [10] to  [12],
       the evidence of the appellant and his daughter.  The evidence of  the
       appellant was that he had lived in a joint family household until  he
       left India on 24th July 2011.  His elder brother and  this  brother's
       children then took over the home and the appellant  claimed  that  he
       was told they would not  be  welcome  on  their  return.   The  Judge
       records at paragraph [11] that orally, the appellant claimed that his
       elder brother had died 6-7 years ago.  His brother's  son  had  taken
       the family home over, and had told him to leave. He still had one  of
       his brothers in India; but the property in which this  brother  lived
       was bought by the nephew who continued to live in the family home and
       the nephew would not let  him  live  with  his  brother.   The  Judge
       records at paragraph [12] that the appellant's daughter claimed  that
       her parents' home has been taken over by her 'Uncles'.


   19. The Judge records at paragraph [12] the evidence of  the  appellant's
       daughter that her two sisters and brother  have  refused  to  support
       their parents since the brother  married.    The  Judge  records  her
       evidence that her sisters in India are  married,  have  no  money  of
       their own and their husbands would  not  want  their  wife's  parents
       living with them.  It formed no part of the appellant's case that  it
       is culturally unacceptable for the appellant and his wife to live  in
       India with their daughters, or that their daughters in  India,  would
       not provide any assistance to them,  even  in  the  short  term,  for
       cultural reasons.


   20. The Judge found at paragraph [25];


             "I do not find it  credible  that  the  Appellant's  surviving
             relatives in India - which include  their  two  other  married
             daughters - would leave them homeless, and I do  not  find  it
             proven that the Appellant has no claim to  his  former  family
             home...."


   21. At paragraph [26] the Judge states:


             "...what is clear is that 2 of their 3 daughters are still  in
             India and I do not find it credible that they would let  their
             parents live on the streets. Nor do I find  it  credible  that
             the Appellant has no claim to the family home he left when  he
             came here or that the one brother he states he still has there
             would leave him destitute,...."


   22. To put those findings into context, they must be read  with  what  is
       said by the Judge at paragraph [24] of his decision:


             24.  The evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his  daughter  was
             broadly consistent but that is hardly surprising  given  their
             close  relationship  and  co-habitation.  Other  corroborative
             evidence is notable for its absence. Neither  the  Appellant's
             wife nor the adult granddaughter provided  oral  evidence  and
             there is no documentary evidence  to  show  that  six  of  the
             Appellant's seven brothers have died, no will to show to  whom
             the family home was left or, absent a will, what the intestacy
             provisions are in India....."


   23. Mr  Bazini  criticises  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  evidence  at
       paragraph [24].  He submits that the fact that the appellant and  his
       daughter give a consistent account  has  not  been  given  sufficient
       weight,  and  is  undermined  by  the  Judge's  view  that  that  the
       consistent account is hardly surprising, given the close relationship
       and cohabitation.  He  submits  that  there  is  no  requirement  for
       corroborative evidence and the Judge should  not  have  rejected  the
       account simply because there is no other corroborative evidence.   We
       disagree.  From a careful reading of paragraphs [20] to [26]  of  the
       decision, one can understand the Judge's thought process when he  was
       making material findings in relation to  the  requirements  that  the
       appellant  must  meet  to  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  Although not expressly referring to matters in  a
       cultural context, in our judgment it was open to the  Judge  to  make
       the findings that he did, at paragraphs [25] and [26].  The  evidence
       was that the appellant's daughters in  India  are  married,  have  no
       money of their own, and their husbands would not  want  their  wife's
       parents living with them. The mere fact that the Judge did not  refer
       to whether the appellant's daughters in  India  would  be  culturally
       able to assist the appellant in our  judgement  is  not,  of  itself,
       enough to justify setting the decision aside.   The  Judge's  finding
       that he did not find  it  credible  that  the  appellant's  surviving
       relatives in India, which include his two  other  married  daughters,
       would leave the appellant and his wife  homeless,  was  made  in  the
       context of the Judge's consideration of whether there would  be  very
       significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into India.


   24. We accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr.  Kotas  on  behalf  of  the
       Respondent.  The first and fourth of the grounds of appeal amount  to
       nothing more than a disagreement with the findings of the  Judge.  In
       our judgment the findings of the Judge were properly open to  him  on
       the evidence and it follows that it was open to  the  Judge  to  find
       that the appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules.


   25. We can also take the second and third  grounds  of  appeal  together.
       They both relate to the Judge's decision  under  Article  8  and  his
       assessment of proportionality.  The Judge does refer in his  decision
       to the five stage approach set out in the House of Lords decision  in
       R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58. The immigration  rules  are
       said to reflect the respondent's view of where a fair balance  should
       be struck between the right to respect for private  and  family  life
       and public interest considerations relating to the maintenance of  an
       effective system of immigration control (paragraph  GEN.1.1  Appendix
       FM). The rules should be  read  in  a  way  that  reflects  a  proper
       interpretation of Article 8 of the European  Convention.   There  may
       some cases where the rules do not address relevant Article 8  issues.
       In such cases it may be  necessary  to  consider  whether  there  are
       compelling circumstances to justify granting leave to remain  outside
       the immigration rules: SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.  This
       should be assessed by reference to the five stage  test  outlined  by
       the House of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.    It
       is conceded by the appellant that he cannot meet the requirements  of
       the immigration rules insofar as 'family life' is concerned,  and  we
       have found that it was open to the Judge to find that  the  appellant
       cannot meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  insofar  as
       'private life' is concerned.


   26. Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family and
       private life. However, it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
       interfered with by the state in certain circumstances.  It  is  trite
       law that the state has a right to control immigration and that  rules
       governing the entry and residence of people into the country are  "in
       accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  Article  8.   Any
       interference with the right to private or family life must be  for  a
       legitimate reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.


   27. We accept, as Mr. Bazini submits before us, that the Judge  does  not
       make any express finding as to whether there is family  life  between
       the appellant (and his wife), their daughter  and  their  son-in-law,
       and that there is no express reference to the best interests  of  the
       appellant's grandchildren in the decision. However,  insofar  as  the
       appellant's grandchildren are concerned, the Judge notes at paragraph
       [12] of his decision the evidence before him, about  the  appellant's
       two grandchildren and the baby that the appellant's daughter and son-
       in-law are expecting.  The Judge notes at  paragraph  [24]  that  the
       adult granddaughter did not provide any oral evidence.  We note  that
       there was no written statement before the Tribunal from her.   Having
       considered the limited evidence  before  him,  the  Judge  states  at
       paragraph [25] of his decision;


             "25. ....It was asserted that the adult grand-daughter feels a
             responsibility   for   her   grandparents,   as    might    be
             understandable if as would appear  to  be  the  case  she  was
             partly  looked  after  by  her  grandmother  from  2003  -   a
             grandmother who had to live apart from her husband for several
             years in order to do so. If she does indeed  feel  she  has  a
             financial responsibility towards her grandparents, there would
             appear to be no reason why she cannot send money  to  them  in
             India...."


   28. In our judgement, the difficulty with the appellant's submission that
       the Judge erred in failing to take account of the best  interests  of
       the appellant's grandchildren, is that there was in fact no  evidence
       before the Judge as to any impact that the appellant's  removal  from
       the  UK  would  have  upon  his  grandchildren.   The  Judge  plainly
       considered the very limited evidence that was before  him  about  the
       relationship between the appellant and his grandchildren and  it  is,
       in our judgement,  unsurprising  that  the  Judge  makes  no  further
       mention of the best interests of the grandchildren  or  s55,  in  his
       decision.


   29. The Judge refers at paragraphs [18] and [19] of his decision  to  the
       questions that he must determine under Article 8.  He notes that  the
       ultimate question is whether the refusal of leave to enter or  remain
       in circumstances where the life cannot reasonably be expected  to  be
       enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations weighing
       in favour of the refusal, including those  referred  to  in  S.117  -
       prejudices the life of the appellant in a manner sufficiently serious
       to amount to a  breach  of  the  fundamental  rights  protected.   At
       paragraph [26], the Judge concludes:


             "26.  ...The  Appellant,  I  conclude,  does  not   meet   the
             requirements of  the  Rules  and  the  nature  of  the  family
             relationship they do have with the one daughter they  have  in
             the UK and her husband and children is such that it  would  be
             neither disproportionate nor unreasonable for any of  them  to
             expect the Appellant and his wife now to return to India where
             they have other children. Such an outcome would clearly be  in
             the interests  of  effective  immigration  control  given  the
             flagrant disregard of all the adults concerned for Immigration
             Law.


   30. Although the Judge  does  not  expressly  make  a  finding  that  the
       appellant enjoys a family and private life in the UK and that in  all
       the circumstances of this case, removal  would  interfere  with  that
       family life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of
       Article 8 (points (i) & (ii) of  Razgar)  we  are  prepared  for  the
       purposes of this decision,  to  assume  that  the  Judge  found  that
       Article 8 is engaged.  That does not assist the appellant because the
       Judge  did  find  that  it  would  be  neither  disproportionate  nor
       unreasonable for the appellant and his wife now to  return  to  India
       where they have other children.  Any failure therefore to  adopt  the
       five stage approach referred to in Razgar is therefore immaterial and
       would not affect the outcome of the appeal.


   31. In Dasgupta -v- ECO [2016] UKUT 28 (IAC) a Presidential panel of  the
       Upper Tribunal confirmed that a  Tribunal's  failure  to  make  clear
       findings about family life is not per se erroneous in law, where  its
       existence has not been contested in the respondent's decision and has
       not been challenged at the appeal hearing and the Tribunal's decision
       is not otherwise unsustainable in law.  The Tribunal  held  that  the
       question of whether  there  is  family  life  in  a  child/grandchild
       context requires  a  finding  of  something  over  and  above  normal
       emotional ties and  will  invariably  be  intensely  fact  sensitive.
       Here, there was no evidence before the Tribunal  upon  which  such  a
       finding could be made.


   32. In our judgement, the appellant also gains  no  assistance  from  any
       express failure to refer further to the provisions  of  s117  of  the
       2002 Act.  It is uncontroversial that it is in the public interest to
       maintain an effective system of immigration control (s.117B(1)).  The
       Judge noted at paragraph [26] of his decision that on the face of it,
       it would appear that the appellant and his wife have shown no  desire
       to integrate in the UK and that  they  have  both  lived  in  the  UK
       unlawfully for years.  The appellant's command of  English  is  poor.
       The appellant claims to  rely  upon  financial  assistance  from  his
       daughter.  There is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  is
       financially independent (s.117B(3)); but in any event, it would be  a
       neutral factor if he were.


   33. The appellant has remained in the UK as an overstayer for a number of
       years. He has remained in the UK unlawfully since 2011. Sections 117B
       (4) and (5) state that little weight should be  given  to  a  private
       life that has been established in the UK at a time when a person  has
       been in the UK unlawfully or his immigration  status  is  precarious.
       The public interest considerations outlined in section 117B are  only
       one  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment  and  may  still   be
       outweighed if the appellant can  show  that  there  are  particularly
       compelling circumstances that might justify granting leave to  remain
       even though he doesn't  meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
       rules.  The appellant here did not meet  the  immigration  rules  and
       those factors that the Judge was bound to  take  account  of  in  any
       assessment  of  proportionality  weigh  against  the  appellant.   It
       follows that in our judgement, there is no merit to  the  second  and
       third grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant


   34. Having carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge, the grounds of appeal and the submissions made to  us  by  the
       parties, we dismiss the appeal.


 Notice of Decision


   35. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin did not involve the
       making of a material error on a point of law and the decision stands.




   36. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date 6th October 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


We have dismissed the appellant's appeal and there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 6th October 2016

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
