
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17851/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 June 2015                      |On 9 July 2015                       |
|Prepared 23 June 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          BABATUNDE OLAWALE ARINOLA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Ezike, Solicitor, Prime Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the respondent is referred to as the claimant.

2.   The Claimant made an application on  21  February  2014  for  leave  to
    remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  The Secretary of  State  refused  that  application  and  made
    removal directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

3.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blandy who, on 28 November 2014, allowed  the  appeal  under  paragraph
    245DD of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the Claimant  had  not
    met relevant requirements.  The issue was clearly  identified  for  the
    Secretary of  State's  stance  had  been  that  the  Claimant  had  not
    submitted sufficient evidence to show the nature of his employment  and
    that the documentation provided did  not  show  the  necessary  contact
    details, as set out in paragraph 2 of the decision [D] and in  addition
    the agreement was not a contract of  the  kind  expected  and  properly
    coded under the provisions of the Rules.

4.   Nevertheless the judge went on to decide that the reasons for  refusing
    leave to remain had not been sufficiently addressed.  The Judge  found,
    even if the specified documents had not  been  provided,  in  substance
    sufficient information had been provided to enable the  application  to
    be resolved.  In addition to that the  judge  went  on  to  remake  the
    decision and to exercise a discretion which the Secretary of State  had
    not exercised to conclude that  the  Appellant  had  met  the  relevant
    requirements of paragraph 245DD of the Rules.

5.   Mr Wilding, for the Secretary of State,  argued  that  what  the  judge
    should have done, having considered the relevant factual elements of it
    which went to show that there was not the  specified  information,  was
    remitted the matter to the Secretary of State to consider the  exercise
    of a discretion under paragraph 245AA in relation to the assessment  of
    the other documents notwithstanding the requirements of the Rules.

6.   The judge according to Mr Ezike, was entitled to reach  a  decision  on
    those matters and that in doing so it does not  disclose  any  material
    error of law.

7.   The fact of the matter is that the Reasons for Refusal Letter, dated  1
    April 2014, specifically asserted (P3/7)  that  a  discretion  was  not
    being exercised and gave the reasons why.  I do not consider the merits
    of that matter but suffice to say it  is  clear  beyond  doubt  that  a
    discretion was not being exercised by  the  Secretary  of  State  which
    plainly under the provisions of 245AA  is  the  responsibility  of  the
    Secretary of State to consider and apply.

8.   In the circumstances, whilst I wholly understand why the judge  decided
    it was appropriate to get on  and  deal  with  the  matter,  given  the
    conclusion he had reached on  the  overall  merits  of  the  Claimant's
    application, nevertheless should not have done so. I find the  case  of
    Ukus (Discretion: when reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  307  shows  that  the
    Secretary of State retains the primary responsibility to decide whether
    or not to exercise a discretion and it is only when the discretion  has
    been exercised, that is  of  course  lawfully  exercised,  then  it  is
    reviewable.  Ukus makes plain, the discretion is  primarily  vested  in
    the Secretary of State, the Immigration Officer or the Entry  Clearance
    Officer. The appropriate course is to require  the  decision  maker  to
    complete his task by reaching a  lawful  decision  on  the  outstanding
    application.

9.   I find that Ihremedu [2011]  UKUT  340  also  reflects  the  continuing
    responsibility that the Secretary of State has  to  act  in  accordance
    with the law and assess the public interest.

10.  For these reasons, therefore, whilst  understanding  why  the  Claimant
    will be disappointed with this outcome, it seemed to me in the light of
    the positive findings and in any further representations  made  by  the
    Claimant  in  respect  of  issues  that  had  been  raised,  that   the
    opportunity must be given to the Secretary of State to  decide  whether
    to exercise that discretion in the light of the judge's  decision,  the
    findings made and any further representations made  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.

11.  The Original Tribunal's decision is set aside.

12   The following decision is substituted.  The appeal of the Secretary  of
    State is allowed to the extent that it is for the Secretary of State to
    consider the exercise  of  discretion  under  paragraph  245AA  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended, with particular reference  to  the
    adequacy of the evidence provided in relation to  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.

13.  No anonymity direction was requested, none is being made  and  none  is
appropriate.



Signed   Date7 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

