
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/18338/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2018                          |On 27th February 2018         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                         Ntombie Patience Ramakoloe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Liew of JBR Morgan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of South Africa born on 16th  October
    1971.  She first arrived in the United Kingdom on 6th October 2004 when
    she was given leave to enter.  After various unsuccessful  applications
    for leave to remain, on 9th February 2015 the Appellant  applied  again
    for leave to remain on the basis of her marriage to the Sponsor, Edward
    Ndou.  That application was refused for the reasons given in a  Reasons
    for Decision letter dated 28th April 2015.  The Appellant appealed  and
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer  (the
    Judge) sitting at Nottingham Justice Centre on  13th  March  2017.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection,  and
    human rights grounds for the reasons given in his  Decision  dated  7th
    April 2017.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and  on
    13th November 2017 such permission was granted limited to the first and
    third grounds of the grounds of application.



Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The first ground of the grounds  of  application  allege  a  procedural
    irregularity.  Paragraph 7 of the  Decision  explains  that  after  two
    adjournments because of uncertainty as to  whether  the  Appellant  was
    suffering from TB, at the hearing on 13th March 2017 it was  agreed  by
    the representatives of the parties and the Judge that the appeal  would
    proceed in the absence of the Appellant from the court  room,  although
    she had attended the hearing centre.  The  Judge  agreed  to  accept  a
    signed witness statement from the Appellant who  would  not  be  cross-
    examined.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he did not find the Appellant to
    be credible and was not satisfied that  she  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.  The Judge then considered  the  Article  8
    ECHR rights of the Appellant and her family outside of the  Immigration
    Rules and decided that the public interest carried more weight than any
    compassionate circumstances of the Appellant  and  that  therefore  the
    decision of the Respondent was proportionate.

 5. At the hearing before me, Ms Liew argued that the Judge  had  erred  in
    law in coming to these conclusions.  The Judge was wrong  to  agree  to
    the Appellant being excluded from the hearing.  There was  no  evidence
    before the Judge of any potential risk  to  the  health  of  any  other
    person attending the hearing.  The Judge had wrongly denied himself the
    opportunity of hearing further necessary evidence from the Appellant as
    to the nature of her relationship with her husband, and the Appellant's
    medical condition.

 6. Ms Liew then argued that when considering  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    ECHR rights, the Judge had erred in law by failing to properly consider
    the position  of  the  Appellant's  husband,  a  British  citizen.   In
    particular, the Judge had failed to consider whether it was  reasonable
    to expect the Appellant's husband to return to South Africa  with  her.
    Further, the Judge had not fully considered the medical  conditions  of
    the Appellant.

 7. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there had been no such error of law.  There had been no procedural
    unfairness considering the history of the appeal.  It was  recorded  in
    the Decision that the Appellant had been properly  represented  at  the
    hearing and that that representative had agreed to the course of action
    suggested by the Judge.  The Appellant in contradiction  to  Directions
    had failed to provide any medical evidence that there was no longer any
    risk of infection or contagion.

 8. As regards Article 8 ECHR, Mrs Aboni argued that the  Judge  had  taken
    all  relevant  factors  into  consideration  at  paragraphs  62  to  69
    inclusive of the decision and had come to a decision  open  to  him  on
    that evidence.  He had given adequate reasons for the decision.

 9. I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  Judge.   As
    regards the alleged procedural irregularity, the conduct of  an  appeal
    hearing is a matter for the discretion of the Judge  provided  he  acts
    within the overriding objectives set out in  Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014.  This provides that the Tribunal must deal with cases fairly  and
    justly so as  to  enable  the  parties  to  participate  fully  in  the
    proceedings.  However, the Tribunal must  also  avoid  delay.  In  this
    case, the Judge was rightly concerned that the hearing of the case  had
    been adjourned twice in the past owing to the potential danger from the
    Appellant's medical condition.  The Appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    evidence that she was no longer a risk to  others  at  the  hearing  as
    required by Directions, and the Judge made  the  best  of  a  difficult
    situation by seeking the agreement of both parties' representatives  to
    a way of proceeding.  I find it  significant  that  the  Appellant  was
    properly represented at the hearing, and that there was consent to  the
    proposed procedure.

10. I also find no material error of law in  the  Judge's  Article  8  ECHR
    decision.  He followed the format given in the decision in R (Razgar) v
    SSHD [2004]  UKHL,  and  demonstrated  that  he  had  carried  out  the
    balancing exercise necessary for  any  assessment  of  proportionality.
    The Judge dealt with the Appellant's medical condition as part of  this
    assessment at paragraph 70 of the Decision, and he took account of  the
    evidence of the Appellant's husband at paragraphs 33 to 37 inclusive of
    the Decision.  The Judge came to a conclusion that was open to  him  on
    the evidence before him and which cannot be described as perverse.   He
    was entitled to find that the public interest carried the most  weight,
    and he explained sufficiently his decision that it did.

11. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Dated  21st February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
