
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18558/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2016                           |On 7 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                Chinwe Uzoka
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed of Counsel, instructed by Greenland
                    Lawyers LLP (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 13  December  1972.   She
    appeals a decision of the Secretary of State on 30 April 2015  refusing
    to issue  her  with  a  residence  card  under  Regulation  17  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   The  appellant
    had arrived in this country on 15 March 2013 and had married  an  Irish
    national,  Mr  James  Martin,  on  14  June  2013.   There   were   two
    applications for residence cards, on 26  June  and  18  November  2013.
    Both were unsuccessful.  The application  giving  rise  to  the  appeal
    proceedings herein was made on 31 December 2014.

2.    The  respondent  refused  the  application  on  30  April  2015.   The
    respondent found that the appellant's marriage was one  of  convenience
    and declined to issue a residence card.  The appellant had entered  the
    UK illegally and  had  married  her  sponsor  within  three  months  of
    arrival.  No evidence of cohabitation had been provided.  There were no
    photographs.

3.   The respondent also concluded that the appellant's  spouse  was  not  a
    qualified person.  Although registered blind and no longer employed  it
    was not the case that blind people as a rule were incapable of any type
    of employment.  A consultant's letter should have been provided.

4.   The appellant appealed and her appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 9 May 2016.  The appellant was then represented by Mr D Balroop,  of
    Counsel.

5.   The judge correctly addressed himself to the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof where allegations that a marriage was  one  of  convenience  were
    made by the  Secretary  of  State.   In  submissions  the  respondent's
    representative submitted that the  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally and there was no evidence  of  lawful  entry  and  no
    passport in evidence.

6.   It was the appellant's case that she had met Mr Martin  while  visiting
    the UK in 2012.

7.   The judge started his consideration  of  the  evidence  by  noting  the
    respondent's  position  about  the  appellant's  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom:

         "23. I find that the respondent has no record of lawful entry.  The
             appellant has produced no passport, expired  or  current.   No
             passport number of [sic] stated in the application  form,  and
             no details have been forthcoming from her as to  the  issuance
             of any visa or the whereabouts of any passport.  The mere fact
             that previous EEA applications have been made does not in  and
             of itself show that a valid passport was submitted  indicating
             lawful entry.  In the light of the foregoing, I do not  accept
             the appellant's oral evidence that she  entered  on  a  multi-
             entry visit visa.


         24.  I find that in light of the evidence, the respondent has shown
             that the appellant did not enter the United Kingdom lawfully.


         25.  In turn, I find that the respondent is able to rely on this as
             undermining  the  overall  credibility  of   the   appellant's
             intentions in coming to this country.  She did not have  leave
             to enter or remain, or any other basis  of  remaining  in  the
             United Kingdom.  She was in need of  obtaining  some  form  of
             status in this country."


8.   While accepting that the appellant had married Mr  Martin  on  14  June
    2013 the judge observes "the marriage occurred very shortly  after  the
    appellant's arrival".

9.   The judge then notes the absence of cohabitation  and  the  absence  of
    supportive evidence of communications between the parties prior to  the
    appellant's arrival in March 2013.   This  was  an  obvious  matter  of
    concern "given the speed of the marriage  following  what  appeared  to
    have been a short relationship."  The judge then reviewed the  evidence
    of cohabitation and agreed with the position taken by the Secretary  of
    State and identified inconsistencies and  clear  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence about a claimed reconciliation.  The judge did not accept that
    the appellant had been staying with Mr Martin at weekends.  He found it
    established that the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.   The  judge
    concluded that he was of the view that the appellant was the party  who
    drove through events "with the sole or decisive  motivation  to  obtain
    status in the United Kingdom.  Mr Martin's  evidence  has  in  material
    aspects been unreliable.  However, that  does  not  mean  he  has  been
    wholly dishonest throughout."  He did not accept that the parties  were
    in a durable relationship but he did conclude that he accepted that  Mr
    Martin had ceased activity as a worker because of permanent incapacity.
     He sets out his reasons  in  paragraphs  49  to  53  of  the  decision
    although he observes that the finding made no difference to the outcome
    of the appellant's appeal.  He dismissed the appeal.


10.  Grounds of appeal  were  settled  by  Counsel  (Mr  Balroop).   Counsel
    referred to Agho v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 1198.   He  cited
    an extract from paragraph 13 of that decision:

         "What it comes down to is that as a matter of  principle  a  spouse
         establishes a prima facie case that he or she is a family member of
         an EEA national by  providing  the  marriage  certificate  and  the
         spouse's passport; that the legal burden is  on  the  Secretary  of
         State to show that any  marriage  thus  proved  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience; and that that  burden  is  not  discharged  merely  by
         showing 'reasonable suspicion'.  Of course in  the  usual  way  the
         evidential burden may shift to the  applicant  by  proof  of  facts
         which justify the inference that the marriage is not  genuine,  and
         the facts giving rise to the inference may  include  a  failure  to
         answer a request for documentary proof of the  genuineness  of  the
         marriage where grounds for suspicion have been  raised.   Although,
         as I say, the point was not argued before us, that  approach  seems
         to me to be correct..."

11.  Counsel points out that the First-tier Judge failed  to  make  findings
    on the appellant's oral evidence corroborated by  the  sponsor  to  the
    effect that she had visited the UK in 2012 for six months and  had  met
    and started the relationship with Mr Martin during that time.  She  had
    returned to Nigeria in December  2012  before  her  leave  expired  and
    returned to the United Kingdom on the visit visa  in  March  2013.   Mr
    Martin had proposed because he did not want to return  to  Nigeria  and
    the parties had married in June 2013.   Counsel  points  out  that  the
    appellant was adamant that her visas  and  entry  stamps  were  in  her
    passport, which was in the possession of the Secretary of  State.   The
    passport was not in  the  Presenting  Officer's  file  at  court.   The
    Secretary of State and the Tribunal had focused on the issue of illegal
    entry and marriage within three months.  It was unfair to make findings
    against the appellant in the absence of evidence that was held  by  the
    Secretary of State.  If the passport confirmed the visit  in  2012  and
    the entry  in  2013  the  respondent  would  not  have  discharged  the
    evidential burden and there would  be  no  basis  to  assert  that  the
    marriage  was  one  of  convenience.   The  sponsor's  letters  to  the
    Secretary of State confirmed  that  there  had  been  a  marriage  with
    problems rather than  a  sham  marriage  or  marriage  of  convenience.
    Further points were taken with the judge's approach to the evidence.

12.  On 3 November 2016 a  Rule  24  response  was  filed.   This  makes  no
    mention of the passport issue.

13.  Before me it was accepted by Mr Whitwell that the Home Office did  have
    the appellant's passport in safe storage.  I was given a  photocopy  of
    the first page of the appellant's expired passport issued  in  February
    2011 and expiring in February 2016.

14.  He said that the appellant's representatives had made a subject  access
    request.  The appellant had been granted a multi-entry visit visa on  2
    July 2008 for five years which would cover the period when she  entered
    the UK on 15 March 2013.  Mr Waheed helpfully provided the bundle  that
    had been produced which includes  the  copy  of  the  appellant's  visa
    covering that period.  On that visa the appellant's  previous  passport
    number was given and I was also provided with a photocopy of that.

15.  Mr Whitwell submitted that a point had been taken that there  had  been
    no record of the appellant's arrival and this had  not  featured  as  a
    discrete ground  of  appeal.   It  did  not  appear  that  the  witness
    statements had addressed the issue.  It was only oral evidence.  He did
    accept that if it was correct that there was a visit visa it  would  be
    unusual for a person to enter illegally.  Mr Whitwell  pointed  to  the
    wealth of evidence before the judge to  support  the  judge's  findings
    that the marriage was one of convenience.

16.  Mr Waheed relied on the grounds of appeal and the evidence that he  had
    put in.

17.  The respondent's decision focused on the allegation that the  appellant
    had entered the UK illegally and had married  Mr  Martin  three  months
    after entry.

18.  As appears from the paragraphs of the determination that  I  have  made
    reference to above, this was a point which also was given  emphasis  by
    the First-tier Judge.  He did not accept the appellant's evidence  that
    she had entered on a multi-entry visit visa.   Further  the  respondent
    was able to rely on this matter "as undermining the overall credibility
    of the appellant's intentions in coming to this country."

19.  Mr Whitwell sought to argue that the  remaining  points  taken  by  the
    judge were more than sufficient in the circumstances to  vindicate  his
    conclusions, putting aside the question of the passport and multi-entry
    visit visa.

20.  As I said at the hearing, I do not accept that  the  determination  can
    safely be upheld as the findings about the passport were very  much  at
    the forefront and affected the overall credibility assessment.

21.  In granting permission to appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  noted
    that the judge had placed great weight on the fact that the  respondent
    had no record of lawful entry and  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to
    produce her passport.  In granting permission the judge  observed  that
    it did not appear that any records available to the Presenting  Officer
    were checked either.  Despite Mr Whitwell's reliance on  the  remaining
    findings made by the judge I am not of the view that the central  point
    relied on by the judge was fairly arrived  at  given  that  it  is  now
    accepted that the Secretary of State had the appellant's  passport  all
    the time and that there was in fact a multi-entry visit  visa  covering
    the period when the appellant arrived.

22.  A further point is that this multi-entry visa would  have  covered  the
    period in 2012 when the appellant says she came to the  United  Kingdom
    and met Mr Martin and the relationship commenced.

23.  The judge appears to have made no direct findings on this evidence.

24.   Unfortunately  the  passport  itself  is  still  not  available.    An
    examination of that document may or not assist the appellant.  However,
    if she did indeed visit the United Kingdom in 2012 as claimed there may
    be stamps on the passport to confirm  that.   In  any  event  it  would
    appear that during that period she had a valid visa.

25.  I note that the respondent's response did not deal  with  the  question
    of the passport.  Despite Mr Whitwell's submissions I  am  not  of  the
    view that the judge's findings can safely be upheld.  It is clear  that
    a fresh hearing on the facts is required.  The matter must be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  I  have
    identified a material error of law  in  the  factual  assessment.   The
    respondent must undertake to equip the Tribunal at  the  fresh  hearing
    with the appellant's passport.

26.  The judge did go briefly into the issue of Mr Martin's status  for  the
    sake of completeness although it was not material to his decision given
    his findings on the marriage of convenience issue.   As  it  was  clear
    that the appeal was to be remitted Mr  Waheed  did  not  seek  to  make
    submissions on this matter.  It was submitted in the response that  the
    assessment was not sufficiently reasoned and had  not  dealt  with  the
    issues raised in the refusal letter and it was not clear how Mr  Martin
    had acquired permanent residence.

27.  It may be that the First-tier Judge put his conclusions on this  matter
    in a short compass because this aspect of  his  determination  made  no
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

28.  For the reasons I have given the determination of the First-tier  Judge
    was affected by a material error of law and the appropriate  course  in
    this case is to direct a fresh hearing on  all  issues  (including  the
    issue of Mr Martin's  status)  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    different First-tier Judge.

Appeal allowed and remitted for a fresh hearing


ANONYMITY ORDER

Anonymity order not made.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award.  It would be premature to  make  one
at this stage in all the circumstances.


Signed                                  Date

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal          7 December 2016

