
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18487/2015
                                                               IA/18497/2015
                                                               IA/18512/2015
                                                               IA/18523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 24 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                               SZ, SZ, KZ, MZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Mahmood, counsel instructed by Morgan Hall
solicitors


                             DECISION & REASONS

    1.     The Respondents, to whom I shall refer  as  the  Claimants,  are
    nationals of Pakistan and comprise a family.  The  first  Claimant  was
    born on [ ] 1973; his wife on [ ] 1981 and their two children were born
    in London on [ ] 2007 and [ ] 2009 respectively.

    2.     The first Claimant came to the United Kingdom  on  22  September
    2003 as a student. He married the second Claimant on  8  February  2006
    and they entered the United Kingdom on 18 September 2006 on  a  student
    visa  valid  until  31  October  2006.  Their  leave  to   remain   was
    subsequently extended until 31 October  2008  and  the  first  Claimant
    became appeal rights exhausted on 7 March 2009. On 7 November 2011, the
    Claimants made human rights applications which  were  refused  with  no
    right of appeal. On 27 October 2014, an application for leave to remain
    on the basis of private and family life was made by  Mrs  Z,  with  her
    husband and children named as  her  dependants.  This  application  was
    refused on 10 March 2015 and she appealed against this decision out  of
    time (on 15 May 2015) however, in a decision dated 3 July 2015 and sent
    on 7 July 2015 the First tier Tribunal extended time to appeal so as to
    admit the appeal.

    3.     The appeals of all four Claimants were heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First tier Tribunal Callender Smith on 23 December 2015. In a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 8 January 2016, he allowed the appeals  both
    on human rights grounds and under the  Immigration  Rules,  in  essence
    because K, the eldest child of the family, had resided in  the  UK  for
    over 7 years and he found she would  face  very  severe  obstacles  and
    difficulties if forced to relocate to Pakistan [47].

    4.     The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal in-time on 14 January 2016. The  grounds  of  appeal  asserted
    that the Judge had erred materially in law: (i) in failing  to  make  a
    balanced consideration in terms of the assessment of  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Rules, best interests and Article 8 of ECHR; (ii) in speculating
    on events upon which there was no verifiable evidence viz  the  ability
    of Mr and Mrs Z to find employment to support the family  in  Pakistan;
    (iii) in failing to apply the provisions of section 117B  of  the  NIAA
    2002.

    5.     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  First
    tier Tribunal Judge Saffer in a decision dated 26 May 2016 on the basis
    that he was satisfied that it is arguable that the Judge made  material
    errors of law in failing to consider the guidance contained within  the
    relevant jurisprudence including  Azimi-Moayad  and  EV  (Philippines),
    failing to take  into  account  within  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise the cost to the public purse of educating  the  children  here
    and made unsustainable findings regarding the adult's ability  to  seek
    work in Pakistan.

    Hearing

    6.     At the hearing before me, Mr Whitwell  sought  to  rely  on  and
    handed up copies of the judgments in: E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests
    of child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  315  (IAC);  Azimi-Moayed  (decisions
    affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 000197 (IAC); Nasim and
    others [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC); EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA 874 and PD
    and others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT
    00108 (IAC). He applied to amend the grounds  of  appeal  at  the  last
    paragraph of ground 1 in light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    PD at [20] which makes clear that  there  is  no  hard  and  fast  rule
    requiring that the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  was
    obliged to determine the claim of the child first.  Save  for  that  he
    relied on the grounds of appeal.

    7.     Mr Whitwell submitted that what the Judge has done ultimately is
    taken a very narrow view of best interests and has  not  factored  that
    out in terms of the other proportionality factors. He sought to rely on
    the decision in Azimi Moayed and the finding that  the  years  four  to
    eleven are formative but that in considering that the Judge has  failed
    to focus on the fact that the eldest child was eight and a half at  the
    date of the appeal. He further sought to rely on the  decision  in  E-A
    (Nigeria) at [29] with regard to education and submitted  that  it  was
    fair to say that the Judge  has  looked  at  best  interests  primarily
    through education and length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that this leads on to EV (Philippines) at [35] and [36]  where  it  was
    made clear that  to  look  at  best  interests  through  the  prism  of
    education is too narrow. He drew my attention to [58] per Lord  Justice
    Lewison and the question that needed to be asked  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to
    remain to the country of origin?

    8.     Mr Whitwell further sought to rely on the decision in  PD  which
    he accepted was not out at the date of promulgation of the decision and
    reasons in this case but is relevant at [21]-[24] when considering best
    interests under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM because  it  cannot  be
    looked at in the absence of consideration of the  family  members.  The
    Judge looked at the best interests of the eldest child first and on the
    back of that allowed the appeals by other  family  members,  which  was
    contrary to the approach in PD. He submitted that it was  necessary  to
    take account of the fact that the  children  would  be  returning  with
    their natural parents; the father has a masters degree; the mother  has
    a  history  of  employment  and  this  would  mitigate  the  change  in
    circumstances.  Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  appropriate  questions
    have to be asked and reasoned and that this could  be  done  on  a  re-
    making.

    9.     Mr Whitwell then made submissions in respect of Ground 3 to  the
    effect that the Judge has not considered the section 117B  factors  and
    that, even though the appeal had been allowed under the Rules and ECHR,
    this was only in respect of the  Claimant's  eldest  daughter  and  the
    appeals of the parents could only have been allowed under Article 8 and
    thus it was incumbent upon the Judge to consider section 117B.

    10.    Mr Whitwell then addressed Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal and
    the direct challenge to the Judge's reasoning at [41] about  employment
    prospects on return to Pakistan; the Judge takes into account the  fact
    that at [32] it would be very difficult for them to support  themselves
    due to their age but they are only in their  40's.  He  submitted  that
    this approach excludes self-employment and private  sector  employment;
    that there is nothing about quality of life in  the  jurisprudence.  He
    invited me to set aside the decision for  it  to  be  re-made  after  a
    further hearing.

    11.    In his response, Mr Mahmood  sought  to  rely  upon  a  skeleton
    argument. He submitted that the Judge had at  [12]  made  reference  to
    section 117B but he accepted that there was  no  analysis.  He  further
    accepted that the remainder of the family would not qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The Judge has accepted that this family needs to  be
    together and united and significantly analysed where the  family  could
    live together and ultimately decided the best place for K was here  and
    that meant that the parents and son would need to be here as  well.  He
    submitted that the decision in E-A was distinguishable because  it  was
    quite an old case decided prior to section 117  and  contrary  to  [29]
    this Judge had not considered best interests entirely through the prism
    of education, but took other factors into account. These  included  the
    seven factors set out by Lord Justice Clarke  in  EV  (Philippines)  at
    [35] viz age, length of time in the United Kingdom, how long the  child
    has been in education, to what extent he or she is distanced  from  the
    country to which they would return, how renewable their connection with
    it may be, linguistic or medical or  other  difficulties.  Further,  EV
    Philippines is an entirely different sort of case because the child did
    not meet the seven year requirement. See also PD at [36]. The  test  is
    whether it would be reasonable for K to live in Pakistan. She had never
    been to Pakistan. The judge identified this as an important factor.

    12.    Mr Mahmood submitted that the Judge had  taken  account  of  the
    public interest in deciding that it would not be reasonable  for  K  to
    leave the United Kingdom and that her parents would  also  need  to  be
    here. The issue of employment in Pakistan is just one aspect. There  is
    significant  documentary  evidence  in  the  appeal  bundle  from   the
    children's class  teachers  and  headteacher  that  there  would  be  a
    detrimental effect on their physical, emotional  wellbeing.  The  Judge
    carefully assessed all the evidence and took this step by step approach
    in respect of various family members and concluded so far as the  Rules
    were concerned that only K would succeed. However, he  found  that  the
    best place for the family was here in the United Kingdom  and  thus  he
    allowed the appeals under Article 8. He submitted that the  grounds  of
    appeal were a mere disagreement with the Judge's findings and there  is
    no material error of law.

    13.    In his reply, Mr Whitwell stated that he was not  asking  me  to
    view the case with a different emphasis but as one  with  gaps  in  the
    reasoning. There was no reference to the public interest or the cost of
    educating the two children in the United Kingdom. The Judge  failed  to
    specify which family members' appeals  were  being  allowed  under  the
    Rules or Article 8 and failed to carry out the requisite assessment.

    Decision

    14.    I have taken a careful note of  the  submissions  made  by  both
    parties and Mr Mahmood's skeleton argument and I  have  also  carefully
    considered the jurisprudence submitted by Mr Whitwell [6] above refers.
    I have concluded that there is no material error of law in the decision
    of Judge of the First  tier  Tribunal  Callender  Smith  and  thus  his
    decision stands.

    15.    My reasons for so concluding are as follows:

    15.1.  the First tier Tribunal  Judge  properly  took  account  of  the
    evidence in respect of the best interests of the two  child  Claimants,
    particularly K and concluded at [45] in  light  of  all  the  evidence,
    including that from her school, that she fulfilled the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules viz she is  under  the
    age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  7
    years and it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the  United
    Kingdom. I find  that  the  Judge  provided  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons for his decision in this  respect  and  the  challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department at Grounds 1 and  2  amounts
    no more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings of fact and  does
    not disclose any material error of law

    15.2.  Ground 3 of the grounds of appeal contains a  challenge  to  the
    decision on the basis that the First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    apply the provisions of section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and that this was
    contrary to his statutory duty. The Judge directed himself with  regard
    to the relevant provisions at [12] of his decision and stated  that  he
    "considered matters accordingly" but it is  the  case  and  Mr  Mahmood
    accepted that he did not then go to apply those provisions. This is  an
    error of law but I find it is not a material error in that:

         (i)      having decided to allow the appeal of  K  under  paragraph
         276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules, the Judge had already decided
         that it would not be reasonable for her to leave the United Kingdom
         and thus the provisions of section 117B (6) were  fulfilled,  given
         that the Claimants were  not  liable  to  deportation  nor  was  it
         disputed that the parents had a genuine and subsisting relationship
         with K, who is a qualifying child;

         (ii)     in the recent decision by  a  Presidential  panel  of  the
         Upper Tribunal in PD and  others  (Article  8  -  conjoined  family
         claims) Sri Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  00108  (IAC)  at  [42]  the  Upper
         Tribunal concluded that section 117B(6) should prevail, despite the
         fact that the parents were unlawful overstayers  and  [41]  and  at
         [34](c) that the public interest was engaged by virtue of the  fact
         that the children had been and would continue  to  be  educated  at
         public expense.

    15.3.  Further, at [20]-[25] of PD the Upper Tribunal make clear  that,
    in cases such as this, the task  for  the  decision  maker  is  not  to
    consider the application from a child of the family in isolation but to
    consider the claims of the family as a whole in the round and determine
    them together. I do not consider, when the findings of the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge are read as a whole, that he fell  into  error  in  this
    respect. Whilst the primary focus of his findings was with  respect  to
    the best interests of both children, particularly K, at [48] he made  a
    clear finding that K "could not be left alone in the UK  and,  on  that
    basis, her parents need to remain in the UK to continue to cherish  and
    support her development along with the development of their son."  This
    finding is entirely  in  accordance  with  the  finding  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in PD at [31] that "viewed from the twin perspectives  of  the
    third Appellant's private and family life, the conclusion that his best
    interests would be best served by continuing  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom, with his parents, follows inexorably."

    15.4.  It is further clear from the jurisprudence cf. PD at  [40]  that
    each case is fact sensitive. I find that the First tier Tribunal  Judge
    carefully considered the oral and written evidence presented to him and
    provided adequate reasons for his findings, which are sustainable.

    Notice of decision

    16.    The appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  is
    dismissed with the effect that the  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Callender Smith to allow the appeals of the family is upheld.




    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


    23 August 2016
