
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18303/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 April 2014                               |On 17th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MUHAMMAD IQBAL RAO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Bureau for Migrant Advice
& Policy


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The challenge by the Secretary of State to the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A Baldwin is on a narrow basis.  The judge  allowed
    the  appeal  under  Article  8  against  the  decision  to  remove  the
    respondent who is a national of Pakistan born  14  August  1968  as  an
    illegal entrant.

 2. On 8 October the respondent applied for leave to remain  on  Article  8
    grounds based on family life with an Indian national, Ms Begum, who has
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  with  reference  to  his   personal
    circumstances which included a fear from  the  Pakistan  army  and  the
    police as a result of his political activities.  The appellant  refused
    the application on 12 May 2013 for reasons set out in a letter  of  the
    same date focusing on Article 8.   As  to  the  asylum  claim,  it  was
    indicated that this should be made in person at  the  Asylum  Screening
    Unit.

 3. The appellant's challenge to the judge's decision is that:

         "The IJ [had] not considered the guidance in the  case  of  Gulshan
         (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)
         namely that there are good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
         outside the  Immigration  Rules  it  is  necessary  for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised   under   the   Rules.
         [emphasis added]

         The IJ [had] omitted to consider whether there are good grounds for
         granting leave outside the Rules and whether there  are  compelling
         circumstances for considering the appeal outside of the Immigration
         Rules.

         As the appeal was allowed on the basis of  Article  8  outside  the
         Immigration Rules it is submitted this is a material omission."

 4. As was accepted by Ms Everett, the preamble to HC 194 provides that "if
    an application for entry clearance, leave to remain or indefinite leave
    to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the application has  not
    been decided, it will be decided in accordance with the Rules in  force
    on 8 July 2012".  She acknowledged the limited nature of the grounds of
    challenge and, furthermore, accepted there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's conclusions on the Chikwamba point which  had  been  the  broad
    thrust  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons   for   refusing   the
    application.  She explained that she did not make application  to  vary
    the grounds.  After taking instructions she nevertheless maintained the
    ground of challenge on the basis that despite  the  application  having
    been made in 2011, since the decision was made in 2013 and  thus  after
    the new Rules had come into force,  the  judge  was  required  to  have
    regard to the new Rules as part of the Article 8 analysis.

 5. By way of response, Mr Jacobs adopted my observation that the challenge
    appeared to have been misconceived.  It was not the  respondent's  case
    that he met the requirements of  the  old  Rules.   In  his  Article  8
    findings, the judge had, in any event, used  language  which  indicated
    that he had made the right approach illustrated as follows:

         "That said I found the oral testimony of Mrs Begam  and  her  three
         daughters highly credible and I accept the evidence of him  playing
         a significant part in their lives since the children arrived in the
         UK in 2008 is compelling"

    and

         "I have no doubt whatsoever that if the appellant were now required
         to return to Pakistan it would be very  upsetting  for  his  wife's
         children ... the appellant's wife, I have no doubt at all would  be
         absolutely devastated were he to have to move back to  Pakistan,  a
         country not that of her  birth  and  upbringing  ...  it  would  be
         completely unreasonable to expect her to abandon her job and family
         in order to live in Karachi."

    In addition he observed,

         "he has not proved he was in the UK before 2004 but ten years  with
         the same partner is clearly a durable  marital  relationship  which
         should not be interrupted absent very good reason  ...  this  is  a
         genuine and durable marriage where separation of the spouses  would
         be traumatic for the wife and extremely upsetting for the appellant
         ... effective immigration control does not demand him to return and
         were he to do so a number of people who love him very much would be
         caused a great deal of unnecessary upset."

 6. Ms Everett had nothing to say by way of response.

 7. I am not persuaded the judge materially erred  in  law  on  the  narrow
    basis asserted in the grounds.   Having  regard  to  the  date  of  the
    application, I do not accept that it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to
    examine the case through  the  prism  of  the  new  Rules  despite  the
    decision having taken place after those Rules came into  force.   There
    would be no purpose otherwise for the preamble.  Cranston J in  Gulshan
    indicated at [26] that the fact that the respondent in  that  case  did
    not qualify under the Rules did not mean those Rules  could  be  passed
    over without analysis: "the Rules should have been the starting  point,
    not least because the Secretary of State  rested  her  decision  -  the
    decision the respondent was appealing - on the Rules".

 8. In the case before me the Secretary of State made no reference  to  the
    new Rules in the reasons for refusal and furthermore it would not  have
    been permissible for her to do so in the light of  the  timing  of  the
    application.

 9. As to the second limb of the ground, the challenge that the  judge  had
    omitted to consider there were good grounds for granting leave  outside
    the  Rules  and  that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  is   not
    sustainable as this is precisely what the judge did.   The  grounds  do
    not challenge the substance of that exercise.  Although the decision by
    the judge was a generous one, it was within the  permissible  range  of
    findings available on  the  evidence.   The  judge  correctly  directed
    himself as to the  law  and  reached  findings  on  the  evidence.   As
    acknowledged by Ms Everett,  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    treatment of the Chikwamba aspect.

10. For these reasons the challenge to the determination is  not  made  out
    and the appeal is dismissed.







11. Since dictating this determination, the Court of Appeal in  Edgehill  &
    Anor v SSHD[2014] EWCA Civ 40 has clarified the position as to the  new
    Rules vis a vis applications made before 9 July  2012.   That  decision
    provides authority for the conclusion I have reached in  [7]  supra.  I
    see no reason to recall the parties to address me on this new decision.







Signed

[pic]
                                             Date 17 April 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

