
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18697/2015
                                                               IA/18727/2015
                                                               IA/18747/2015
                                                               IA/18748/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                 |On 24th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              (1) Mr Tumain [M]
                              (2) Mrs Grace [M]
                              (3) Master [N M]
                               (4) Miss [N M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Hussain (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Tanzania.  They comprise  a  father  and
    mother (the first and second Appellants) and their  two  children  (the
    third and fourth Appellants).  They  were  born  respectively  on  12th
    October 1976, on 18th December 1982, on 9th January 2013,  and  on  2nd
    December 2007.  They appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 7th May 2015 on the basis that  their  removal
    from the UK will constitute an unlawful interference with their private
    and family lives.

 2. The Appellants' appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 1st March 2016.  In paragraph 10, the judge
    observed how the basis of the original claim was that  the  Appellant's
    eldest child, Miss [NM],  was  aged  7  years  and  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect her to return to Tanzania as she had never lived
    there, and for the other Appellants to be given leave to remain on  the
    basis of family life.  During the course of the  appeal,  however,  the
    judge explained how  the  situation  had  changed  in  that  the  first
    Appellant now relied on the fact that he has been in  the  UK  lawfully
    for ten years and that he should be permitted to remain in  the  UK  on
    that basis.

 3. At the hearing before Judge Obhi, it was accepted  that  the  case  had
    been adjourned on a previous occasion for the Home Office  to  consider
    whether the Appellant should benefit from the ten year lawful residence
    Rule as he had now completed ten years in the UK, but the  Home  Office
    had not been able to do that, and the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the application was still under consideration,  although
    it was open to Judge Obhi to consider that the Appellant might  succeed
    under that provision (see  paragraph  12).   The  main  thrust  of  the
    appeal, however, was in relation to Article 10.  In  this  respect,  Mr
    Hussain, who appeared on that occasion  also  in  the  Tribunal  below,
    submitted that it would be unreasonable to expect a 7-year-old child to
    return to Tanzania, and if this was the case, then the parent should be
    allowed to stay in  this  country  with  their  7-year-old  child  (see
    paragraph 13).

 4. In the judge's consideration of the appeal, she noted  that  there  was
    "no evidence to suggest  that  the  first  Appellant  has  in  any  way
    breached the terms of his permission to remain in  the  UK"  (paragraph
    15).  She went on to observe that, "the main part  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal relates to his daughter [Miss NM], where it was claimed that she
    had been in the UK for  a  period  of  seven  years  and  was  settled"
    (paragraph 16).  The judge also had before her a social worker's report
    from Kerry Fidler but this did not provide any  additional  information
    to that which the Appellants had provided, namely, that  [Miss  NM]  is
    settled at school (see paragraph 17).

 5. The judge went on to hold that removal would be disruptive to [Miss NM]
    but that, "she is only 7 years of age and she will need to move schools
    when she goes to secondary school" and that  in  any  event  the  child
    [Miss NM]'s relationship was with her parents (paragraph 18).

 6. The judge then went on to say of the Appellants that,

         "They came to the UK as students, knowing that they would  be  here
         on a temporary basis.  They chose to start a family in the UK  with
         that knowledge and knowing that there was no  guarantee  that  they
         would be able to remain in the UK.  The Home Office considered that
         it is not unreasonable to expect the children to return with  their
         parents to Tanzania" (paragraph 19).

    The  judge  also  went  on  to  compare  this  case  with  that  of  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 84 and observed  that,  "in  the  present
    case, as in EV, neither of the Appellants nor any of the children  have
    a right to be in the UK" (paragraph 22).

 7. Consideration was thereafter given by the judge to whether the decision
    to remove was disproportionate and said that,

         "I take into account the fact that the first Appellant may have ten
         years' lawful residence in the UK.  On the facts of the case, it is
         highly likely that he does, and if the Home Office agreed  then  he
         is likely to be able to apply for further leave to remain  on  that
         basis" (paragraph 26).

    However, the judge did not decide this question but did  add  that  the
    only issue before her was whether this possibility may tip the  balance
    in the Appellants' favour (paragraph 26).

 8. In approaching the matter thus, it was then concluded,  however,  that,
    "at the time when these applications were made the first Appellant  had
    not completed ten years' lawful residence in the UK", and although "the
    Home Office agreed to consider his application prior to  the  adjourned
    hearing but had not done so" there was nothing to  stop  the  Appellant
    from making the application to be considered under the Rules (paragraph
    27).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Hussain,  appearing  once  again  for  the
    Appellants in this matter, submitted that one of  the  children,  [Miss
    NM], had been in the UK now for seven years.  He stated that  the  case
    of PD (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT 00108 now confirms  that  the  Article  8
    question has to be determined through the prism of  children's  rights,
    rather  than  through  the  prism  of  the  parents'   situation.    He
    additionally relied upon the cases of MA (Pakistan) and Pereira  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705.  To suggest, as the judge had done, that, as far  as  the
    Appellants were concerned, "they came to the UK  as  students,  knowing
    that they would be here on  a  temporary  basis"  (paragraph  19),  was
    incorrect as an approach to the determination of these issues.

11. Second, the judge was also wrong to have suggested that  the  situation
    here was similar to that in  EV  (Philippines)  in  that  "neither  the
    parents nor any of  the  children  have  a  right  to  be  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 22).  This is because the Appellants  had  at  all  relevant
    times always had lawful leave to remain.

12. Third, in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it was held that the judge
    below "was wrong to give way to the fact that the children were here on
    a precarious basis" because this suggested that the  judge  might  have
    approached the reasonableness test too strictly  (see  paragraph  116).
    The same applied in this case.

13. Finally, the judge  should  have  decided  the  issue  of  whether  the
    principal Appellant had been in the UK for ten years lawfully, and that
    it was not enough to simply say that, "on the facts of the case  it  is
    highly likely that he does" qualify under the ten year  Rule,  and  not
    least because this finding directly went to the question of whether the
    Appellants could succeed under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   The  relevant
    date for consideration of whether the Appellants succeeded was the date
    of the hearing and not the date of the application.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted  that  the  judge  had  clearly  given
    consideration to the position of the daughter [Miss NM]  (at  paragraph
    16), referring to the fact that she had been provided  with  a  lot  of
    information about [Miss NM]'s schooling, such that it could not be said
    that this had been overlooked in any way  whatsoever.   In  fact,  from
    paragraph 16 right the way through to paragraphs 23 to  24,  there  was
    proper consideration of the position  of  the  child  [Miss  NM]  in  a
    detailed manner.

15. Eventually, at paragraph  28,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  public
    interest was in favour of the  maintenance  of  a  fair  and  effective
    immigration policy, and the judge was entitled to  do  so.   The  cases
    referred to could not assist the Appellant because in MA (Pakistan) the
    child had severe autism  and  in  EV  (Philippines)  the  parties  were
    already settled here.

16. Finally, the judge was correct  not  to  look  at  the  long  residence
    provisions because these had not yet been considered by  the  Secretary
    of State.

17. In reply Mr Hussain submitted that the  Court  of  Appeal  case  of  MA
    (Pakistan) cannot simply be distinguished on  this  basis  because  the
    court made it clear that it is improper to suggest that people who come
    on a temporary basis can be expected to leave automatically  even  when
    there is a child born to them.  It had been observed there that, as far
    as the children are concerned, "they are not to be blamed for the  fact
    that their parents  overstayed  illegally"  (paragraph  103).   In  the
    instant case, however, the parents have  not  overstayed  illegally  at
    all.  They had always been lawfully  based  in  the  UK.   Second,  the
    Secretary of State had been given ample opportunity  to  determine  the
    issue of the ten  year  residence  in  this  country.   The  judge  had
    expressly referred  to  this.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  chosen,
    notwithstanding the grant of an adjournment to enable her to do so,  to
    refrain from determining this question.  This is clear  from  what  the
    judge states at length at paragraph 12, where it was  accepted  by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer that the adjournment  was  expressly  on
    this basis, and it is also clear from the fact that  the  Secretary  of
    State then chose not to decide this issue (see paragraph 26).



Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that I ought  to  set  it
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My  reasons  are  as  follows.
    First, the judge's consideration of the situation  of  [Miss  NM],  the
    child who has been in the UK for seven years, begins at  paragraph  16,
    and moves onto paragraph  17  with  the  consideration  of  the  social
    worker's report from Kerry Fidler,  following  which  it  is  concluded
    that, "I have no doubt that a move from the UK would disrupt [Miss NM]"
    (at  paragraph  18).   Thereafter,  however,  having  established   the
    baseline facts, the judge then goes on to observe  how  the  Appellants
    came to the UK as students, knowing  that  they  would  be  here  on  a
    temporary basis and that, "they chose to start a family in the UK  with
    that knowledge and knowing that there was no guarantee that they  would
    be able to remain in the UK" (paragraph 19).

19. In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it was noted that,

         "The purpose underlining the seven year Rule is that this  kind  of
         reasoning ought not to be adopted in their case.  They are  not  to
         be blamed for the fact that their parents overstayed illegally, and
         the starting point is  that  their  status  should  be  legitimised
         unless there is good reason not to do so" (paragraph 103).

20. Second, the judge also appears to have implied in this case that,  just
    as in the case of EV (Philippines), so  here,  the  position  was  that
    "neither of the parents nor any of the children have a right to  be  in
    the UK" (paragraph 22).

21. Third, the finding that, "on the facts of the case it is highly  likely
    that" the  principal  Appellant  complies  with  the  ten  year  lawful
    residence requirement, "and if the Home Office agree then he is  likely
    to be able to  apply  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  that  basis"
    (paragraph 26) went substantially in favour  of  the  Appellants  being
    allowed to remain in the  UK,  given  that,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal
    observed in MA (Pakistan), "the starting point  is  that  their  status
    should be legitimised unless there is good reason not to  do  so"  (see
    paragraph 103).

Remaking the Decision

22. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submission that  I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the  following  reasons.   It  is
    well-established that the fact that a child has  been  here  for  seven
    years  must  be  given  significant  weight  when  carrying   out   the
    proportionality exercise.  Indeed  the  Secretary  of  State  published
    guidance in August 2015 in the  form  of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions entitled "Family life (as partner or parent)  and  private
    life: 10-year routes".  In this, it was expressly stated that once  the
    seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied,  there  need  to  be
    'strong reasons' for refusing leave  (see  paragraph  11.2.4).   In  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the court observed  (at  paragraph  46)
    how, after a child has been in the UK for seven years, "the child  will
    have put down roots and  developed  social,  cultural  and  educational
    links in the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive  if  the
    child is required to leave the UK" (paragraph 46).

23. I conclude that there are no "strong reasons"  for  refusing  leave  in
    this case.  The Appellants have not been living in the  UK  unlawfully.
    The first Appellant has lawfully been in this country for  a  ten  year
    period.  There has been a finding earlier by the judge below  that  "it
    is highly likely" that he would be able to comply with the  ten  years'
    lawful  residence.   But  most  importantly,  the  factors   to   which
    determinative weight have to be given with respect to [Miss NM]'s seven
    year residence in this country, which have spanned her entire life, are
    her immersion in all aspects of the life in this country, the  critical
    stage of her  personal  and  educational  development  which  has  been
    reached, and the minimal connections which she has with her country  of
    origin.  These matters were deemed significantly relevant  in  PD  (Sri
    Lanka) [2016] UKUT 00108 at paragraph 40, and I hold them to be equally
    so determinative in this case.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd November 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of the amount that has been paid or is payable.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd November 2016

