
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18053/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 June 2016                           |On 04 August 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                               Mr FARHAD BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Skinner, of Counsel, instructed by ATM
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student on 10  August  2006,  thereafter  he  was  granted
    extensions of leave until 12 October 2013.

2.   On 30 September 2013 he applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur.  That application was considered under paragraph 245DD(h)
    of the Immigration Rules.

3.   On  6  March  2014  the  appellant  was  invited  to  an  interview  in
    connection with that application, a record of which has been  provided.
    The respondent had regard to  the  answers  which  were  given  by  the
    appellant and issued the decision of 2 April 2014 refusing to vary  his
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  to  remove  him  by  way  of
    directions.  In particular, as  is  set  out  in  some  detail  in  the
    decision, it was not accepted that the appellant genuinely had  �50,000
    to invest in the business  or  that   he  was  able  to  demonstrate  a
    credible business plan or that his advertisement was in fact effective.



4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako on  9  November  2015.   In
    effect, the Judge upheld the decision of the respondent  and  dismissed
    the appeal.

5.   The matter now comes before  us  by  way  of  an  appeal  against  that
    determination. Two errors of law are cited in particular.  It  is  said
    that it is an error of law for the Judge not  to  have  considered  the
    facts for himself and that it  was  not  appropriate,  in  a  statutory
    appeal, for the Judge to conclude simply that it was reasonable for the
    respondent to have made the decision.

6.   Challenge is also made  to  the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  itself,
    contending that it was a fundamental unfairness in the  procedure  that
    having called the appellant to interview  because  the  Respondent  had
    certain  concerns, those concerns were not put to him in order for  him
    to deal with them.

7.   It is important that we remind ourselves of the context  in  which  the
    respondent made the decision.  The Judge has helpfully set that out  in
    paragraph 26 of the determination by reference to the decision of Ahmed
    and Another (PBS admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT  00365  (IAC).   That
    case determines as follows:

         "1.    Where a provision of the Rules (such as  that  in  paragraph
             245DD(k)) provides that points will  not  be  awarded  if  the
             decision-maker is not satisfied  as  to  another  (non-points-
             scoring) aspect of the Rule, the non-points-scoring aspect and
             the requirement for points are inextricably linked.


         2.   As a result, the prohibition on new evidence in Section 85A(4)
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to
             the non-points-scoring aspect of the Rule: the prohibition  is
             in relation to new  evidence  that  goes  to  the  scoring  of
             points."

8.   In general terms, therefore, only that  evidence  which  was  submitted
    with the application can be considered.  That  prohibition  applies  to
    the appellant but not to the respondent.  In those circumstances it was
    open to conduct an interview and to  rely  upon  the  content  of  that
    interview.  The Judge indicated  that  he  was  able  to  consider  the
    contents of the interview and the appellant's  explanations  about  the
    interview.  He was not,  however,  able  to  take  into  account  other
    additional material, such as letters purporting to show the  source  of
    funds.

9.   In the course of the determination the Judge looked at the features  of
    the evidence, paying particular regard  to  the  interview.  The  Judge
    considered what was said in interview  concerning  the  genuineness  of
    funds  and  noted  that  the  appellant  gave  "the  more  cursory   of
    responses".  The Judge went on to look at whether there was a  business
    plan or genuine business intentions. The apparent lack  of  preparation
    by the appellant raised doubts about his  competence  and  his  genuine
    intention to establish a business. The Judge  went  to  find  that  the
    concerns that were expressed by the respondent had not been allayed  by
    the appellant at interview even though he had had the opportunity to do
    so.  The Judge highlighted that the assessment  of  genuineness  was  a
    holistic one and concluded that  there  were  legitimate  concerns  and
    upheld the decision of the respondent.

10.  Mr Skinner submits that such  was  an  error.   This  was  a  statutory
    appeal not a judicial review on  Wednesbury  grounds.   It  was  not  a
    question whether the decision was one reasonably to  be  taken  by  the
    respondent but whether it was correct.

11.  It seems to us however that that is an argument  more  of  form  rather
    than of substance. In many cases of course the Judge,  in  hearing  the
    case, will have the advantage of hearing evidence from the parties  and
    possibly other evidence produced subsequent to the decision.    It will
    then be for the Judge to make of that evidence as he or she wishes.  In
    this case of course, by reason of the prohibition  imposed  by  Section
    85A(4) of the 2002 Act, the Judge was confined to that  evidence  which
    was before the respondent at the time  of  the  decision.   Essentially
    that would be the documents submitted  with  the  application  together
    with the interview.  It is not suggested in this case  that  the  Judge
    omitted to consider material evidence, nor is  it  suggested  that  the
    matters raised at the hearing have not been faithfully recorded by  the
    Judge in the decision.

12.  Although the reasonableness test seems to be referred to, it  is  clear
    to  us,  having  regard  to  paragraph  30  of  the  determination   in
    particular, that the Judge has looked at matters for himself.  That  is
    apparent from the comments that are made in the  determination  and  by
    the phrase "I must uphold the  decision  of  the  respondent".   It  is
    apparent to us looking at the determination as a whole that  the  Judge
    looked at the interview and agreed with the  conclusions  expressed  by
    the respondent.

13.  It  seems  to  us,  however,  that  the  second  challenge  as  to  the
    unfairness of the procedure is a significant matter.

14.  In this case the appellant  had  made  his  application  and  submitted
    those documents which were deemed to be relevant to  that  application.
    The respondent, having some concerns about that  evidence,  decided  to
    call the appellant for an interview in order for those  matters  to  be
    further investigated.  It is significant that in the invitation to  the
    interview, which is  before  us,  there  is  no  mention  made  to  the
    appellant as to the purpose of that interview other than to  help  with
    the assessment of the application made.

15.  It is reasonable  to  assume,  therefore,  that  at  the  time  of  the
    interview, the interviewing officer had some idea as  to  the  concerns
    and was focusing the questioning upon such concerns.

16.   Such concerns and indeed the subsequent interview was relied  upon  to
    refuse the application.   There is, however, no indication  that  those
    concerns were ever made clear to the appellant so that he could make  a
    response in interview to those matters.  For example, it was noted that
    in the business plan the appellant called  himself "Muhammad  Mr  Butt"
    where there is no reference to that name in the passport.  It  is  said
    that that brings into question the viability  and  credibility  of  the
    business plan.  There is no indication however that concern was put  to
    the appellant for him to  give  an  explanation.   Similarly  with  the
    business contracts and agreements which do not have a company's name on
    the back agreement page.  The contracts provided for  businesses  based
    more than an hour's travelling distance apart.  That in  itself  caused
    some concern as to the credibility of the application.   Those  matters
    were not put to the appellant to see what his response  to  them  would
    be.

17.  It does seem to us to be a matter of fairness that when  an  individual
    is called for an interview in order to clarify certain aspects,  he  or
    she be given an opportunity to provide an explanation for  concerns  as
    articulated. This is particularly so when  the  Statute  prohibits  any
    further evidence being presented after the decision.

18.  Although the Secretary of State holds against the appellant that  funds
    were transferred from several indeterminate sources during a  two  week
    period, no opportunity has been provided to the appellant to explain or
    clarify such matters.

19.  The  fairness  in  respect  of  an  interview  was  considered  by  The
    Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey in Miah [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).   That
    case involved the suggestion of a sham marriage and held that  fairness
    required that the affected person must  be  alerted  to  the  essential
    elements of the case against him.  The decision dealt with  the  aspect
    of disclosure of the interview, although  that is not an  aspect  which
    is relied upon in the circumstances of this case.

20.  However, the remarks of Lord Mustill in R v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department ex parte Doody [1994] 1 AC 531  at  paragraph  14  were
    cited. It was recognised that fairness is not to  be  applied  by  rote
    identically in every situation but is dependent upon  the   context  of
    the decision.

         "Fairness will  very  often  require  that  a  person  who  may  be
         adversely affected by the decision will have an opportunity to make
         representations on his own behalf either  before  the  decision  is
         taken with a view to producing a favourable result, or after it  is
         taken, with a view to procuring its modification, or both."

21.  It seems to us that  in  this  particular  case  that  context  of  the
    decision is of fundamental importance because it is only  the  evidence
    submitted before application and at interview that can  be  taken  into
    account subsequently.  Thus there is in practical terms a limitation on
    the nature of the evidence that can be given post-decision in order  to
    explain answers given before a decision.  It may  be,  therefore,  that
    this is precisely the context of the case when an appellant should have
    the opportunity to give  explanations  before  the  decision  is  taken
    rather than waiting until the decision is taken.

22.  As was made clear in  the  case  of  Miah,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision  making  process  includes  a  process  whereby  comments   or
    opinions, of an interviewing  officer  are  conveyed  to  the  decision
    maker.  In the generality of cases, this practice will not  contaminate
    the fairness of the decision making process.  The duty  of  a  decision
    maker is to approach and consider all of the  materials  with  an  open
    mind and with circumspection.  The due discharge of this duty,  coupled
    with a statutory  right  of  appeal,  will  provide  the  subject  with
    adequate protection.

23.  It was argued before us by Mr Skinner that,  in  the  circumstances  of
    cases where further evidence is dramatically restricted or  prohibited,
    any concerns in the mind of the interviewer at the  very  least  should
    have been put to the appellant.

24.  We note paragraph 13 of Miah which is in these  terms

         "These features of the context point decisively to the  proposition
         that the affected person must be alerted to the essential  elements
         of the case against him. This places the spotlight  firmly  on  the
         pre-decision interview which, it would appear,  is  an  established
         part of the process in cases of this nature. The interview  is  the
         vehicle through which this discrete duty  of  disclosure  will,  in
         practice, be  typically,  though  not  invariably  or  exclusively,
         discharged.   In  this  forum,  the  suspicions  relating  to   the
         genuineness of the marriage must be  fully  ventilated.  This  will
         entail putting  to  the  subject  the  essential  elements  of  any
         evidence upon which such suspicions are based.   In  this  way  the
         subject will be apprised of the case against him and will have  the
         opportunity to make his defence, advancing such representations and
         providing such information, explanations or interpretations  as  he
         wishes. Adherence to these basic requirements should, in principle,
         ensure a fair decision making process in the generality  of  cases.
         In order to cater  for  the  unusual  or  exceptional  case,  those
         involved in the decision making process must always be alert to the
         question of whether, in the interests of fairness, anything further
         is required."

25.  We note also  the   case  of  Mushtaq  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  of
    Islamabad Pakistan, (ECO - Procedural fairness) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00224
    (IAC).  In that case it was held that ECO interviews  serve  the  basic
    two-fold purpose of enabling applications to be probed and investigated
    and, simultaneously, giving the appellant a fair opportunity to respond
    to potentially adverse matters.     The  appellant  in  that  case  had
    applied for entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under
    the points-based system. The essential issue was whether or not he  was
    a genuine student. He was interviewed and the answers are  set  out  in
    detail.  Essentially the ECO in the impugned decision  identified  five
    factors  which  he  considered  adverse  to  the  genuineness  of   the
    appellant's entry clearance application.  They are highlighted  by  the
    court in Mushtaq at paragraphs 10 to 15.  Significantly one factor  was
    that the payments for maintenance and course fees were not commensurate
    with the family's evident financial status.  As the court  noted,  that
    issue was not raised all directly or indirectly  during  the  interview
    and a further element of procedural unfairness occurred in consequence.



26.  Essentially the concern of the Upper Tribunal was that  none  of  these
    concerns had been put to the appellant in such a way that he could make
    a response to them.  .It was   noted in particular   that,  so  far  as
    Tier 4 interviews are concerned,  they were the  subject  of  a  policy
    published on 4 December 2013 making it clear that an application should
    not be refused under paragraph 245ZV(k) unless the  appellant  has  had
    the chance to respond to  questions  in  interview  (a  credibility  or
    genuineness interview) unless certain circumstances  applied.   It  was
    held that none of the circumstances did apply in this case.

27.  Mr Skinner relies on a further but unreported case of the President  in
    Hussain IA/19033/2014.  Such is relevant simply to paragraph  3  making
    it clear that Section  85A  had  no  application  to  the  pre-decision
    interview.  There would have  been  no  prohibition  on  the  appellant
    producing  relevant  documents  in  response  to  specific  doubts  and
    concerns raised by the interviewer, to  be  contrasted  with  documents
    which must compulsorily be provided with  the  application  proper  and
    documents which are excluded from the ambit of the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing by statutory prohibition.

28.  This seems to us merely to emphasise the point of context in  that  the
    appellant should be given the fullest opportunity to meet the  concerns
    that have been  expressed before the  decision  has  been  made.   Once
    again, in this context issues were raised as to whether there were  any
    documents in existence to establish certain facts and queries raised as
    to why or the origins of certain payments.   Had  those  concerns  been
    expressed to the appellant he may have  been  in  a  position  to  have
    produced the relevant documents or to give explanations.

29.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was directed as to  the  nature  of  that
    argument by Mr Skinner and was referred to the case of Miah.  The Judge
    at paragraph 24 made the following response:-

         "In my reading, this case does not hold that in all cases where  an
         adverse decision arises from the context of an interview, there  is
         a duty to  put  those  concerns  to  the  appellant.  In  fact  the
         interviewer in this case was called in order to put the concerns to
         the appellant.  He was fully aware of the matters on which  he  was
         probed.  He did not at any time indicate to the interviewer that he
         wanted to provide additional evidence.


         In this case, the  absence  of  any  cogent  explanation  from  the
         interview about the wage payments meant that the  respondent  could
         not be satisfied of the genuine  availability  of  the  funds.   In
         light  of  the  material  before  the  respondent,  her  continuing
         scepticism after the interview was fully justified."

30.  We do not find that that is an accurate  statement  of  the  situation.
    As was made clear to us by the consideration of the letter inviting the
    appellant to interview, the  purpose  of  that  interview  was  nowhere
    clearly stated. Questions were asked, those answers were not probed any
    further at interview.Ha
  We do not find that the appellant was fully aware of the  matters  nor  do
    we find  that  in  certain  instances  he  was  provided  with  a  fair
    opportunity to deal with those concerns.

31.  We are satisfied that the Judge misunderstood the nature and  ambit  of
    Miah and failed to bear  in  mind  the  limitations  imposed  upon  the
    appellant to introduce evidence by way of explanation post-decision. We
    find that there was merit in the submissions made by Mr Skinner at  the
    hearing. We do not find that they were properly addressed by the Judge.

32.  The appellant had been called to  the  interview  because  of  concerns
    about his application.  The interviewing  officer  was  therefore  well
    appraised of those  concerns  and  asked  questions  about  them.   The
    interviewer,  we  so  find,  was  perfectly  able  to  articulate   the
    particular concerns so as to give the appellant a fair  opportunity  to
    respond to them.  We do not find that it was done in this case and that
    that is a procedural unfairness.

33.  As we have indicated, we find that the Judge has erred  in  considering
    the fairness point and as such that is a matter error  of  law  in  the
    determination such that it should be  se  aside.   In  considering  the
    arguments of Mr Skinner for ourselves, we determine that  the  decision
    which was made was conspicuous in its unfairness of procedure  such  as
    to amount to an unlawful decision.

Notice of Decision

34.  In those circumstances the appeal is allowed against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. The decision  is  set  aside.  We  remake  the
    decision and find that the decision of the Secretary of State  was  not
    in accordance with the law. Thus it remains for the Secretary of  State
    to make a lawful decision.

35.  We are minded to make a fee award and allow 28 days for submissions.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
