
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18726/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2015                    |On 25 August 2015                    |
|Oral judgment                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            MEHAR MUHAMMAD WAQAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Bajwa of A Bajwa and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  appellant  Mr  Mehor
    Muhammad Waqas against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ian
    Howard promulgated on 17 March 2015 following a hearing at Hatton Cross
    on 6 February 2015 in which the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 11 April  2014  to
    vary his leave to remain and to make a decision to remove  him from the
    United  Kingdom  by  way  of  a  direction  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   It is important to consider the chronology which  is  relevant  to  the
    judge's decision.   The  variation  of  leave  decision  refers  to  an
    application made on 28 March 2012 for  Tier  1  (Highly  Skilled)  Post
    Study leave to remain in the United Kingdom which was  granted  to  the
    appellant valid to 28 September 2014. The  refusal  of  11  April  2014
    states that the Secretary  of  State  has  now  identified  that  false
    representations were made in  relation  to  that  application  for  the
    purposes of obtaining the leave to remain.

3.   The basis of that finding is that in support  of  the  application  for
    Tier 1 leave on 28 March 2012 the appellant is said to  have  submitted
    financial documents showing investments worth  500,000  rupees  at  the
    National Savings Centre in  Lalamusa  in  Pakistan.   It  is  said  the
    documents have been confirmed to  be  false.  On  4  October  2012  the
    National Savings Centre Lalamusa confirmed that the submitted documents
    were not genuine and that there was no investment held by  that  centre
    in the appellant's name.  It is stated that had the  Home  Office  been
    aware of  these  facts  at  the  time  of  considering  the  applicants
    immigration status on 28 September 2012 the appellant  would  not  have
    been granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

4.   The submission of false documents in  support  of  the  application  to
    obtain leave  is  said  to  show  a  flagrant  disregard  of  the  UK's
    Immigration Rules and UK laws  and  it  was  not  considered  that  the
    circumstances were such that discretion  should  be  exercised  in  the
    appellant's favour and the appellant's leave  was  therefore  curtailed
    under the provisions of paragraph 323(i) with reference  to  322(2)  of
    the Immigration Rules so as to expire on 11 April 2014.

5.   The appellant challenged that decision in grounds  of  appeal  received
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2014 in which he states that the
    decision was not in accordance with the Rules, discretion  should  have
    been exercised differently, was not otherwise in  accordance  with  the
    law and incompatible by reference to his human rights.

6.   There is within the bundle  in  addition  to  the  formal  pleadings  a
    statement that has been provided  by  the  appellant  setting  out  his
    details, immigration history,  his  current  circumstances  and  making
    comment upon the curtailment decision  in  which  he  states  that  the
    documents submitted were not false and that he contacted  the  National
    Savings Centre in Pakistan after receipt of the decision who  confirmed
    that he has had the funds of 500,000 rupees (5  lakh  rupees)  for  the
    last four years. He contacted the head office and the  Lalamusa  branch
    and both had confirmed the existence of the investment.

7.   There are further comments relating to  maintenance  and  accommodation
    and Article 8 is touched on. In paragraph 10 the appellant said he is a
    genuine truthful, credible and honest person who  has  always  observed
    the Immigration Rules during his stay in the United Kingdom and that he
    has not, and will not, have recourse to public funds.

8.   The matter came before the judge, as stated, on  6  February  2015.  In
    the determination the judge sets out  the  nature  of  the  immigration
    decision under challenge and refers  to  the  evidence  that  was  made
    available and the grounds of appeal.  In paragraph 6  the  judge  notes
    that by agreement between the parties the appeal proceeded  by  way  of
    submissions only which is relevant because it appears that it  was  not
    considered appropriate by the appellant's representative to call him to
    give oral evidence which may have given an opportunity to explain  some
    of the issues of concern to the judge.

9.   The judge correctly identified  that  in  a  case  where  there  is  an
    allegation of false documents the burden of proving that rests upon the
    Secretary of State.  The judge sets out the findings from paragraph  10
    of the determination.  What was of particular concern to the judge  was
    the documentary evidence made available.   The  first  of  these  is  a
    document verification report (DVR) that the judge ruled  as  admissible
    at the hearing and in relation to which Counsel, although objecting  to
    late admission,  did  not  apply  for  an  adjournment  or  allege  any
    procedural  irregularity  or  fairness  in  relation   to   the   judge
    considering this material.

10.  It is necessary to look at this document.   The  DVR  states  that  the
    verification result is that the documents  provided  were  verified  as
    being false.  In the DVR are reference numbers  and  rupee  amounts  in
    relation to three certificates that  had  been  sent  to  the  National
    Savings  Centre  for  confirmation  and  verification   as   to   their
    genuineness or otherwise.

11.  There is within DVR redacted sections, one of which is said to  contain
    the name of the person in relation to whom the verification checks were
    made.  The judge has written on  the  copy  that  is  attached  to  the
    correspondence section of the First-tier Tribunal file that  under  the
    second of those sections it  contains  the  appellant's  name  Muhammad
    Waqas Mehar.

12.  Of more importance,  however,  is  a  further  document  which  is  the
    response referred to as an attachment in the comments  section  of  the
    DVR.  This is  a  letter  from  the  Government  of  Pakistan  Regional
    Directorate of National Savings dated 4 October  2012.   That  date  is
    important as a submission was made during the  course  of  the  hearing
    today regarding the passage of  time  between  the  evidence  that  was
    relied upon and the date of hearing in 2014.  Had this  been  a  matter
    where an application made in  2012  was  only  considered  on  evidence
    obtained in 2014 and where the passage of time may  have  been  a  more
    important consideration, Mr Bajwa's submission may have been  relevant.
    But if one looks at the letter from the Government of  Pakistan  it  is
    dated 4 October 2012 which is in fact relatively  contemporaneous  with
    the reference to the National Savings Centre for  verification  of  the
    certificates provided. The letter states that it is intimated that  the
    certificates provided by the appellant concerning the investments worth
    500,000 rupees is fake and bogus as  there  is  no  investment  in  NSC
    Lalamusa in the name of the appellant.

13.  There is then a comment regarding  appreciation  of  such  verification
    requests and a request for stern action to be taken against persons who
    arrange such bogus balance statements. It is not  suggested  that  that
    document did not emanate from an official source within the  Government
    of Pakistan and is signed by a joint director of the organisation.

14.  In relation to the omission of the appellant's name from the  DVR,  the
    fact this relates to the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is in
    fact corroborated by a further document that he  sought  to  rely  upon
    which is a National Savings Centre letter allegedly, according  to  the
    heading, from the same centre but dated 10 August 2012, which refers to
    the appellant's name and lists the savings that it is stated  he  holds
    by reference to the three certificate numbers  and  quantities  of  the
    individual investments which are identical to those  appearing  in  the
    DVR.

15.  The judge was therefore entitled to look at the  documents  as  it  had
    not been established, as suggested, that they might not relate  to  the
    appellant.  The weight the judge gave to the  documents  has  not  been
    shown to be inappropriate in  all  the  circumstances.   Challenges  to
    weight are matters that have to be given careful consideration  as  the
    weight to be given to evidence is ordinarily a matter  for  the  judge.
    Two relevant questions arise which are firstly, did the judge  consider
    the evidence with the required degree anxious scrutiny  and,  secondly,
    has the judge given adequate reasons for the findings made.

16.  The judge considered  the  evidence  and  finds  that  the  content  to
    contain an unequivocal statement that  the  three  certificates  relied
    upon are fake and bogus.  As a  result  the  judge  was  satisfied  the
    evidential burden upon the Secretary of State of establishing 'falsity'
    had been met.  I find the judge did consider the evidence in the manner
    required and has given adequate reasons for the findings made.

17.  The second documents are those referred  to  in  paragraph  16  of  the
    determination, bearing in mind no  oral  evidence  was  given  and  the
    appellant's case that he was only seeking to rely upon the  documentary
    evidence that he had placed before the judge.  There are two  documents
    specifically referred to.  The first is the letter dated 10 August 2012
    purportedly from  the  National  Savings  Centre  certifying  that  the
    appellant had purchased on 10 August 2010, which are deposited  at  the
    National Savings Centre, National Savings Certificates amounting  to  5
    lakh rupees with the reference number of the certificates  referred  in
    the DVR.   The value of the certificates due to accrued  interest  over
    two years is  stated  to  be  560,000  rupees  and  it  is  stated  the
    certificates can be cashed at any time.

18.  That clearly indicated to the judge that what  had  been  purchased  in
    August 2010 were National Savings Certificates. The second document  is
    a letter of 12 June  2014  purporting  to  emanate  from  the  National
    Savings Centre. It has a date on it of 11 June 2014 under the signature
    appearing but it is dated 12 June in relation to what appears to  be  a
    counter-signatory.  This  states  that  in  fact  four  years  ago  the
    appellant bought National Lottery Bonds from the centre which had  been
    redeemed and transferred into a savings certificate.

19.  The judge in paragraph 16 refers to inconsistencies in the  information
    provided by the appellant within the documents he relies upon  in  that
    one was claiming National Savings Certificates were bought on 11 August
    2010, whereas the later letter was stating that National Lottery  Bonds
    were bought which had subsequently been redeemed and transferred.   The
    judge stated in 2010 that the  appellant,  according  to  the  original
    certificate, did not own National  Lottery  Bonds  but  three  National
    Savings Certificates.

20.  It has been submitted today that the judge erred  in  relation  to  his
    assessment of the evidence and failed to understand  the  evidence  and
    failed to adequately consider that evidence.  The  starting  point  for
    that submission is what is said to be the  chronology  that  the  three
    National Lottery Bonds were in fact purchased in  2010  and  that  they
    were later redeemed and the National Savings Certificates purchased  in
    April 2014.

21.  If one starts a consideration of paragraph 16 from that point  in  time
    then it does appear that the findings of the judge are contrary to  the
    appellant's chronology.  But that is not the position this court has to
    adopt. The starting point is to  consider  whether  the  judge  made  a
    material error by failing to consider the evidence  with  the  required
    degree of anxious scrutiny and it is clear that he did not.  There  was
    no oral evidence called and no other evidence given  to  the  judge  to
    provide an explanation for the identified discrepancy. The  finding  by
    the judge, the factual finding  that  these  two  documents  contain  a
    discrepancy is correct.  It has not been shown that this is  a  finding
    contrary to the evidence and it has not been shown it is a finding that
    is irrational, perverse or which can be challenged on  any  public  law
    ground.

22.  The judge also had before  him  at  that  stage  the  DVR  stating  the
    certificates were bogus and evidence provided in support of  the  claim
    to the contrary that were contradictory in nature.  It cannot therefore
    be said that the judge has erred in relation to the assessment that the
    Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof upon her  to  the
    required standard in relation to the issue of falsity.

23.  Counsel for the appellant today was asked whether the alleged error  in
    relation to paragraph 16 was an assertion of error of fact but  if  one
    considers the evidence that was made available,  even  if  there  is  a
    factual error in relation to one  of  these  documents,  that  was  not
    proved before the judge and in  fact  has  not  been  proved  in  other
    evidence provided since.  The submission that the appellant had to  own
    the National Lottery Bonds as otherwise he could not have obtained  the
    National Savings Certificates does not appear to  have  been  a  matter
    that was explored before the judge and it is clear that no evidence was
    provided to the  judge  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  support  the
    contention that without ownership of the  National  Lottery  Bonds  the
    appellant could not obtain the National Savings Certificates.

24.  The next issue that was submitted in  relation  to  the  making  of  an
    error of law is that of intention.  It  is  settled  law  following  AA
    (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773   that   the   reference   to   false
    representation and false documents in the Immigration Rules requires an
    element of dishonesty even though that dishonesty need not be  that  of
    the appellant himself.

25.  The Court of Appeal considered this matter  further  in  JK  (India)  v
    Secretary of State [2013] EWCA Civ 1080  in  which  they  confirmed  in
    relation to  Section  322(1A)  that  that  paragraph  was  deliberately
    couched  in  terms  intended  to  prevent  the  making   of   dishonest
    applications with the result that applications were to be refused  even
    though the dishonesty employed may be not  be  that  of  the  applicant
    himself or herself.

26.  It is therefore a reoccurring theme in the case law that there are  two
    elements to a 'dishonesty' appeal. One  is  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State has established that the documents are by their nature  false  or
    contain false statements and the second the mental  element,  the  mens
    rea, of the appellant or another  person  and  whether  this  has  been
    established. The determination on the  face  of  it  is  silent  as  to
    whether the judge considered the issue of the necessary mental  element
    but it is clear from the case of  R  (Iran),  which  although  somewhat
    dated still provides useful guidance in relation to the  assessment  of
    an error of law, and subsequent cases  that  even  if  a  determination
    appears silent in relation to an issue a judge on appeal is entitled to
    find no material error of law if it can be inferred from a  reading  of
    the determination that this element has been properly  considered,  has
    no application, or is not material.

27.  In relation to this matter, it is accepted  by  all  parties  that  the
    application made in 2012 was an in-country application that was made by
    the appellant himself.  It is not suggested that any  other  party  was
    involved or that an agent or some other person is responsible  for  the
    submission of the documents.  The judge's finding that  these  are  not
    genuine documents must mean that the starting point in relation to this
    issue has to be the finding that these documents are  fake  and  bogus.
    If they are fake and bogus then the  appellant  himself  in  submitting
    those documents to the Secretary of State in support of an  application
    must have known they were fake and bogus and therefore  must  have  had
    the necessary negative intent required.  No alternative explanation has
    been provided other than disagreement with the core finding.

28.  There is clearly a contradiction between the documents as  referred  to
    in paragraph 16.  The letter of 10 August 2012 is  said  to  contain  a
    misrepresentation/ false statement relating to the purchase of National
    Savings Certificates.  I accept that in relation  to  that  matter  the
    appellant may not be responsible but it is not only his intention  that
    is relevant.   It can quite properly be inferred that in  finding  that
    the documents are fake and  bogus  the  judge  has  accepted  that  the
    necessary mental intent  has  been  established  that  relates  to  the
    appellant himself.

29.  For that reason I find (i) that in relation to the substantive  finding
    regarding the falsity of  the  documents  no  error  of  law  has  been
    established, (ii) that in relation to the challenge  on  the  basis  of
    intention, although it is arguable the failure of the judge to set  out
    consideration of this issue in the determination  may  be  an  arguable
    error of law, it is not material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.
     It is quite clear from the findings that that element can be  inferred
    as being satisfied  from  the  substantive  findings  in  paragraph  13
    onwards.

30.  For that reason my finding is that there is no legal error material  to
    the decision to dismiss the appeal established and this  appeal  itself
    must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date: 21 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date: 21 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

