
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18513/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           SUSUANA NAA AHIMA ATTOH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Mensons &
                    Associates Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following a hearing  on  8  September  2015  I  found  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mayall had made a material error of  law  in  dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal.  The error  of  law  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to consider whether the Appellant had a right
    to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 other than upon that which her original
    application had been based.

 2. The full error of law decision is annexed to my remake decision.

 3. Having announced my error of  law  decision  at  the  last  hearing,  I
    adjourned the matter for a resumed hearing, which then came  before  me
    again on 9 October.  In the interim period the  Appellant's  solicitors
    served additional evidence relating to the employment  of  Mr  Lalande,
    the Appellant's partner.  The additional evidence consists of a bundle,
    indexed and paginated 1 - 55, and in addition a Bank of  Scotland  bank
    statement covering the period 29 July 2015 to 23 September 2015.

Remake decision

 4. As set out in my error of law decision, the sole issue to be determined
    on the remake hearing was whether or not Mr Lalande was  a  worker  and
    therefore a qualified person within the meaning of Regulation 6 of  the
    2006 Regulations.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Tufan very  fairly  acknowledged  that  the
    further evidence appeared on its face  to  show  that  Mr  Lalande  was
    indeed  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.    Having
    carefully considered the  further  evidence  myself,  I  find  that  Mr
    Lalande is in  fact  in  employment  with  two  companies,  they  being
    Complete Cleaning and Noonan.  As evidenced by the information provided
    at pages 3-55 of the new bundle, and the  bank  statement  referred  to
    previously, I find  that  Mr  Lalande  is  a  worker  and  therefore  a
    qualified person, and therefore is  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. As discussed at the error of law hearing, whilst there was an issue  as
    to whether the Appellant and Mr Lalande were in fact validly married by
    virtue of a proxy marriage which occurred some years ago, Mr Karim  was
    content that I deal with the matter on the basis that the Appellant and
    Mr Lalande were in a  "durable  relationship"  within  the  meaning  of
    Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  There was no dispute from the
    Secretary of State that such a durable relationship did in fact exist.

 7. Therefore in light of the agreed issues and further evidence before me,
    I find that the Appellant is the extended family member of a  qualified
    EEA national and I allow the appeal of the Appellant.

 8. I allow the appeal only to the extent that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    original decision was not otherwise in accordance with the law  because
    of course there is a discretion under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations as to whether a residence card is issued to  the  Appellant
    or not.  This discretion has yet to be exercised by  the  Secretary  of
    State and she must be  the  decision-maker  who  first  exercises  that
    discretion.

 9. In light of the foregoing,  the  Appellant's  EEA  application  remains
    outstanding before the Secretary of  State  awaiting  the  exercise  of
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations and  a  fresh
    decision in due course.  The Secretary of State will of course bear  in
    mind the contents of my  decision  on  error  of  law  and  the  remake
    decision when exercising her discretion.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by  allowing  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
Respondent's decision was not otherwise in accordance with the law, and  the
Appellant's  EEA  application  remains  outstanding  before  the  Respondent
awaiting a lawful decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 26 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
This is because the appeal,  although  successful,  required  a  hearing  in
order for a proper resolution.


Signed        Date: 26 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

    ANNEX A: Error of Law decision

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18513/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 September 2015                          |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                         ms susuana naa ahima attoh
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Mensons and
                    Associates Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Mayall (Judge Mayall), promulgated on 8 January  2015,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal  was  against
    the Respondent's decision  of  9  April  2014  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    permanent residence card under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 7 December 1962.  She  has
    at all material times been either the spouse or durable  partner  of  a
    French national, Mr Daniel Lalande. The application for  the  permanent
    residence card was made on 14 February 2014. It was  asserted  that  Mr
    Lalande had been exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  for  a
    continuous  period  of  five  years.  The   Respondent   rejected   the
    application,  asserting  that  there  was  insufficient  proof  of   Mr
    Lalande's circumstances over the  whole  of  the  five-year  period  in
    question. The Appellant appealed, stating that she was  entitled  to  a
    permanent residence card, or alternatively was entitled to a  five-year
    residence card.

 3. Judge Mayall heard the appeal on 2 December 2014. At  the  hearing,  Mr
    Karim, who represented the Appellant then  as  now,  conceded  that  Mr
    Lalande had not been a qualified person for the requisite  period,  and
    therefore the Appellant's appeal could not succeed on the  basis  of  a
    permanent right of residence (paragraph 17). It was submitted, however,
    that Mr Lalande was  exercising  Treaty  rights  as  the  date  of  the
    hearing. Judge Mayall accepted this to be the case (paragraph 20).

 4. On the basis that the Appellant had not acquired a permanent  right  of
    residence, Judge Mayall proceeded to dismiss the appeal because in  his
    view it was against the  Respondent's  refusal  to  issue  a  permanent
    residence card only.

 5. The Appellant appealed on the ground  that  Judge  Mayall  should  have
    considered whether she was entitled  to  a  five-year  residence  case.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 21 April 2015.

The hearing before me

 6. At the outset, Mr Whitwell informed me that he would not  be  resisting
    the Appellant's assertion that Judge Mayall had materially in erred, as
    claimed in the grounds.

Decision on error of law

 7. I find that Judge Mayall did materially  err  in  law  by  refusing  to
    consider whether the Appellant was entitled to  a  five-year  residence
    card as an alternative to entitlement to a permanent residence card. Mr
    Whitwell's realistic position in this case was  of  assistance,  but  I
    would have found the error in any event.

 8. The Appellant's appeal was against an  EEA  decision.  The  appeal  was
    therefore brought under Regulation 26 of the Regulations. This had  the
    effect of entitling the Appellant to rely on the ground of appeal under
    section 84(1)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
    namely whether the decision breached  any  of  the  Appellant's  rights
    under EU law in respect of her entry to  or  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Where the evidence supports the possibility of entitlement  to
    documentation confirming a right of residence other than that which the
    Appellant has specifically applied to the Respondent for, the  Tribunal
    is, I conclude, required to consider such  an  alternative  basis.  Two
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal support my view on this. The first,  is
    MDB and Others (Articles 12, 1612/68) Italy [2010] UKUT 161  (IAC),  at
    paragraph 44; the second is the  recent  decision  in  Amirteymour  and
    others  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466  (IAC),  at
    paragraph 61.

 9. In the present case, once Judge Mayall had found  as  a  fact  that  Mr
    Lalande was a qualified person as at the date  of  hearing,  and  there
    being no dispute as to the Appellant's relationship with  him,  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to consider the issue of entitlement to a  five-
    year residence card under Regulation 17 of the Regulations. His refusal
    to do was a material error of law.

10. In light of the above I set aside the decision of Judge Mayall.

Disposal

11. Both representatives were agreed that I should  re-make  the  decision.
    All other things being equal, this would be a straightforward task, the
    only live issue appearing to be whether Mr Lalande was still exercising
    Treaty rights as of now.

12. However, the Appellant's solicitors had failed to  submit  any  further
    evidence on the question of Mr Lalande's current employment in  advance
    of the hearing before me. Mr Karim had some documentary  evidence  with
    him, but this was clearly an unsatisfactory state of affairs. I gave Mr
    Whitwell the opportunity to read and consider this new evidence but  he
    was not  prepared  to  concede  the  fact  of  Mr  Lalande's  on  going
    employment. I make no criticism of that position, given the  very  late
    production of the evidence.

13. In light of the foregoing, I  concluded  that  the  appeal  had  to  be
    adjourned for a continuation hearing to take place in due course.

14. Mr Whitwell  raised  a  further  matter.  Until  now,  the  Appellant's
    circumstances had been assessed on the basis that she was the spouse of
    Mr Lalande, they having contracted a proxy marriage in Ghana some years
    before. The apparent validity of this marriage had been accepted by the
    Respondent previously. However, in light of  the  current  case-law  on
    proxy marriages, in particular TA and Others (Kareem  explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC), there was now a real question mark  over  this
    status. In response to this Mr Karim stated that  he  was  prepared  to
    proceed at the adjourned hearing on the basis that the Appellant was an
    extended family member  of  Mr  Lalande,  their  relationship  being  a
    durable one within Regulation 8(5) of the Regulations.

15. Mr Whitwell acknowledged that no issue has ever  been  taken  with  the
    genuineness and durability of the relationship. In the absence  of  any
    previous  challenge  by  way  of  submissions  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal, subsequent rule 24 notice or cross-appeal, he quite  properly
    accepted that the only issue to be addressed at the  adjourned  hearing
    was that of Mr Lalande's Treaty rights.

Anonymity

16. I make no direction in this case.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is adjourned.

Directions

      1. The appeal is to be re-listed before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Norton-Taylor at Field House on 12 October 2015;

      2. The single issue to be addressed at the adjourned hearing  is  that
         of Mr Lalande's employment;

      3. The Appellant shall, no later than  14  days  from  the  date  this
         Decision is promulgated, file and serve on the Upper  Tribunal  and
         the Respondent any further evidence relied upon;

      4. Oral evidence from Mr Lalande may be  permitted  at  the  adjourned
         hearing.


Signed   Date:

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

