
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18998/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 24th May 2017                    |On: 27th June 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                         Nooriya Ali Noori al-Haddad
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     no legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq date of birth 1st July  1939.   She
    has permission[1] to appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge NMK Lambert) to dismiss her human  rights  appeal.  The
    determination was promulgated on the 13th July 2016.

    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a visit visa on the 31st
    May 2012.  In order to get that visa  the  Appellant  had  assured  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Amman, and then Judge White  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that she was only coming for a two week holiday to visit
    her daughter, Dr S. Jadow.   She said that she had every  intention  of
    returning to Iraq to live with her son and daughter in the family home.

 3. On the 14th November 2012 the Appellant's sponsor and  daughter  Dr  S.
    Jadow wrote to the Respondent, stating that she had lost  contact  with
    her siblings who had  previously  been  living  with  their  mother  in
    Baghdad. Dr Jadow asserted for the first time that her mother had  been
    threatened by sectarian and criminal elements. In  2010  she  had  been
    forced to relinquish all of her money and  personal  possessions  to  a
    criminal gang who  were  threatening  her  and  her  family.  Dr  Jadow
    asserted that she and her husband were both working  full  time,  owned
    their property outright and would be able to  adequately  maintain  and
    accommodate the Appellant, who would cost the public  purse  no  money.
    She had comprehensive private healthcare insurance.

 4. The  Respondent  rejected  the  claim  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    Appellant appealed and on the 19th June 2014 the decision was found  to
    be 'not in accordance with the law' and the matter was returned to  the
    Respondent[2]. On the 29th April 2015 the  Respondent  issued  a  fresh
    decision. The Respondent considered the claim  with  reference  to  the
    provision in the rules relating to Article 8  private  life:  paragraph
    276ADE(1). Having rejected that, the Respondent proceeded  to  consider
    whether there were any 'exceptional circumstances' such that a grant of
    leave under Article 8 would be justified.  Finding there  to  be  none,
    the claim was rejected.

 5. When the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's
    daughter and sponsor Dr  Jadow  gave  oral  evidence.    She  told  the
    Tribunal that after her mother arrived in  this  country  in  2012  the
    family had lost touch with relatives in Baghdad and that  her  mother's
    health had deteriorated.     At  paragraph  3.3  of  the  decision  the
    following observation is  made:  "Quite  obviously  all  of  this  runs
    completely counter to the findings made by Judge White on the  evidence
    presented to him in 2012. It  is  extremely  difficult  to  escape  the
    conclusion that the Appellant and sponsor have been dishonest in  their
    evidence before  either  me  or  Judge  White".  The  Tribunal  thereby
    rejected the Sponsor's evidence that her mother had no health issues at
    all at the time of the visitor appeal. It found  it  to  be  improbable
    that Dr Jadow would  not  have  been  aware  of  the  sectarian  attack
    suffered by the family in 2010 when she gave evidence to  Judge  White.
    As to the family members in Iraq, the Tribunal  noted  the  Appellant's
    evidence before Judge White that she had  four  children  in  Iraq.  It
    rejected Dr Jadow's evidence that two of these people were stepchildren
    who had both died a long time ago, and that the other two had suddenly,
    without  any  notice,  fled  Iraq  for  Turkey.    In  light   of   the
    discrepancies identified, the Tribunal was unable to place  any  weight
    on the current claims of the Appellant and her daughter.  Judge Lambert
    found there to be no likelihood that any of the  evidence  given  about
    the family circumstances in Iraq was true.  The claim therefore fell to
    be dismissed in the following terms [at 3.6]:

         "There is no credible basis for concluding that  her  return  there
         would  breach  Article  3.  On  the  sponsor's  own  evidence   the
         Appellant's health problems were appropriately  treated  and  under
         control there and while I accept that she also now has a  diagnosis
         of Alzheimer's dementia, on the findings I have  made  I  have  not
         been able to accept that she could not depend on family members  in
         Iraq who include medically qualified adults equally as able to cope
         with their mother in her old age as the sponsor. For these  reasons
         I also uphold the respondent decision under paragraph  276ADE  that
         there  are  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the   Appellant's
         integration  into  Iraq.  There  are  of  course  ongoing  security
         problems there, but these were experienced by the family  for  many
         years before she left. There is no suggestion  that  the  appellant
         meets any of the provisions of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules
         and I find  no  evidence  justifying  consideration  of  Article  8
         outside of the rules or capable of sustaining any finding that  the
         respondent decision  is  in  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case
         disproportionate."

    Discussion and Findings

 6. The grounds of appeal were drafted by the Sponsor Dr  Jadow,  who  also
    appeared before me.  Bearing in mind  that  she  is  not  a  lawyer  or
    immigration law specialist I have  given  those  grounds  their  widest
    possible reading.

 7. It is submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    the following material respects:

       i)   In  failing  to  take  the  country  background  material  into
          account. It  is  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  inherently
          implausible in the Appellant's son and daughter electing to leave
          Baghdad in the summer of 2012;

      ii) In failing to weigh into the reasoning  an  envelope  and  letter
          which established as a matter of fact that the Appellant's  other
          children were now in Turkey;

     iii) Failing to consider the particular bond between the Appellant and
          her daughter in the United Kingdom

 8. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant,
    who considered ground (i) to  be  arguable,  but  found  that  "in  the
    absence of credible evidence from Turkey the FtTJ was fully entitled to
    reject  the  claims  made".    Permission  was  granted  upon   renewed
    application by UTJ Taylor who considered  the  evidence  referenced  at
    ground (ii) might be the evidence that Judge  Grant  considered  to  be
    missing.

 9. The evidence in question consisted of  photocopies  (it  is  not  clear
    whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  shown  the  originals)  of  two
    envelopes posted in Turkey, said to have  contained  letters  from  the
    Appellant's daughter. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal did have
    sight of this material, since it is recorded at paragraph 3.4:

         "... letters presented from the son and daughter  at  the  hearing,
         posted from and claimed to support  their  presence  in  Turkey  in
         February 2016, present no particular  incident  causing  either  of
         them to flee Iraq but maintain in general terms that life  in  Iraq
         became too difficult"

10. I accept that the First-tier Tribunal has made no express  findings  on
    whether the letter was  posted  directly  by  one  of  the  Appellant's
    children, whether they were in Turkey then or whether  they  remain  in
    Turkey now. I must however read the determination as a whole, and  when
    the entire body of the reasoning is taken  into  account  it  is  quite
    clear that the Tribunal rejected the documents as credible evidence  of
    the whereabouts of Dr Jadow's siblings. I say that  for  the  following
    reasons. First, the account of flight to Turkey was  primarily  doubted
    by the Tribunal for the reason it sets out  at  paragraph  3.4,  namely
    that there was no explanation as to why these two adults, with  settled
    lives and  good  jobs,  would  up  and  leave  Baghdad  with  no  prior
    discussion with their close family members.  Second, as set out in  the
    extract above, the explanation provided in the letter appeared to be at
    odds with the suddenness of their apparently covert departure.   Third,
    it is clear from the subsequent findings that the Tribunal believes the
    two to still be in Iraq. It is further implicit  in  the  wording  used
    that the Tribunal doubted that the pair were in Turkey at  all,  or  at
    least that they were there for any substantial period of time:  "...and
    claimed to support their presence in Turkey in February 2016".    I  am
    unable to find that the Tribunal ignored the Turkish letter, or that it
    failed to consider whether it  was  probative  of  that  plank  of  the
    Appellant's case.

11. It perhaps follows that ground (i)  must  fall  away  in  light  of  my
    finding. There may well have been good  reasons  for  anyone  to  leave
    Baghdad in the summer of  2012  but  the  Tribunal's  finding  was  not
    premised on it being inherently unlikely that anyone would do  so.  The
    evidence that is rejected as "extremely unlikely" is the claim that two
    hitherto established professionals, who had cared for their mother  for
    a number of years and were obviously close to her, would secretly elect
    to leave their homes, jobs and country in the two weeks that she was on
    holiday.

12. In respect of ground (iii) I have reviewed the  witness  statements  of
    both mother and daughter. Whilst I do not doubt that the two are  close
    I have been unable to identify any particular evidence contrary to  the
    finding made at paragraph 3.6 of the determination: "I  have  not  been
    able to accept that she could not depend on family members in Iraq  who
    include medically qualified adults equally as able to cope  with  their
    mother in her old age as the sponsor" (emphasis added).

13. At the hearing I did canvass with  Mr  Harrison  whether  any  material
    error arose in the First-tier Tribunal's apparent  application  of  the
    Gulshan threshold question in the closing sentence of 3.6.  The  notion
    that a decision maker  must  first  decide  whether  there  is  a  good
    arguable case under Article 8 before  deciding  whether  to  conduct  a
    proportionality balancing exercise has now been  expressly  disapproved
    by the Court of Appeal: see Lord Justice Aikens at paragraph 129 of  MM
    (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
    985.  In that respect, the Tribunal arguably erred in stating: "I  find
    no evidence justifying  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  of  the
    rules".  I am however unable to find that error to be  material,  since
    the determination immediately qualifies the reasoning with  the  words:
    "or capable of sustaining any finding that the respondent  decision  is
    in all the circumstances of the case disproportionate".  On  the  facts
    as it had found them, that was a decision open to the Tribunal  on  the
    evidence before it.

14. The Appellant is approaching her 78th birthday. She has a diagnosis  of
    Alzheimer's dementia. There was no evidence before me, nor insofar as I
    can tell, before the First-tier Tribunal, going to the  matter  of  her
    fitness to fly. Obviously her age and  illness  are  matters  that  the
    Respondent will have careful regard to before making  any  decision  to
    remove. Dr Jadow should endeavour to keep the  Respondent  up  to  date
    with any developments relating to her mother's health.

    Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside.

16. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              26th June 2017


                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on the 14th December
2016

[2] The decision of Judge Holmes, dated 18th June 2014 (IA/10644/14) was
that the decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department was
unlawful for its refusal to address protection concerns. Judge Holmes
considered it to be incumbent on the Respondent to consider these matters
before the First-tier Tribunal determined their validity


