
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18308/2015
                                                               IA/18309/2015
                                                               IA/18310/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th December 2016                         |On 5th January 2017           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1) [P] Houston
                                  (2) [A M]
                                  (3) [P M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Houston, principal Appellant in attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants comprise a mother  and  her  two  children.   The  first
    Appellant, a female, was born on 21st April 1973.  The second Appellant
    was born on 27th April 2004 and the third Appellant  was  born  on  1st
    September 2007,  and  both  are  respectively  female  as  well.   They
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 30th April 2015,  refusing  their  application  for  a
    variation of  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   Their  application  was
    considered under Appendix FM (under the  parent  route)  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The first Appellant has two  children
    and these children appear to have lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for
    seven yeas preceding their application and  resided  in  the  UK  since
    their birth.  The Respondent, however, considered that  they  would  be
    able to adapt to life  in  Jamaica.   The  first  Appellant  spent  the
    majority of her life in Jamaica and would be aware of the  culture  and
    way of life there.  She had provided no evidence that she would not  be
    able to maintain her children in Jamaica or provide  for  their  safety
    and welfare.

 2. The Appellants' appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart in Taylor House "on the papers" and promulgated  on  21st  June
    2016.  The judge considered the case law of  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
    197 (IAC).  It was noted that neither child had  reached  the  position
    whereby it could be said that taking them from aged  4  (as  being  the
    most significant) that this would aid the  two  Appellant  children  as
    being decisive in their favour.  Moreover,  the  adaptability  of  very
    young children  meant  that  they  could  go  to  Jamaica.   The  judge
    presented there was "no hint of the suggestion that the welfare of  the
    children is threatened" (paragraph 15).

 3.  Secondly,  the  judge  also  considered  the  acquisition  of  British
    citizenship for the relevant second Appellant in this case, or that  at
    the time of the  application the second Appellant had only been in  the
    UK for nine years and not for ten years, thus enabling her to apply for
    British citizenship.   Nevertheless,  consideration  was  given  to  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  The judge observed  that  "it  would  appear
    that citizenship for the second Appellant is an accident of being  born
    here as it was when the mother had no leave to remain.  It is not  from
    descent.  There is no evidence of her father or any other  relative  in
    the UK with whom the children may have formed an attachment" (paragraph
    17).

 4. Thirdly, the judge then went on (at paragraphs 20 to  21)  to  consider
    the best interests of the children on the  basis  of  the  case  of  JO
    (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT 00517.  It was held by the judge that Section  55
    of the BCIA 2009 was  considered  by  the  Respondent  "in  respect  of
    exceptional circumstances and an adequate assessment carried out  given
    the limited information.  The Appellants had not submitted any  further
    evidence that might cause me to  interfere  with  the  assessment  ..."
    (paragraph 21).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  have  regard
    to the "Zambrano principle" to the effect that the parents of  a  child
    must be granted the right of residence where a child (such as a British
    citizen second Appellant  child),  would  be  required  to  leave  this
    country.  Moreover, the reading of ZH (Tanzania) was selective in  that
    the  best  interests  of  the  child  should  have   been   a   primary
    consideration as opposed to the mother's poor immigration history.

 7. On 13th October 2016, permission to appeal  was  granted  and  on  31st
    October 2016,  a  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State whereby it was stated that, "the material matter for
    her [the judge] to decide was whether it would be  reasonable  for  the
    children to relocate to Jamaica with the Appellant", and the judge  had
    made a finding also open to her (paragraph 4).

 8. At the hearing before me on 9th December 2016, the principal Appellant,
    Miss Houston, was in attendance and the Respondent was  represented  by
    Mr K Norton, although the  Appellants  themselves  were  without  legal
    representation.  Miss P Houston, the principal Appellant,  had  nothing
    to say but for reliance upon the Grounds of Appeal and  insofar  as  to
    say that "I do not understand the appeal".  To  his  great  credit,  Mr
    Norton summarised the Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Appellant  and  the
    Appellant, at my enquiry, indicated that she  would  wish  to  say  the
    same.  For the Secretary of State, Mr Norton submitted that  the  issue
    was whether there would be "very significant obstacles"  to  a  British
    citizen's child, such as the second Appellant, relocating  to  Jamaica.
    At the time of the decision, the second Appellant  was  not  a  British
    citizen.  This may have been a potentially foreseeable consequence, but
    he was not a British citizen.  The child was 9 years of age and not  10
    years of age.  The principal Appellant herself was without  employment,
    or income, or any church support or friends.  She did not have leave to
    remain in this country.  The decision reached by the judge was open  to
    her.

My Consideration of the Appeal

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

10. First, whilst the Rule 24 response correctly states that "the  material
    mater for her to decide was whether it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    children to relocate to Jamaica with the Appellant " (paragraph 4),  as
    far as the judge was  concerned,  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    reasonableness of exclusion of the second Appellant (whom the judge had
    recognised as having by now  acquired  British  citizenship)  from  the
    European Union territory.

11. Second, the judge also  attached  insufficient  weight  to  the  policy
    guidance of the Respondent in this context.  Third, the judge  did  not
    consider whether there had been a breach of Article 8 in  carrying  out
    the  proportionality  exercise  when  dealing  with  the  question   of
    reasonableness, given what is stated in Section 117 of the 2002 Act  in
    that the second Appellant is a "qualifying" child, had the  judge  done
    so, on  what  was  a  appeal  "on  the  papers",  with  no  benefit  of
    representations being heard  by  the  judge,  it  is  conceivable  that
    sufficiently compelling circumstances could be  shown  to  exist  which
    would enable consideration of  whether  there  had  been  a  breach  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  This was an exercise that was
    not performed by the judge.

12. For all these reasons, there is an error of law.  Since these  are  all
    matters of evidence for proper consideration by a decision maker, under
    practice statement 7.2(b)  is  such  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because of the  nature  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  exercise  that
    requires consideration of these matters.




Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This matter was remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Bart-Stewart.

14. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


Judge Juss

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss             4th January 2017

