
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18352/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 January 2015                              |On 22 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Milind Mayankumar Vyas
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr A Khushi, instructed by UK Immigration Legal Service
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Milind Mayankumar Vyas, date  of  birth  24.10.81,  is  a
    citizen of India.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki promulgated 9.10.14,  allowing  the
    claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent,  dated
    28.3.14, to curtail his leave to remain and to remove him from  the  UK
    by way of directions under section 47 of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. The Judge heard the appeal on 19.9.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge TRP Hollingworth granted permission to appeal
    on 25.11.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 21.1.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Thanki should be set aside.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Hollingworth  considered  that
    the Secretary of State's decision to curtail leave was sustainable  and
    commensurate with the information then in  her  possession.  "In  other
    words, the respondent can only make decisions based on the  information
    supplied by the appellant. It appears at  no  time  did  the  appellant
    inform the respondent of compassionate circumstances. So  that  on  the
    face of the appeal there is no manifestation of unfairness."

 7. The ground of appeal point out that curtailment of leave  is  mandatory
    as expressed in Rule 323A(a)(ii), if  the  migrant  fails  to  commence
    studying with the sponsor. There can be no dispute  that  the  claimant
    failed to commence studying with the sponsor. The Home Office  guidance
    is to the same effect, that leave must be curtailed "unless one of  the
    exceptions below applies, in which case curtailment is  discretionary."
    None of the exceptions under Rule 323A(b)(iv) apply to the claimant.

 8. In the circumstances, curtailment of the claimant's leave was not  only
    inevitable but there was no option to do anything other than to curtail
    it; it being a mandatory requirement.  In  the  circumstances,  it  can
    hardly be unfair for the Secretary of State to apply  the  requirements
    of the Rules to the claimant's circumstances.  In  Marghia  (procedural
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 366 (IAC), the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    common law duty of fairness is essentially about  procedural  fairness.
    There is no absolute duty at common law to  make  decisions  which  are
    substantively 'fair.' The court will not interfere with decisions which
    are objected to as being substantively unfair, except the  decision  in
    question falls foul of the Wednesbury test,  i.e.  that  no  reasonable
    decision-maker or public body could have arrived at such a decision.

 9. In the circumstances,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unsustainable and based on a false premise. It cannot stand and must be
    set aside and remade.

10. On the facts of this case I can see no alternative but to  a  dismissal
    of the appeal. It was doomed to failure from  the  outset.  It  is  not
    disputed that the claimant failed to commence  studying.  He  told  the
    college about his circumstances, which are not in dispute. However, the
    college very properly notified the Home Office  and  the  Secretary  of
    State took the required and mandatory action to curtail leave. To do so
    cannot be regarded as unfair, as it is entirely in accordance with  the
    Rules.

11. As cases such as Nasim and Patel have explained, the private life of  a
    student to study in the UK does not engage article  8  ECHR,  which  is
    intended to protect the moral and physical integrity of the individual.
    There are no  particular  circumstances  of  the  claimant  that  could
    justify allowing him to remain under article 8 when his leave has  been
    very  properly  curtailed  in  accordance  with  the  Rules.   In   the
    circumstances, I find that article 8 is not engaged in  this  case  and
    thus the decision cannot be regarded as disproportionate  or  otherwise
    unjustifiably harsh so as to require the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to be set aside.

12. It remains open to the claimant  to  make  a  further  application  for
    leave, explaining the circumstances leading to curtailment, but that is
    a matter for the claimant and the Home Office and in which the Tribunal
    has no role to play.

Conclusions:

13. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside and remade.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.




Signed: [pic]     Date: 21 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup







Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.






Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 21 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

