

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18999/2014

                                              IA/35001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10th April 2015                            |On 5th May 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between


                    ALASTAIR BRAINBRIDGE TINASHE CHINZOU
                             AYISHA ROSE CHINZOU
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr. A. Nyamayaro, RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on 12th January 1987,  is  a  national  of
      Zimbabwe. He married his wife in Zimbabwe in a customary  marriage  on
      12th December 2011 and entered into a civil marriage  on  3rd  January
      2013. She was born in Zimbabwe on 5th October 1990 but has  indefinite
      leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.  Their  daughter,  the  Second
      Appellant, was born in Zimbabwe on 28th November 2011.

   2. The Appellants were granted entry clearance as visitors on 16th August
      2013 and arrived in the United Kingdom on  18th  October  2013.  Their
      visas were due to expire on 16th February 2014. The Appellant  applied
      for further leave to remain on 14th February 2014 as the partner of  a
      person who was settled in the United  Kingdom  and  named  the  Second
      Appellant as his dependent.

   3. On 3rd April  2014  the  Respondent  refused  their  applications  and
      decided to remove them from the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions
      under S.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.  The
      Respondent asserted that they were not entitled  to  leave  to  remain
      under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
      particular, it was asserted that the Appellant  was  not  entitled  to
      leave under EX.1., as there were no insurmountable obstacles to family
      life being continued in Zimbabwe. She also took into account  S.55  of
      the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  considered
      whether there were no exceptional  circumstances  in  the  Appellants'
      case which required her to consider their applications under Article 8
      of the European Convention on Human  Rights  outside  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   4. The Appellants appealed and their appeals  were  heard  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Phull on 26th September 2014. She allowed their appeals
      in a determination and reasons promulgated on 16th October  2014.  The
      Respondent applied for permission to appeal against this  decision  on
      23rd October 2014. She submitted that the First-tier Judge  materially
      misdirected herself in allowing the appeals on Article  8  grounds  as
      the Appellant's partner had not provided any corroborative evidence to
      show that she could not internally relocate away from  the  campus  on
      which she had previously been studying. She also  submitted  that  the
      First-tier Judge  had  neglected  to  consider  the  divergent  public
      interests in the case and noted that the Appellant could have  had  no
      legitimate expectation of being granted further leave to remain  after
      entering as a visitor. She also noted that there was  a  clear  public
      interest in a firm and coherent  system  of  immigration  control  and
      submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge   should   not   have   placed
      determinative weight on the Second Appellant's rights. The  Respondent
      also submitted that the First-tier  Judge  had  reached  unsustainable
      conclusions in relation to the ability of the Appellants  to  continue
      to enjoy a family life in Zimbabwe as  the  Appellant  had  previously
      worked there and they would  be  able  to  seek  assistance  from  the
      Appellant's family.  Therefore, she submitted that the Appellants  and
      the Appellant's wife would be able to enjoy a family life together  in
      Zimbabwe or, in  the  alternative,  the  Appellants  could  return  to
      Zimbabwe and apply to enter as the Appellant's wife's dependents  when
      she was able to meet the financial requirements of Appendix FM to  the
      Immigration Rules.

   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted the Respondent permission to
      appeal on 13th February  2015  on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
      grounds identified arguable errors of law. She  noted  that,  although
      the Judge found that the Appellants could not meet the requirements of
      Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and went on  to  consider  the  5-step
      Razgar approach, she did not give adequate weight to the  Respondent's
      concerns and, in particular, did not give  adequate  consideration  to
      Ss.117A & B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  She
      also  found  that  her  reasoning  was  terse  and   lacked   clarity,
      particularly when  finding  that  the  Appellants'  removal  would  be
      disproportionate.

 Error of Law Hearing

   6. At the hearing before us Mr. Nayamayaro relied on the bundle submitted
      at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and a Rule 24  Response.
      This response asserted that the submissions made when  the  Respondent
      appealed were a mere disagreement with the First-tier Judge's findings
      and did not amount to a material error of law and were findings  which
      she was entitled to  make in the course of her assessment. It was also
      submitted that the Respondent had not  taken  into  consideration  the
      negative effect of a possible separation of the  family  unit  if  the
      Appellants were required to leave the United Kingdom and that, if  the
      family were to return  to  Zimbabwe,  there  would  be  insurmountable
      obstacles to establishing a life there.
   7. At the hearing, Mr. Nayamayaro accepted that the Appellants  were  not
      entitled to leave under the Immigration Rules as the sponsor could not
      meet the financial requirements contained in Appendix FM but  asserted
      that the Appellants' circumstances in Zimbabwe had not been challenged
      at the appeal hearing. He also submitted that the  witness  statements
      had made it clear that the Appellant's wife would not be safe anywhere
      in Zimbabwe. In addition, he asserted that the  Judge  had  considered
      all the evidence before her in the round  and  reached  a  sustainable
      decision. He also asserted that in Dube (ss117A-117D) [2015]  UKUT  90
      (IAC) the Upper Tribunal had noted that the factors in these  sections
      did not provide an exhaustive  list  of  what  should  be  taken  into
      account in Article 8 cases.
   8. However, we find that in Dube the Upper Tribunal held that judges  are
      required statutorily to take  into  account  a  number  of  enumerated
      considerations and that sections 117A-117D are not, therefore, an a la
      carte menu of considerations that it is at the discretion of the judge
      to apply or not apply. Judges are duty-bound to "have regard"  to  the
      specified consideration. Judges do not have  to  refer  to  each  sub-
      section but do have to show that they have considered the substance of
      the content of relevant sub-sections.
   9. In this case the First-tier Judge failed to do so. In particular,  she
      did not give sufficient consideration to the fact that  S.117B  states
      that the maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public
      interest and that it is in the interests of the economic well-being of
      the United Kingdom that persons who  seek  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom are financially independent. The Judge  also  failed  to  take
      into account the fact that the Appellants had entered as visitors  and
      that, therefore, their immigration status was  precarious,  when  they
      developed a private life here.
  10. The Judge also failed to take into account the fact that Ayisha is not
      a "qualifying child" for the purposes of S.117D  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum 2002
  11. Furthermore, she failed to take into account that her starting  point,
      when considering the Appellants' rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,
      should have been  whether  there  were  factors  which  had  not  been
      adequately covered in the Immigration Rules and which could lead to  a
      successful Article 8 claim.
  12. In addition, we find that the Judge did not give proper  consideration
      as to whether the sponsor would be able to relocate within Zimbabwe if
      she  were  to  return  there  with  the  Appellants,  when  her   only
      difficulties in the past had arisen on the university campus where she
      was studying and  where  her  uncle  was  a  senior  employee  of  the
      Government.
  13. For all of these reasons we are satisfied  that  there  were  material
      errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings
      and that it should be set aside in its entirety. We are also satisfied
      that, as there will need to be a complete re-hearing that  this  is  a
      proper case for remission to the First-tier Tribunal.



          Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings did  include
    material errors   of law.

      2. The decision should be set aside in its entirety.


      3. The appeal should be listed for a de novo hearing before the First-
         tier Tribunal.

     Directions

     1.       The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de
         novo hearing.

     2.  The  appeals  should  be  listed  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
         Birmingham but not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull.







                                    Date: 24 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
