
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/18604/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1st February 2016                      | On 7th April 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                          mr Olumide Olusola Adeeko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms W Bremang (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
    ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on 15th May 2015.  In  December
    2013, he applied for further leave under the partner route in  Appendix
    FM to the Immigration Rules  ("the  rules").   In  making  the  adverse
    decisions, the Secretary of State  drew  attention  to  inconsistencies
    which emerged in the accounts given by the appellant and  his  sponsor,
    following a marriage interview held on 25th March 2014.

2.   The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant had not shown  that
    his relationship with his sponsor was genuine and subsisting and so  he
    did not meet the requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.1.7. of Appendix  FM.
    She went on to find that the appellant had not provided  evidence  that
    he had achieved a qualification in English to level A1  of  the  Common
    European Framework of reference for languages, although he had in  fact
    provided a life in the UK test certificate.

3.   The judge noted that although the Secretary of State had  not  produced
    a record of the interview held with the appellant and his  sponsor  she
    had, nonetheless, identified eighteen discrepancies in their  accounts,
    leading to the conclusion that the relationship was not  genuine.   The
    appellant appeared before the First-tier Tribunal in  person  and  gave
    oral evidence.  The respondent was not represented.   The  sponsor  did
    not  appear,  the  appellant  explaining   that   she   suffered   from
    schizophrenia.

4.    The  judge  observed  that  the  appellant   did   not   dispute   the
    discrepancies identified in the Secretary of State's  decision  letter.
    In his evidence, the appellant asserted that some were minor  and  said
    that his wife had told  the  interviewer  that  she  was  not  good  at
    remembering things.  The judge noted that there was no proper diagnosis
    of the sponsor or medical opinion about how her condition might  affect
    her memory.  There was no supporting evidence explaining the  sponsor's
    absence from the hearing, although the appellant  submitted  a  medical
    certificate showing that she was assessed as unfit  for  work  on  26th
    November 2013, the period of unfitness lasting until 26th January 2014.
     The hearing took place on 8th May 2015.

5.   The  judge  summarised  some  of  the  discrepancies  recorded  by  the
    Secretary of State in her decision letter, found that  the  absence  of
    the sponsor had not been properly explained or justified and  concluded
    that the appellant had failed to show that his marriage was genuine and
    subsisting.  He was satisfied that the  language  requirements  of  the
    rules were  met,  in  the  light  of  a  certificate  produced  by  the
    appellant.  He found that Article 8 was not engaged in the light of his
    adverse finding regarding the marriage but, in any event, there was  no
    obstacle to family life continuing abroad.  It was not unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant and his sponsor to continue their family  life  in
    Nigeria.

6.   Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the  judge  erred  in
    law in proceeding to decide the appeal  as  he  had.   The  appellant's
    sponsor was unavailable due to illness.  The absence of the  record  of
    interview was significant and an assessment without it was flawed.

7.   Permission to appeal was refused by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but
    granted, following renewal of the application,  by  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge, on the basis that it was arguable that procedural unfairness had
    occurred in relation to the absence of the sponsor and in the light  of
    Miah [2014] UKUT 00515.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Ms Bremang said that the judge erred by  excluding  relevant  evidence,
    in the form of the marriage interview. Taking into account the  absence
    of the sponsor, the transcript of the interview  carried  more  weight.
    If she were unable to attend, through illness, the genuineness  of  the
    marriage could not  be  properly  tested  without  the  full  interview
    record.  This would reveal the extent of consistent answers, not merely
    those assessed by the Secretary of State and the  judge  as  discrepant
    answers.

9.   The judge accepted that some of  the  discrepancies  contained  in  the
    decision letter were minor but, without the transcript, the  extent  of
    consistent answers was simply not known.   Ms  Bremang  said  that  the
    sponsor was still unwell.  The evidence before the judge consisted of a
    medical certificate showing that she had been unable to work.

10.  Mr Tarlow relied on the rule 24 response.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant had  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.  The medical certificate showing  the  sponsor's  unfitness  for
    work came to an end in January 2014 and the hearing  was  over  a  year
    later.  There was nothing further by way of evidence.  Paragraph 19  of
    the decision dealt with the discrepancies.  Although it was true that a
    full interview record was not before the Tribunal, the judge had access
    to the summary which appeared in  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter.  The judge concluded that some  discrepancies  were  minor  and
    some were significant and it was up to him to weigh the evidence before
    him.   There  was  nothing  unreasoned  or  perverse  in  the   judge's
    assessment or conclusions.

11.  In a brief discussion, Ms Bremang said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    would be the appropriate venue for remaking the decision, if  an  error
    were found, so that the full evidence could be weighed by a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Mr Tarlow inclined to the view that the Upper Tribunal
    should retain the case.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  The decision has been prepared by  a  very  experienced  judge  and  it
    bears all the hallmarks of  concision,  fluency  and  a  common  sense,
    pragmatic approach.  The judge drew attention to 18  points  which  led
    the Secretary of State to conclude that the marriage was  not  genuine,
    listed in the decision letter.

13.  In that letter, the discrepancies are described  as  arising  from  the
    marriage  interview.   Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the  record  of  the
    interview itself was not before the Tribunal.

14.  The President of the Upper Tribunal gave guidance in September 2014  in
    Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00515.
    The Upper Tribunal held that the Secretary of State's  decision  making
    process includes  a  process  whereby  comments,  or  opinions,  of  an
    interviewing officer are  conveyed  to  the  decision  maker.   In  the
    generality of cases, this practice does not contaminate the fairness of
    the decision making process.   However,  the  document  enshrining  the
    interviewer's comments, form ICV.4605, must be disclosed as a matter of
    course.  An appellant's right to a fair hearing dictates this course.

15.  The Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter,  dated  9th  April  2014,
    appears on a different template, ICD.3050.  The document containing the
    interviewer's comments was not before the Tribunal.  At paragraph 13 of
    the Upper Tribunal decision in Miah, the President  drew  attention  to
    the need to ensure that the essential elements of the case  against  an
    appellant are put to him.

16.  In the  present  appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter
    contained a list of discrepancies  but  without  the  interview  record
    itself or a full summary, it is impossible to put  those  discrepancies
    into context.  Unknown at present is the total number of questions  and
    the nature of any consistent answers  given.   Importantly,  the  judge
    noted the appellant's oral evidence that his sponsor explained  at  her
    interview that she was not good  at  remembering  things  and  receives
    treatment in the form of tablets.  The decision letter  bears  on  this
    aspect of the case.  In the list of bullet points on the second page of
    the letter, the decision maker has recorded that the sponsor claimed to
    suffer from schizophrenia and said she was on medication and had a  key
    worker.  That reflects in part what the appellant  told  the  judge  in
    evidence but not completely so.  The interview  transcript  would  have
    enabled the judge to test his claim that  the  sponsor  expressly  said
    that she was not good at remembering things.  If  the  transcript  does
    indeed support this claim, that might bear on  the  assessment  of  the
    discrepancies which emerged.

17.  The reasoning of the judge shows that he  gave  substantial  weight  to
    the discrepancies, other than those which were minor.  He was  entitled
    to draw attention to the absence  of  medical  evidence  regarding  the
    diagnosis of schizophrenia and any  effect  on  the  sponsor's  memory.
    Nonetheless, without the interview record or at least a full summary of
    it, part of the essential factual context was missing.

18.  The Secretary of State failed  to  provide  a  representative  but  the
    Tribunal had available broad case management powers, in rule 4  of  the
    2014 Procedure Rules, to adjourn the hearing for a short while, require
    production of the interview record and give the  appellant,  acting  in
    person at the time, a further opportunity to  obtain  relevant  medical
    evidence.

19.  For these reasons, and largely in the light of guidance given in  Miah,
    I conclude that there has been procedural unfairness and that the First-
    tier Tribunal's assessment was made without all the  relevant  evidence
    being before it.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside
    and must be remade.

20.  So far as venue is concerned, there will need  to  be  extensive  fact-
    finding in the light of the  interview  record  and,  perhaps,  medical
    evidence. The appropriate venue is the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing  a  material  error
    of law, is set aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at
    Hatton Cross, before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kimnell.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


