
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18386/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th June 2014                               |On 27th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS FLORA OWUSU ANSAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms A Okyere-Darko of BWF Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Claimant, Mrs Flora Owusu Ansah, date of birth 20th November  1977,
    is a citizen of Ghana.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (the SSHD) against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colyer whereby the judge allowed the appeal of Mrs  Flora  Owusu  Ansah
    (the Claimant) against the  decision  of  the  SSHD  to  refuse  her  a
    residence card.  The Claimant had applied for a residence card  as  the
    spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

Facts

 4. The Claimant, Mrs Flora Owusu Ansah, date of birth 20th  November  1977
    is a citizen of Ghana.  On  26th  September  2012  she  applied  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of Mr  Jean  Jacques  Ngeu  (the  Sponsor).   The
    Sponsor is a French national who is working in the United  Kingdom  and
    as such is exercising treaty  rights.   Whilst  the  Sponsor  has  been
    previously married that marriage was terminated by divorce  on  a  date
    prior to any date relevant to these proceedings.

 5. The Claimant came to the United Kingdom prior to 2010.  In January 2010
    the Claimant met the Sponsor.  Their relationship developed and by June
    2010 the Claimant had moved into the Sponsor's  address  in  Cambridge.
    From that day on the parties have lived together.

 6. In late 2010/early 2011 the Claimant  and  the  Sponsor  determined  to
    marry.  Because the Claimant was from Ghana she wanted  their  marriage
    to be recognised by her family in Ghana.  Arrangements  were  therefore
    made for a marriage ceremony to take place in Ghana.  The Claimant  and
    the Sponsor were  in  the  United  Kingdom  throughout.   The  marriage
    ceremony in Ghana was conducted by proxy.  It took place in Kumasi with
    various members of the  Claimant's  family  present.   Members  of  the
    Claimant's family not  only  represented  the  Claimant  but  also  the
    Sponsor at that ceremony.

 7. The issue in this appeal is whether that  wedding  ceremony  should  be
    recognised as valid in EU  law.   The  judge  found  that  the  wedding
    ceremony was lawful and in accordance with the laws of the  country  in
    which it took place, namely Ghana.  In coming to  that  conclusion  the
    judge assessed the evidence presented including an expert report from a
    Professor Woodman.

 8. It was accepted by all parties that issues of foreign law  are  matters
    of fact to be determined on the basis  of  evidence  presented  to  the
    Tribunal.  Whilst the evidence was such that the ceremony was performed
    in accordance with the laws of Ghana there was no evidence  as  to  how
    French law would treat the marriage.

 9. The contention by the SSHD is that whilst the marriage has been validly
    performed in Ghana it was necessary for the Appellant to prove that the
    marriage would be recognised as valid by French law.  The  SSHD  relies
    upon the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24.  The
    SSHD contends that the Appellant has the burden  of  proving  not  only
    that the marriage is valid as to form in the country where the marriage
    was performed, but also that the  "personal"  law  of  the  individuals
    concerned have to recognise that that is a  valid  marriage.   That  is
    that it was necessary for French law to recognise that the marriage was
    a valid marriage.

10. The contention on behalf of the Claimant is that  the  case  of  Kareem
    sets out a series of sequential questions as set out  in  the  headnote
    and that once it has been established that there is a  lawful  marriage
    certificate there is a valid marriage and there is no need to go on  to
    the remaining questions set out within the headnote.

11. In respect of this appeal there is no challenge to the fact that in its
    form the marriage of the  Claimant  to  the  Sponsor  is  lawful  under
    Ghanaian law.  It was accepted that it was a proxy  marriage  conducted
    according to customary law and that there was the appropriate level  of
    certification and confirmation that  the  marriage  was  recognised  in
    Ghanaian law.

12. The issue was whether or not it was  necessary  for  the  Appellant  to
    prove that it would be recognised in French law.

13. Both sides have relied upon the case of Kareem.  The headnote in Kareem
    provides as follows:-
         "(a) A person who is the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  a
             qualified person in the United Kingdom can  derive  rights  of
             free  movement  and  residence  if  proof   of   the   marital
             relationship is provided.
           (b)    The production of  a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a
             competent  authority  (that  is  issued   according   to   the
             registration laws of  the  country  where  the  marriage  took
             place) will usually be sufficient.  If not in English law  (or
             Welsh in  relation  to  proceedings  in  Wales),  a  certified
             translation of the marriage certificate will be required.
           (c)    A document which calls itself a marriage certificate  will
             not raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to  record
             unless it has been issued by an authority with legal power  to
             create or confirm the facts it attests.
           (d)    In appeals where there is no such marriage certificate  or
             where there is doubt that  a  marriage  certificate  has  been
             issued by a competent authority, then the marital relationship
             may be provided by other  evidence.   This  will  require  the
             Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was contracted.
           (e)    In such an appeal, the starting point will  be  to  decide
             whether a marriage was contracted between  the  Appellant  and
             the qualified person according to the national law of the  EEA
             country of the qualified person's nationality.  ..."

14. The contention on behalf of the  Claimant  is  that  here  there  is  a
    marriage certificate and as such there is no requirement to go on  from
    step (d) to step (e).  By reason of paragraphs (c) and (d) above it  is
    suggested  that  the  requirement  of  producing   a   valid   marriage
    certificate recognised in a country where the  marriage  was  performed
    was sufficient to establish that a marriage had taken place and  was  a
    valid marriage which should be recognised in the UK..

15. It is clear from paragraph 7 of Kareem that:-

         "In terms of EU law, the law of marriage can be said to  be  within
         the competence of the Member States."

16. As recognised in paragraph 10 of Kareem marriage  is  special  kind  of
    contract in that it changes a person's civil status.  In  dealing  with
    the change of status and by what law that should be  determined  Kareem
    at paragraph 11 states:-

         "11. We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a person is
             in a marital relationship is governed by the national laws  of
             the Member States.   In  other  words,  whether  a  person  is
             married is a matter that falls within the  competence  of  the
             individual Member States."

    It is for the law of individual Member States to determine  whether  or
    not their citizens are married.

17. In respect of this appeal  paragraphs  12  to  18  are  relevant,  they
    provide as follows:-


      12.        In addition to these points, the CJEU has established  that
          a Member State can expect persons claiming to be  family  members
          to establish that they meet the requirements of EU law (cf Jia (C-
          1/05) [2007] Imm AR 439, para  37ff).  Article  10(2)(b)  of  the
          Citizens  Directive  (2004/38/EC)  [1]  indicates  that   non-EEA
          nationals can establish that  they  are  family  members  by  the
          production of a document attesting to the existence of  a  family
          relationship. We are also aware that  the  jurisprudence  of  the
          CJEU just cited indicates that  in  the  absence  of  a  document
          attesting to  the  existence  of  a  family  relationship,  other
          evidence may be considered.

      13.        From this we infer  that  usually  a  marriage  certificate
          issued by a competent authority will be sufficient evidence  that
          a marriage has been  contracted.  Of  course,  a  document  which
          merely calls itself a marriage  certificate  does  not  have  any
          legal status. A certificate will only have legal status if it  is
          issued by an authority with legal power to create or confirm  the
          facts it  attests,  that  is,  by  an  authority  that  has  such
          competence. Where a marriage document  has  no  legal  status  or
          where such status is unclear,  other  evidence  may  be  used  to
          establish that a marriage  has  been  contracted.  However,  once
          again we find that these principles  do  not  help  us  determine
          whether  a  person  is  a  spouse  because  it  will  depend   on
          identifying the authority with legal power to create  or  confirm
          that a marriage has been contracted.

      14.        Whilst considering the issue of evidence  of  marriage,  we
          remind ourselves that the proof of the law of another country  is
          by evidence, including proof of private international law of that
          other country. Such evidence  will  not  only  have  to  identify
          relevant legal provisions in the other country but  identify  how
          they apply in practice. A lack of evidence  of  relevant  foreign
          law will normally mean that the party with the burden of  proving
          it will fail.

      15.        In light of the preceding considerations, the  question  we
          must answer is how we might identify which  national  legislation
          applies in a particular situation and how the  relevant  national
          legislation applies to the facts of the present case.

      16.        To answer this question, we start from the  fact  that  the
          rights of free movement and residence stem  directly  from  Union
          citizenship. According to  the  Treaties,  a  person  having  the
          nationality of a Member State is a Union citizen. It follows from
          these provisions that a Union citizen's rights of  free  movement
          and  residence  are  intrinsically  linked   to   that   person's
          nationality of a Member State. Judgments  of  the  CJEU  indicate
          that  where  there  are  issues  of  EU  law  that  involve   the
          nationality laws of Member States, then the law that applies will
          be the law of the Member State of nationality and  not  the  host
          Member State (cf Micheletti (C-369/90) [1992] ECR I-4239, para 10
          & 14). This is because nationality remains within the  competence
          of the individual Member States.

      17.        Spouses' rights of free movement and residence are  derived
          from a marriage having been contracted and depend on it. In light
          of the  connection  between  the  rights  of  free  movement  and
          residence and the nationality  laws  of  the  Member  States,  we
          conclude that, in a situation where the marital  relationship  is
          disputed, the question of whether there is a marital relationship
          is to be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State
          from which the Union citizen obtains nationality and  from  which
          therefore that citizen derives free movement rights.

      18.        The same conclusion may readily be reached by  a  different
          route.  Within  EU  law,  it  is  essential  that  Member  States
          facilitate the  free  movement  and  residence  rights  of  Union
          citizens and their spouses. This would not be achieved if it were
          left to a host Member State to decide whether a Union citizen has
          contracted a marriage. Different Member States would be  able  to
          reach different conclusions about that  Union  citizen's  marital
          status. This would leave Union citizens  unclear  as  to  whether
          their spouses could move freely with them; and  might  mean  that
          the Union citizen could move with greater freedom to  one  Member
          State (where the marriage would be recognised)  than  to  another
          (where it might not be). Such difficulties would be  contrary  to
          fundamental EU law principles. Therefore, we perceive EU  law  as
          requiring the identification of  the  legal  system  in  which  a
          marriage is said to have been contracted in  such  a  way  as  to
          ensure that the Union citizen's marital status is not at risk  of
          being differently determined by different  Member  States.  Given
          the intrinsic link between nationality of a Member State and free
          movement rights,  we  conclude  that  the  legal  system  of  the
          nationality of the Union citizen must  itself  govern  whether  a
          marriage has been contracted.




18. It is clear from paragraph 16 set out that a union citizen's rights  of
    free movement are intrinsically linked to  that  person's  nationality.
    The CJEU has set out that where there are issues of EU law that involve
    the nationality law of Member States then the law that applies will  be
    the law of the Member State of nationality  and  not  the  host  Member
    State.

19. Whilst in the normal course of events a marriage certificate  from  the
    country where the  marriage  was  performed  should  be  sufficient  to
    establish that the parties have married.  There is still within EU  law
    where the issue is the rights of free movement  a  requirement  that  a
    person's law of nationality has to recognise the marriage.

20. To do otherwise  would  mean  that  an  individual's  status  may  vary
    according to which of the Member States the individual is in.  Thus  an
    individual may be  married  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  not  married
    according to French law and capable of entering into a further marriage
    or of avoiding the consequences of the marriage by merely returning  to
    France.

21. That is clearly not the intention and effect of  the  case  of  Kareem.
    Kareem clearly  requires  that  the  law  of  the  nationality  of  the
    individual EU citizen is  the  law  that  determines  the  individual's
    status.   The  effect  of  that  is  that  having  defined  whether  an
    individual is married according to the law of the person's  nationality
    other Member States will give due recognition to that subject always to
    the caveat of public policy.

22. Accordingly it was necessary not only for the Claimant  to  prove  that
    the form of the marriage ceremony was legal according to  the  laws  of
    Ghana but also that the marriage was lawful according to  the  laws  of
    France.  There was no evidence before the judge as to what the  law  of
    France was.  The burden was upon the Claimant to  produce  evidence  to
    show that the change of status was lawful according to the national law
    of the Sponsor.  That they failed to do.

23. Accordingly the burden being upon the Claimant, the Claimant failed  to
    discharge that burden.  The judge therefore made a  material  error  of
    law in ruling that the marriage between the Sponsor  and  the  Claimant
    was a valid marriage and by reason thereof the parties were married.

24. I considered with the representatives if I found an error of  law  what
    course I should take as to the future disposal of the  appeal,  It  was
    accepted that I had all the necessary evidence before me  to  determine
    the case. I therefore indicated that I would decide  the  case  on  the
    basis of the evidence presented.

25. In any event the judge has gone on to consider that  the  Claimant  and
    the Sponsor are in a durable relationship.

26. As the parties are in a durable relationship consistent with  the  case
    of FD (Algeria) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 981 there is an  exercise  of  a
    discretion to be made by the Secretary of State as to whether or not to
    grant free movement rights to the Sponsor's partner, the Claimant.

27. For the reasons set out the Claimant has failed to prove that there  is
    a valid marriage  between  herself  and  the  Sponsor  which  would  be
    recognised in French law.  Evidence has been submitted subsequently  by
    the Respondent that French  law  does  not  recognise  proxy  marriages
    entered into by its citizens.  On the basis outlined it  has  not  been
    proved that there is a marriage which is recognised by French law.   As
    the rights under the EEA Regulations and  Charter  derived  from  there
    being a valid marriage the Claimant is  not  entitled  to  a  residence
    certificate on the basis of marriage.

28. However there is a durable relationship and it is not  challenged  that
    there is a durable relationship.  It is a matter under Regulation 8 for
    the Secretary of  State  to  consider  all  of  the  circumstances  and
    consider whether or not he will exercise his discretion  to  grant  the
    Claimant a residence card on that basis.

29. For the reasons set  out  the  appeal  is  allowed  and  the  following
    decision is substituted:-

      i) The appeal is dismissed under Regulation 7 and Regulation 17 of the
         EEA Regulations 2006.

     ii) The appeal is allowed to the extent  that  there  being  a  durable
         relationship between the Claimant and  the  Sponsor,  there  is  an
         application for a residence card which is  outstanding  before  the
         SSHD and which requires the SSHD  to  make  a  lawful  decision  on
         including the exercise of the discretion set out within  Regulation
         8 and Regulation 17.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
