
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18483/2010



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 July 2013                                |On 19 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               RUKAYYA CHATTUN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bonavero, Counsel, instructed by Oracle
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 8 April 1986.

2.   The appellant  appeals  against  Immigration  Judge  Widdup's  decision
    promulgated on 23  August  2010  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 19 March 2010  to  refuse  to  grant  her
    leave to remain under the provisions of the Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    scheme then in existence.  The Immigration Judge was not satisfied that
    the appellant was entitled to further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant as she was unable to show that Liverpool College of
    Management and Sciences (LCMS) was at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision a recognized or listed body or that it held a sponsor  licence
    under Tier 4 of the Points-Based System.

3.   In granting permission to the appellant to appeal on 19  October  2010,
    Senior Immigration Judge Latter  said  that  the  point  the  appellant
    sought to make was that the LCMS had previously been a listed body  but
    after she had completed her studies and been awarded  her  degree  from
    the University  of  London  at  some  stage  it  became  delisted.  The
    appellant conceded that she was not aware  of  what  happened  to  LCMS
    after she left it but in substance argued that subsequent events should
    not disqualify her from qualifying for leave to remain as a  post-study
    work migrant.  SIJ Latter doubted whether there was  any  substance  in
    this argument as the Rules required the college to qualify  in  one  of
    those capacities as at the date of decision.

4.   He granted permission however, in the light of  the  comments  made  by
    the Court of Appeal in Pankina and the  Tribunal  in  CDS,  as  it  was
    arguable that the appellant in the light of her circumstances may  have
    had  a claim on human  rights  grounds  which  the  judge  should  have
    considered.

5.   The appellant's appeal came before Senior  Immigration  Judge  Waumsley
    on 7 February 2011.  On the issue on which the respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application, SIJ Waumsley at paragraph 28  stated  that  he
    was satisfied that the interpretation contended for by the  appellant's
    representative was the correct  one,  namely  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  relevant  paragraph  by
    showing that the UK institution at which she studied was a  "recognised
    or listed body" at the time when she was studying there.  She  was  not
    required to show that it was still a recognised or  listed  body  at  a
    later date, i.e. when she made her application for leave to remain as a
    Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.  Indeed  that  interpretation  was
    confirmed in a subsequent decision by the Upper Tribunal in the case of
    Adubiri-Gyimah and Others (Post-study work - listed institution)  Ghana
    [2011] UKUT 123 (IAC).  This finding in the appellant's favour does not
    bring the appellant's appeal to an end.

6.   At the hearing before SIJ Waumsley the HOPO adopted  a  further  ground
    on which he  submitted  that  the  appellant's  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules was bound to fail in any event, namely that  she  had
    failed to disclose a  material  fact,  i.e.  her  real  intention  when
    applying for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-study Work) Migrant  was
    not to undertake post-study work, but to continue with her  studies  at
    Birkbeck College.  The HOPO based that submission  on  the  appellant's
    own words as set out in her grounds of appeal dated 3 April 2010 and as
    confirmed  by  her  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  before   the
    Immigration Judge.

7.   After hearing evidence briefly from the appellant,  SIJ  Waumsley  said
    he was satisfied that when the appellant applied for leave to remain as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, her real intention in doing so  was
    to enable her to continue her  studies  at  Birkbeck  College,  not  to
    enable her to  undertake  post-study  work.   Her  application  was  in
    reality just a device to evade  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which she could not satisfy as a  student,  and  her  failure  to
    disclose her true intention to the respondent amounted to a failure  to
    disclose a material fact  to  the  respondent  within  the  meaning  of
    paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules.   This  was  a  mandatory
    ground for refusal.  For  that  reason  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

8.   The appellant appealed that decision to the Court  of  Appeal.   On  18
    December 2012 Sullivan LJ on reading the Notice of Consent dated 22 May
    2012 signed by the solicitors for the  appellant  and  the  respondent,
    treated the application for permission to  appeal  as  allowed  without
    determining the merits of the appeal for the reasons  set  out  in  the
    Statement of Reasons.  He remitted the matter to the Upper Tribunal for
    determination.

9.   It was for this reason that  the  appellant's  appeal  came  before  me
    today for hearing.

10.  The following paragraphs from the Statement of  Reasons  are  pertinent
    to this appeal.  They are:

         "9.  The appellant made an application for permission to appeal  to
             the Court of Appeal. This was refused by Lord Justice  Toulson
             on 5 August 2011 on the basis that it was not  unfair  of  the
             Senior Immigration Judge to permit the SSHD to raise the issue
             of  material  misrepresentation  since  it  arose   from   the
             appellant's own grounds of appeal.


         10.  The appellant renewed to an oral hearing  and  permission  was
             granted by  Lord  Justice  Sullivan  on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant's case was unusual in that the particular ground  of
             objection was raised at such a late stage and as a result  the
             appellant was not afforded a fair opportunity to  present  the
             full picture.


         11.       The  respondent  accepts  that  there  is  merit  in  the
             appellant's  argument  that  there  may  have  been  potential
             procedural  unfairness  in  the  method  in  which  the  Upper
             Tribunal dealt with the unusual  circumstances  of  a  further
             ground being raised at a very late stage.


         12.  In the particular factual circumstances  of  this  case,   the
             Secretary of State agrees that the appeal  should  be  allowed
             and the case  should be remitted to the Upper Tribunal of  the
             Immigration and Asylum Chamber."


11.  Mr Bonavero sought to argue that it  was  down  to  the  respondent  to
    raise again the issue of dishonesty, that is  whether  the  appellant's
    real intention was to study when she made her application for leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Worker.  I ruled against him  because  I
    took the view that Lord Justice Toulson  had  ruled  that  it  was  not
    unfair of the Senior Immigration Judge to permit the SSHD to raise  the
    issue of material misrepresentation since it arose from the appellant's
    own grounds of appeal.  There was therefore no need for Miss  Isherwood
    to raise the issue again.  What was at issue was that the appellant was
    not afforded a fair opportunity to present the full  picture  and  that
    led to a procedural unfairness.

12.  It became the only live issue which needed a decision.

13.   I  heard  evidence  briefly  from  the  appellant.   She  adopted  her
    statement of 4 July  2013.   When  questioned  by  Miss  Isherwood  she
    confirmed that it was her intention at the time of the  application  to
    study part-time at Birkbeck College and work full-time.  Her  part-time
    studies would be undertaken in the evening.  Indeed  I  am  aware  that
    Birkbeck College engages in part-time evening courses only.

14.  On the evidence before me I found that there was no dishonesty  by  the
    appellant.  She had throughout her application and  grounds  of  appeal
    stated precisely what her intention was - it was to  study  an  evening
    course at Birkbeck College whilst at the same time undertaking  daytime
    employment. That employment would amount to post-study work.   I  found
    that there was no dishonest intention by the appellant

15.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
