
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18781/2015
     IA/18789/2015
     IA/28814/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th January 2017                       |On 6th February 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Mr Paa Adjei Nyanson (FIRST APPELLANT)
                MASTER Kofi Obeng NYANSON (SECOND APPELLANT)
               Akua Asamoah Tweneboah KODUAH (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Reid, Counsel, for Perera & Co Solicitor, London

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana born on  4th  October  1982,  15th
    February 2008 and 3rd June 1981  respectively.   The  First  and  Third
    Appellants are the parents of  the  Second  Appellant.   They  appealed
    against the decisions of the Respondent dated for the First and  Second
    Appellants 7th May 2015 and for the Third  Appellant  4th  August  2015
    refusing their applications for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    under the Immigration Rules HC 395  as  amended.   Their  appeals  were
    heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet  and  allowed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 1st August 2016.

 3. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett on 24th
    November 2016.  The permission states that the Respondent  refused  the
    applications for leave to remain under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules and it is arguable that the judge  erred  when
    considering MA [2016] EWCA Civ 705 by relying on paragraphs 41  and  42
    when at paragraph 45 it was concluded that the court should have regard
    to the conduct of the parents of a qualifying child when considering  a
    grant of leave to remain in the UK..

 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file.  This  response  states  that  the
    judge has taken the correct approach to MA Pakistan.  Paragraph  17  of
    that case is quoted.  This refers to Section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act
    and the response states  that  if  public  interest  does  not  require
    removal there is no other basis on which removal  could  be  justified.
    Reference is made to interference in the right  to  private  or  family
    life under Article 8(1) which can only be justified where  there  is  a
    sufficiently  strong  countervailing  public  interest  falling  within
    Article 8(2).  The response then refers to paragraph  45  of  the  said
    case  of  MA  which  states  that  when  considering  the  question  of
    reasonableness under Section 117B(6) the only significance  of  Section
    117B(6) is that where the seven year Rule is satisfied it is  a  factor
    of some weight leaning in favour of leave to remain being granted.  The
    response goes on to state that the correct approach is to take  account
    of the public interest when considering whether it is reasonable for  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK but that strong countervailing reasons
    are required not to grant leave to remain where  a  child  has  accrued
    seven years' residence.  The response states that when paragraph 22  of
    the decision in this case is read in its  entirety  that  is  what  the
    judge has done.  The judge noted paragraph 46 of MA and makes reference
    to the significant weight attached to seven years' residence by a child
    and the fact that the child in this case has put  down  roots  and  has
    developed social, cultural and educational links with the UK.  Based on
    this the judge has concluded that the removal of the  Second  Appellant
    from the UK would not be reasonable.  The response  goes  on  to  state
    that if this is not accepted and an error is found it is not a material
    error as strong factors are required to refuse leave  to  remain  to  a
    child who has resided in the UK for seven years but the judge has found
    no such factors in this case.

The Hearing

 5. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  basis  of  the  judge's
    consideration of reasonableness is in paragraph  22  of  his  decision.
    She submitted that MA Pakistan has not been properly considered in this
    paragraph.  The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 45 of the said
    case of MA and submitted that this states that when  reasonableness  is
    considered and paragraph 117B(6) is taken into account public  interest
    must be considered.  This paragraph states that the  only  significance
    of Section 117B(6) is that where the seven year Rule is satisfied it is
    a factor of some weight leaning in favour  of  leave  to  remain  being
    granted.  At paragraph 114 of the said case of MA  it  is  stated  that
    with regard to the reasonableness test the judge requires  to  consider
    the immigration history and status of the parents.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that based on the said case of MA  and
    paragraph 42 thereof it is not putting blame on the child to  say  that
    the conduct of the parents should weigh on the scales when the  general
    public   interest   in   effective   immigration   control   is   under
    consideration.   She  submitted  that   everything   requires   to   be
    considered.  She submitted that the judge does not do that at paragraph
    22 of his  decision and in fact incorrectly states:

         "The decision in MA concludes that there is  no  justification  for
         reading  the  concept  of  reasonableness  so  as  to   include   a
         consideration of the conduct and immigration history of the parents
         as part of an overall analysis of the public interest."

    The Presenting Officer submitted that this is  a  misinterpretation  of
    the case of MA and because of this misinterpretation the  judge  failed
    to look at the Second Appellant's  parent's  history  although  it  was
    necessary for him to do so when making his decision on public interest.
     She submitted that had their  history  been  taken  into  account  the
    judge's decision might well have been different and this is a  material
    error of law.

 7. Counsel for the Appellant made her submissions referring to the Rule 24
    response, at paragraphs 5(b) and 5(c).  She  submitted  that  what  the
    judge has to decide is whether it would be reasonable for the child  to
    go to Ghana with his parents and if the judge finds it to be reasonable
    then a decision has to be made as  to  whether  the  family  should  be
    removed.  She submitted that one sentence in the judge's decision is an
    error but this cannot be read on its own, it has to be  read  with  the
    rest of the paragraph and when paragraph 22 is read in full there is no
    material error.

 8. She submitted that the Second Appellant was aged 7 when the application
    was made and aged 8 at the  hearing.   She  submitted  that  7  is  the
    relevant age.  The child speaks English and some Fanti and has  engaged
    with the Ghanaian community in Enfield.  She submitted that  the  judge
    looked at all the reasonable factors in this case  and  dealt  properly
    with the case of MA Pakistan.  The judge refers to Section  117B(6)  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  refers  to
    paragraph 46 of the case of MA which states that the fact that a  child
    has been in the UK for seven years must  be  given  significant  weight
    when carrying out the proportionality  exercise.   She  submitted  that
    although the judge makes an error when he states that the  conduct  and
    immigration history of the parents should not be taken into account  as
    part of an overall analysis of  the  public  interest  he  goes  on  to
    correct this error by stating that significant weight has to  be  given
    to a child who has been in the United Kingdom for seven years.

 9. Counsel submitted that the judge gave significant weight to this in his
    proportionality assessment and  I  was  referred  to  the  Home  Office
    guidance about this which states that strong reasons need to  be  given
    for the removal of a child who has been in the United Kingdom for seven
    years, who is not British.

10. I asked Counsel if she accepts that the parent's conduct must be  taken
    into account in the proportionality assessment and she said  she  does.
    That is what MA states.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  judge  has  erred  when  he
    refers to the conclusion  in  the  case  of  MA  Pakistan  and  he  has
    misunderstood that case.  She submitted that at  paragraph  22  of  the
    decision no reference is made to the history of  Appellants  numbers  1
    and 3.  She referred to paragraphs 20 and 21 of the decision  in  which
    Appellants 1 and 3's history is mentioned under the  heading  "Findings
    of Fact".  The judge makes reference to discrepancies in the First  and
    Third Appellants' evidence.  She submitted however that when the  judge
    deals with reasonableness at paragraph 22 there is no  mention  of  the
    Second Appellant's parent's conduct  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  she
    submitted  that  paragraph  23  of  the  decision  cannot  be  correct,
    particularly when the judge states "It follows therefore that the First
    and Third Appellants' appeals must also succeed."  She  submitted  that
    the  judge  has  not  considered  their  history  when   reaching   his
    conclusion, in particular the fact that the First  Appellant  has  been
    illegally in the United Kingdom since 2000 and the Third Appellant  has
    been in the United Kingdom illegally since 2005.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that it is correct that strong reasons
    are needed for a child who has been in the  United  Kingdom  for  seven
    years to be removed and that the seven year period is  significant  but
    the judge has erred in his proportionality  assessment  by  not  taking
    into account the history of the child's parents.

13. Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  has  taken  the
    correct approach and there is no material error of law in the decision.
     Counsel however submitted that she has to accept that at paragraph 22,
    the child's parent's history has not been taken  into  account  in  the
    proportionality assessment, although it is clear from the remainder  of
    the decision that he is aware of their history.  She submitted that the
    history would not be sufficient to  outweigh  the  child's  seven  year
    residence in the United Kingdom and that the  decision  should  not  be
    overturned.

Decision and Reasons

14. The judge in this case has dealt with the  relevant  Immigration  Rules
    and has based his decision on the said case of MA Pakistan  and  Others
    but he has misinterpreted the conclusion in this case.

15. At paragraph 22 of the decision he states

         "The decision in MA concludes that there is  no  justification  for
         reading  the  concept  of  reasonableness  so  as  to   include   a
         consideration of the conduct and immigration history of the parents
         as part of an overall analysis of the public interest."

    This is not what the said case of MA states.  When public  interest  is
    considered in a proportionality assessment the child's parents' conduct
    has to be taken into account.  Paragraph 22  of  the  decision  is  the
    relevant paragraph and it is clear from this that when  proportionality
    was dealt with by the judge the conduct of the child's parents was  not
    taken into account.

16. I find that had the judge taken this into account  his  decision  might
    have been different.  The history might well be sufficient to  outweigh
    the child's seven year residence in the UK.  I  find  that  this  is  a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision of Judge Sweet  promulgated
on 1st August 2016 and this decision must be set aside.

No  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can   stand.    Under   Section
12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice  Statement  7.2  the  nature  and
extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be re-made  is
such that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
The member of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case is not  to
include Judge Sweet.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


