








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18306/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 1 October 2015                    |on 19 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           Mr Bijan Mohammadzadeh
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, counsel, instructed by Turpin and Miller
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freer  dismissing   his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision dated 29 May 2013 cancelling his leave to  remain
    in the UK as a business person and to remove him to Iran.

 2. At the commencement of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Savage
    produced a printout confirming that the appellant has departed from the
    UK on 19 October 2014, travelling on a flight from London  Heathrow  to
    Iran.

 3. Mr Hoshi stood the matter down. On returning to Court, he  stated  that
    he had been in touch with the appellant whom he confirmed is in Iran.

 4. In the circumstances, it was common ground that the appellant's  appeal
    is to be treated as abandoned.

Notice of Decision

 5. Pursuant to Rule 17A of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I find that the appeal is to be  treated  as  abandoned.  In  the
    circumstances, I direct that the Upper Tribunal shall send the  parties
    a notice informing them that the  appeal  has  been  treated  as  being
    abandoned.
    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 15 October 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
