
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18266/2015
     IA/16250/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd November 2016                         |On 24th November 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Ms V O O
                                MASTER S O O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh  (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bello (Apex Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of  State,
      with permission, against a decision of the First tier Tribunal,  Judge
      Asjad, promulgated on 17th May 2016 following a hearing at  Birmingham
      on  25th  April  2016.   In  that  decision  the  Judge  allowed   the
      Respondents' appeals against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
      refuse them leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  their  private
      and family life.

   2. The Judge allowed the  appeals  on  the  basis  of  s.117B(6)  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, finding it unreasonable to expect the
      second Respondent, the first Respondent's son, to leave the UK.


   3. For the purposes of continuity and clarity, in this decision  I  shall
      hereafter refer to VOO and SOO as the Appellants and the Secretary  of
      State as the Respondent.


   4. The Appellants are both  citizens  of  Nigeria.  The  first  Appellant
      arrived in the UK (pregnant) with a family  visit  visa  in  2006  and
      overstayed. Her son, the second Appellant, was born  on  28th  January
      2007. Neither have been back to Nigeria since.


   5. During the hearing the Judge heard evidence from the  first  Appellant
      that she would be at risk on return to Nigeria and  he  rejected  that
      evidence and indeed  found  her  to  be  largely  without  credibility
      (changing her claim when she was caught out in inconsistencies).


   6. The Judge then  went  on  to  consider  article  8,  first  under  the
      Immigration Rules. Neither could meet the requirements of Appendix FM.
      The judge went on to consider and find that  neither  could  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276 ADE. The first Appellant  had  lived  in
      the UK for less than 20 years and the second Appellant, at the date of
      application, had not yet reached the age  of  7.  It  is  notable  and
      regrettable in this case that the Appellants made their application on
      1st March 2010 but the decision appealed against  was  only  taken  in
      April 2015.


   7. The Judge then went on  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling
      reasons to consider Article 8 outside the Rules and found  that  there
      were, because the second  Appellant  found  himself  in  a  precarious
      position with an uncertain future through no fault his own but  rather
      through the actions of his mother.


   8. The Judge then went through the questions set  out  by  Razgar  [2004]
      UKHL 27 and found that the case revolved around proportionality.


   9. The Judge recognised that the best interests of the second  Appellant,
      as a child, were a primary consideration and  noted  the  Respondent's
      point, as set out in the Letter of Refusal that no evidence  had  been
      produced to show that the second Appellant had developed relationships
      with friends in the UK and that any such relationships could  continue
      via  modern  methods  of  communication.  The  Judge  found  that  the
      Secretary of State had carried  out  an  analysis  as  required  under
      section 55 of the 2009 Act but then considered the best  interests  of
      the child for himself. He noted that the  second  Appellant  had  been
      born in the UK and was now over nine years of  age.  He  had  attended
      school where he was doing very well and had formed ties to the  UK  in
      terms of his education, his  friends  and  the  culture.  Nigeria  was
      wholly alien to  him.  He  found  that  the  second  Appellant's  best
      interests were to remain in the UK. The Judge referred himself to  the
      seven-year yardstick which has long been in place. The Judge found  it
      would not be reasonable to expect this child, of over  nine  years  of
      age, to leave the United Kingdom and on the  basis  that  his  primary
      carer was his mother, that she satisfied the requirements  of  section
      117B(6) and he allowed the appeal.

  10. The grounds upon which the Secretary of State  relies  in  challenging
      that decision assert that the seven-year test is not the  only  matter
      to be considered and whilst it is correct that a child should  not  be
      punished for the actions of its parent, the Judge should have  engaged
      with the fact that the child would be removed with his mother as  part
      of the family unit. It asserts that the Judge failed to consider  that
      in failing to meet the Immigration Rules there needs to  be  something
      compelling to merit a grant outside the Rules  under  Article  8.  The
      fact that the second Appellant had been at school and made friends was
      insufficient to outweigh the public interest in removing them.


  11. I find the grounds to be without merit. The significance  of  a  child
      having been in the United Kingdom for more than seven years  has  long
      been recognised, initially by the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  and
      thereafter by inclusion in the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276  ADE
      and more recently  by  the  inclusion  of  section  117B  (6)  to  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  Judge  approached  this  appeal
      correctly  in  first  considering  whether  the  Appellants  met   the
      Immigration Rules and found that they did not.  He  did,  contrary  to
      what is asserted in the grounds, appreciate that in order to  consider
      Article 8 outside the Rules there had to be compelling reasons  to  do
      so and found that the compelling reason in this case was the situation
      that the second Appellant found himself in, namely with  an  uncertain
      future and precarious status through no fault of his own.


  12. In considering Article 8 the judge followed the  appropriate  step-by-
      step approach. He recognised a  primary  consideration  was  the  best
      interests of the second Appellant and found those to be by met by  his
      remaining in the UK.


  13. He went on to consider the situation for this young Appellant who  had
      been in the UK over nine years and who  had  no  links  whatsoever  to
      Nigeria. Case law has made clear that once a child has embarked on his
      education then his life is no longer completely centred on his  family
      but will embrace other persons including teachers  and  friends.  This
      child knows nothing other than UK  society  and  culture  and  Nigeria
      would be alien to him.


  14. Whilst the mother's immigration  history  is  appalling,  she  has  no
      criminal convictions and this is not a  deportation  case.  The  Judge
      found that the best interests of the second  Appellant  and  the  fact
      that it would be unreasonable to expect him to leave the only  country
      he has ever known outweighed the public interest in removing those who
      do not meet requirements of the Immigration Rules.


  15. It must also be of significance that an application  lodged  today  by
      the second Appellant under paragraph 276ADE would in  all  probability
      succeed.


  16. I find the Judge did not err in his approach to  this  appeal  and  he
      followed the procedure set out by case law  and  came  to  conclusions
      open to him on the evidence. Given that this child is very  nearly  10
      years of age (when he will be able to apply for a British passport)  I
      cannot conceive of any judge coming to a different conclusion than the
      one reached by this judge.


  17. I find that the First tier Judge's is not tainted by an error of  law
      and it is upheld.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 23rd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed                              Date 23rd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

