
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18697/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 March 2015                     |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                 ABDUL AWUAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Afzal of IIAS Levenshulme
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge V A  Osborne  promulgated  on  2  December  2014   which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the Rules and under Article 8 of
    ECHR .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  24  February  1982  and  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.

 4. The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom as a student in 2006 and
    his leave continued until 2009 when he made an in time application  for
    further leave to remain. In June 2010 the Appellant applied for and was
    granted a certificate of approval to marry and on 21 September 2010  he
    married Gemma Pope who is a British citizen.

 5. On the basis of his marriage the  Appellant  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of a settled  person  which  was  refused
    without a right of appeal.

 6.  On  20  April   2011   the   Appellant's   representatives   requested
    reconsideration of the decision supported by a statement of  additional
    grounds.

 7. On 4  April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and made directions for his  removal.  The  refusal  letter
    gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant could not succeed under  the  new  Immigration  Rules
         that addressed Article 8  either  as  a  partner  or  parent  under
         Appendix FM.

      b) There were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  parties  enjoying
         family life together in Bangladesh

      c) The Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  that
         addressed private life under paragraph 276ADE.

      d) All of the Appellant's circumstances were considered including  his
         previous convictions, the fact that he had stayed after  his  leave
         expired, there had been no significant  delay  in  considering  his
         case by the Respondent. There was no basis on which  the  Appellant
         was entitled to a grant of discretionary leave.

The Judge's Decision

 8. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Osborne  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision on the basis  of  the  papers  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal the Appellant's representatives having indicated that an  oral
    hearing was not required as the Appellant's spouse  was  'unwell'.  The
    Judge in her decision :

      a) Summarised the reasons given in the refusal  letter(paragraphs  15-
         23).

      b) Summarised the grounds of appeal which were  in  essence  that  the
         marriage was genuine and that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  were
         entitled to live in the United Kingdom as she is a British citizen;
         that  the  Appellant  had  an  extensive  private  life;  that  the
         application was made before the new Rules came into force  in  July
         2012.(paragraphs 24-26)

      c) Summarised the documentary evidence at paragraphs 27-32.

      d) At  paragraphs  35-44  the  Judge  considered  the  application  by
         reference to Article 8 outside the Rules and section  117B  of  the
         Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      e) Concluded that in the circumstances  the  decision  to  remove  was
         proportionate.

 9. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    considering the application by reference to the new Rules and that  the
    reasoning in relation to Article 8 was inadequate. On 27  January  2015
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  gave  permission  to  appeal  on  both
    grounds.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Afzal  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that in essence:

      a) The Judge had been wrong to consider the new Rules.

      b) The Judge failed to give adequate weight to the delay in  making  a
         decision in this case relying on FH [2009] EWCA Civ 385

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnstone submitted that :

      a) The judge  in  her  decision  took  into  account  the  period  the
         Appellant had spent in the United Kingdom  (paragraph  26)  and  at
         paragraphs 36 -37 confirmed the lack of evidence of the Appellant's
         private life confirming that she could only proceed on the basis of
         the evidence before her.

      b) The Judge was obliged to apply section 117B  and  was  entitled  to
         reach the conclusion she did.

Caselaw

12. In relation to the materiality of errors of law I have  looked  at  the
    recent Court of Appeal  decision in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    1636 that an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal may be  considered
    immaterial -

         " ... if it is clear that on the materials before the Tribunal  any
         rational Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion or if it is
         clear that, despite its failure to  refer  to  the  relevant  legal
         instruments, the Tribunal has in fact applied the test which it was
         supposed to apply according to those instruments."

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. This was an application made on 20 April 2011  for  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules it having been accepted that the Appellant could  not
    meet any of the Rules then in force for leave as a  spouse  and  having
    had his last application for leave as a spouse rejected with  no  right
    of appeal.

15. The first ground argued was that the judge erred  in  considering  this
    matter under the new Rules in force after 9 July 2012  given  that  the
    application in issue was made on 20 April 2011.

16. I am satisfied that while the Judge set out in  some  detail  that  the
    refusal letter did consider the Appellant's application by reference to
    the new Rules given that the Appellant could not meet  the  suitability
    requirements or  the  income  requirements  there  is  nothing  in  her
    findings to suggest that the Judge assessed the case  by  reference  to
    Appendix FM in her decision. At paragraph 33 she made reference to  how
    Article 8 had  been  encompassed  into  the  Rules  and  the  test  for
    eligibility in EX.1 but in essence her findings related  to  Article  8
    using the guidance set out in Razgar as Mr  Afzal  had  to  concede  in
    opening his case and therefore I do not find an error  of  law  in  her
    assessment of the relevant law that applied.

17. Mr Afzal argues that the Judges  findings  were  inadequate.  I  remind
    myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set  aside)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the requirement  for  sufficient
    reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although there is a
    legal duty to give a  brief  explanation  of  the  conclusions  on  the
    central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons need  not
    be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard  to
    the material accepted by the judge."

18. I remind myself that this was an application that the Judge dealt  with
    on the papers at the  Appellant's  request.  This  appeal  was  not  an
    opportunity to argue caselaw and grounds  or  indeed  advance  evidence
    that was not placed before the Judge. The Judge indeed commented on the
    dearth of evidence in the case before her, all of the  statements  were
    barely a page long and while there was reference to medical  issues  in
    relation to both the Appellant's spouse and her mother  and  it  having
    been made clear (if that was  required)  that  such  claims  should  be
    supported by medical evidence, no such evidence was provided. The Judge
    was therefore entitled to state that she dealt with  the  case  on  the
    basis of the evidence before her.

19. I am satisfied that the Judge on the basis of the  inadequate  evidence
    before her reached conclusions that were open to her in her  assessment
    under Article 8. She found that there was no  documentary  evidence  to
    support the claims made in relation to either the  Appellant's  spouses
    diabetes or her mother suffering from MS  and  therefore  she  did  not
    accept that the facts were as claimed. She identified that the claim of
    the Appellant and his wife that it was their right to choose where they
    lived because the wife was a British citizen was not  guaranteed  under
    Article 8 (paragraph 33). There was no evidence placed before her  from
    any source to show why  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's wife to live with him in Bangladesh. The reference  to  the
    'political situation' was unsupported by any background  material.  The
    Judge's assessment of the nature and quality of their family  life  was
    limited by the dearth of evidence and the fact that they had  chosen  a
    paper hearing and therefore such evidence was never expanded upon.

20. The Judge also properly  self  directed  herself  in  relation  to  the
    provisions  of  section  117B  in  relation  to  the  public   interest
    considerations which were relevant given that  the  Appellant  and  his
    spouse were, for example , on their own evidence not self sufficient as
    the  Appellant's  wife  was  on  benefits  and  they  were  financially
    supported by his sister (paragraph 41) . The judge  under  section  117
    was also required to give little weight to a relationship formed  while
    the Appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully  (paragraph 43)

21. While Mr Afzal now argues that the Judge failed to give adequate weight
    to the delay in making a decision in this case I have read the  grounds
    of appeal that the Judge had before her and nowhere was it argued  that
    delay was a material consideration in this  case.  As  indicated  above
    this hearing is not  an  opportunity  to  re  litigate  the  case  more
    effectively and while reliance is now placed  on  FH  there  are  other
    cases which make clear that delay  is  not  determinative  such  as  ES
    (Togo) and Anr v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 230 where a delay of 5  years  in
    making a decision in relation to leave to remain was found by the Court
    of Appeal not to mean that the Respondents' decision was unsustainable.

22. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 15.3.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
