

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/18007/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 18 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

                                   Between

                                MR FAHIM ALI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss F Shaw of Counsel briefed by Hillcrest
Solicitors LLP,
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.     The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18  September  1980
      appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  tribunal  judge  Prior
      promulgated on 31  March  2014  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
      respondent's decision 9 May 2013 refusing his application for  further
      leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
      Migrant.
   2.      First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge gave the  appellant  permission
      to appeal stating that it was arguable that the  First  Tier  Tribunal
      Judge erred in finding that mandatory information was missing from the
      specified documents concerning the appellant's sponsor  and  paragraph
      245AA did not assist him. He found that on the facts of the  case,  it
      is capable of doing so.

T
       First-Tier Tribunal's findings.


   3. The first-tier Tribunal found the following.


   I. Subparagraph 41-SD (b) (ii) (7) provides that a letter  from  a  legal
      representative confirming the validity of signatures  on  each  third-
      party  declaration  provided  must  clearly  show,   inter-alia,   the
      following. "If the third party is not a venture capitalist firm,  seed
      funding competition or a UK government Department, the number  of  the
      third party's identity document (such as a passport or -  an  identity
      card), the place of issue and the dates of issue and expiry". This was
      a mandatory documented information requirement of the rules  no  doubt
      designed to ensure that the respondent could be  reasonably  satisfied
      that the chosen legal representative of  the  applicant  had  properly
      checked the identity of the third-party providing the  funds  for  the
      applicant's business, was properly identified and  meaningful  details
      recorded from the chosen identity of the third party.


  II. In this application this mandatory requirement was neither  fully  nor
      satisfactorily complied with. The legal  representative's  letter  did
      not, in terms of the provisions of the rules clearly show  the  number
      of the third party's national identity card since the  letter  did  no
      more after stating that the third party's  name  continue  as  follows
      CNIC nO 35201-148 7714-one" I find as claimed by  the  author  of  the
      refusal letter, the letter did not clearly  show  the  number  of  the
      third party's identity document.  Furthermore  the  letter  failed  to
      state at all the place of issue of  the  card  and  his  issuance  and
      expiry dates. Although the appellant's counsel referred to the  matter
      of evidential flexibility she did not seek  explicitly  to  rely  upon
      paragraph 245 AA of the rules. In any event it was my view  that  such
      reliance could not have assisted the appellant. It was the appellant's
      testimony that he was aware that the legal representative's letter had
      to contain details of the third-party (his father's (identity and that
      it was  legal  advice  that  he  secured  the  necessary  letter  from
      Pakistan.


 III. The other requirements of the Immigration Rules were satisfied.


    Grounds of appeal

   4.      The appellant in his grounds of appeal states the following which
      I summarise. The Judge found that the  legal  representative's  letter
      was not adequate  as  per  the  requirements  in  paragraph  41-SD  or
      appendix A of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  representative's  letter
      plainly included the third party's identity card number and  therefore
      the Judge erred in concluding otherwise. It is however  accepted  that
      the place and date of issue and date of expiry of  the  third  party's
      identity document was not given.


   5.      The appellant  submits  that  after  receiving  the  respondent's
      refusal decision, he sought legal  advice  and  became  aware  of  the
      omission  in  the  legal  representative's  letter  and  secured   the
      necessary  letters  and  his  explanation  was   misinterpreted.   The
      Immigration Rules provide for  flexibility  where  there  is  such  an
      omission and the Judge erred in failing to  consider  this  evidential
      flexibility approach.


   6.     The Judge did not say why paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules
      could not assist  the  appellant.  There  are  two  provisions  within
      paragraph 245 AA that ought to have been considered and applied to the
      appellant's case. Paragraph 245 (a) states that "where part 6A or  any
      Appendix 6 referred to in part 6A states that specified documents must
      be provided, the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer  or  the
      Secretary of  State  shall  only  consider  documents  that  has  been
      submitted with the  application,  and  will  only  consider  documents
      submitted after the application when they are submitted in  accordance
      with subparagraph (b).  Subparagraph  (b)  (iv)  states  that  if  the
      applicant has submitted a specified documents  in  which  "a  document
      does not contain all the specified information"  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer may contact the  applicant's  representative  in  writing  and
      request  the  correct  documents.  The  requested  documents  must  be
      received at the address specified in the request within seven  working
      days of the date of the request."


   7.     It is hard to think of a clearer example of a  situation  where  a
      document does not contain all of the specified information than in the
      current case. The only missing information on the appellant's father's
      identity document was the place, date of issue and expiry date.


   8.      The second provision within paragraph  245  AA  that  could  have
      assisted the appellant is contained in  paragraph  245  AA  (d)  which
      provides that if the applicant  has  submitted  a  specified  document
      (iii) "which does not contain all of the  specified  information,  but
      the missing  information  is  verifiable  from  (1)  "other  documents
      submitted with  the  application",  the  application  may  be  granted
      exceptionally, providing  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration
      Officer or the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  the  specified
      documents  are  genuine  and  the  applicant  meets  all   the   other
      requirements".


   9.        In  the  appellant's  case  the  identity  of  the  third-party
      investor, who is the appellant's father, was abundantly clear from the
      other documents submitted with the application and that paragraph  245
      AA (d) potentially applied.


10. Paragraph 245 AA confers a discretion within the Immigration Rules.  The
   exercise of this discretion is therefore challengeable  on  appeal  under
   section 84 (1) (f) of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
   The Judge was therefore obliged to consider whether this discretion or to
   have been exercised differently and was free to substitute his or her own
   discretion for that of the decision maker. His failure to  even  consider
   doing so  was  a  clear  material  error  of  law.  The  Judge  therefore
   materially erred by his failure to properly consider paragraph 245 AA and
   the decision should be set aside.


    Rule 24 response


11. The respondent in their view 24 response was not in the bundle of
   documents.


    The hearing

12. It was accepted by both parties at the hearing that the Judge had made
   a material error of law in not considering all the evidence in the appeal
   and the decision is not in accordance with the law and should be sent
   back to the Secretary of State awaiting their lawful decision.


    Decision whether there is an error of law in the determination


13. The complaint made against  the  Judge  is  that  he  did  not  say  why
   paragraph 245 AA would not assist the appellant's appeal.


14. The Judge stated that in  the  appellant's  application  this  mandatory
   requirement was neither fully nor satisfactorily complied with. The legal
   representative's  letter  did  not,  in  terms  of  provisions   of   the
   Immigration Rules, clearly show the number of the third party's  national
   identity card since the letter  did  no  more  than  state  his  father's
   identity card as, "CNIC No;  5201-148 7714-1". He said  that  letter  did
   not show the number of the  third  party's  identity  document.  It  also
   failed to state the place of issue of  the  card  and  the  issuance  and
   expiry dates. He said that this is a mandatory  requirement  because  the
   respondent  should  be  reasonably  satisfied  that  the   chosen   legal
   representative of the applicant has properly checked the identity of  the
   third-party providing  the  funds  for  the  appellant's  business,  were
   properly identified and  meaningful  details  recorded  from  the  chosen
   identity document of the third-party.


15. Paragraph 245 AA states that when a document provided by  the  appellant
   does not contain  all  the  specified  information  and  if  the  missing
   information  is  verifiable  from  other  documents  submitted   by   the
   appellant, the Secretary of State has a discretion within the Immigration
   Rules to either contact the appellant to obtain further information or to
   consider whether she is satisfied the requirements  have  been  fulfilled
   because other documents submitted with the application  demonstrate  that
   the appellant's sponsor is deemed to be a valid third-party  support  for
   the appellant's application for an entry clearance as an entrepreneur.


16. The appellant claims that the his  father's  identification  number  was
   provided within the  legal  representative's  letter  which  matched  the
   translation of the third party's identification card, his passport,  bank
   statements and two further letters from the legal adviser which  were  in
   the appellant's bundle and this evidence was sufficient to show  a  valid
   sponsorship.


17. The law  is  clear  that  there  are  certain  circumstances  where  the
   respondent must look at all the evidence provided by the appellant to see
   if the missing  information  is  verifiable  from  other  documents.  The
   respondent also has a duty to contact  the  appellant  to  either  verify
   details in an  application  or  ask  the  appellant  to  provide  further
   information to satisfy the Immigration Rules and I find that in this case
   this was not done.


18. In the circumstances, I find that there was a material error of  law  in
   the determination and I set it aside.

      DECISION

  19. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the First-tier determination,
      dismissing the appeal against the refusal of  variation  of  leave  to
      remain as an entrepreneur, is  set  aside,  and  the  application  for
      variation of leave remains outstanding before the Secretary of  State,
      to await a fresh decision in the light of my findings.


Signed by

First-tier Tribunal Judge
Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            Dated this 16th day of July 2014
Mrs S Chana


