
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18420/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 16th January 2015                          |On 30th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                    ms Kulsumbanu Usman Ahmed Musa patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ruparelia (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S J Pacey, promulgated on 18th November 2014, following a hearing
    at Nottingham on 4th August 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of  Ms  Kulsumbanu  Usman  Ahmed  Musa  Patel.   The
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

2.   The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who  was  born  on  16th
    January 1979.  She made an application for a  derivative  card  on  9th
    January  2014,  and  she  now  appeals  against  the  refusal  of   her
    application on 9th April 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

3.   The Appellant's claim is that she is the primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen, her son, Mr Mustaqeem Patel, who was  born  on  20th  December
    2006.  She has said that there was another person in the UK  who  could
    or does assume caring responsibility for her  son,  and  this  was  the
    child's father, but he works full-time and could  not  look  after  his
    son, given his  work  responsibilities.   The  Appellant's  husband  is
    British and he was born on 2nd September 1978.

The Judge's Findings

4.   The  judge  had  regard  to  the  refusal  letter,  which  stated  that
    Zambrano,  did  not  establish  that  a  third  country  national  (the
    Appellant) would have a right to reside  as  a  "family  member".   The
    Appellant's husband was a British citizen.  The Appellant could not  be
    regarded as sharing equally with him the responsibility  for  her  son.
    The husband of the Appellant voluntarily undertook  employment.   There
    was no reason why he could not continue to care for the  child  if  the
    Appellant was forced to leave the United  Kingdom.   Consideration  was
    given to Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.

5.   The judge concluded that the Appellant's child was under 18 and  was  a
    British citizen living in the  UK.   There  was  no  evidence  of  poor
    immigration history or of criminality.  The Appellant was faced with  a
    scenario where she would either have  to  leave  the  country  (in  due
    course) taking her son with her, or being separated  from  her  husband
    and her son from his father, or the son would have to remain  with  his
    father, separating the husband from the wife  and  mother  from  child.
    The United Kingdom was the only country that the son had known.  He was
    now almost 8 years of age.  If the Appellant failed in her  appeal  she
    could not remain in the United Kingdom.  The judge  concluded  that  it
    would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  son  to  relocate  with  the
    Appellant as it would "effectively deprive him of the genuine enjoyment
    of the substance of the  rights  attaching  to  the  status  of  an  EU
    citizen".  The judge concluded that the Appellant would  succeed  under
    EX1(A).

Grounds of Application

6.   The grounds of application state that the  judge  erred  in  making  no
    findings in relation to the main issue, namely, whether the child would
    be required to leave the UK.  The judge  also  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal under EX1(A) because she considered EX1 in isolation and  failed
    to consider any other requirements.  On 30th September 2014  permission
    to appeal was granted.

Submissions

7.   At the hearing before me on 16th January 2015, Mr Smart,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent, relied upon the Grounds of Appeal.  He stated
    that the judge looked at the case of Sabir [2014] UKUT 63 at  paragraph
    9 of the determination.  The judge said that this case was  a  reminder
    that EX1 was not a freestanding provision.  However,  she  went  on  to
    reason that

         "the reasoning in Sabir addressed a scenario in which  the  parties
         could not satisfy the substantive requirements for limited leave to
         remain as a partner.  That is  not  the  scenario  in  this  appeal
         before  me.   That  being  so,  I  have  considered  the   relevant
         provisions of EX1" (see paragraph 9).

    Mr Smart submitted that this conclusion was wrong.

8.   For his part, Mr Ruparelia submitted that he  relied  on  the  skeleton
    argument.  Mr Ruparelia submitted that the judge had an overriding duty
    to safeguard the bests interests of the child under Section 55  of  the
    BCIA 2009.  The judge also had to consider Article 8  as  part  of  the
    decision-making process.  It was being argued now by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer that, since a removal decision had  not  been  made,
    there was no need to consider Article 8.  However, this  was  wrong  in
    the light of Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Reg 15A(3C)) 2006 EEA  Regs  [2013]
    UKUT 00089).  With respect to the case of Sabir [2014] UKUT 63, it  was
    said there that EX1 was not a freestanding provision.   It  has  to  be
    considered as a component part of the leave granting rule.   The  court
    here  was  assessing  EX1  on  the  basis  of  a  subsisting   parental
    relationship between the Appellant and the child.  In  Sabir  what  was
    being considered was the relationship of the Appellant and the partner.



9.   In reply, Mr Smart submitted that the decision was  on  an  application
    for a derivative rights status.  The decision was not on an application
    for Article 8 consideration.  The refusal letter  states  that,  "since
    you have not made a valid application ... consideration  has  not  been
    given ..." to Article 8.  The application of EX1 is  only  for  removal
    cases.

No Error of Law

10.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.   The  judge  was
    entitled to consider Article 8 and entitled to consider EX1.  In  Ahmed
    [2013] UKUT 00089, the judge stated (at paragraph 69) that,

         "we accept that our decision entails considering the refusal  of  a
         residence card as indicative of an intention to  remove,  but  note
         that this was also how Mr Deller  asks  us  to  regard  it  in  the
         context of our Article 8 ECHR consideration  and  it  seems  to  us
         there is no principled basis for taking a different  view  in  this
         respect from that taken in respect of  human  rights  law:  see  JM
         (Liberia)".


Notice of Decision

11.  There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th January 2015



