
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18190/2014
     ia/18191/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd September 2014                          |On 3rd October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             priyantha udagedara
              nilusika aranthi pathirana imiya pathirannahalage
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms R Frantzis, Counsel instructed by Craig
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellants' appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Wilson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 9th July 2014.

 2. The appellants produced to the judge an email from the Premium Customer
    Service Team Licensed Manager at UK Visas  and  Immigration  dated  3rd
    February 2014 in which she stated:

         "Although the  students  qualification  has  been  awarded  I  have
         arranged  for   the   students   application   to   be   considered
         exceptionally in the light of their previous refusal,  should  they
         wish to submit a fresh application."

 3. The appellant did submit a  fresh  application  in  reliance  upon  the
    undertaking but it was refused on the sole basis that it was made after
    the end of his Ph.D course.

 4. It is implicit from the email that that would not  be  the  basis  upon
    which the application would be refused.

 5. The judge did not consider the email. He dismissed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules  because  it  was  a  requirement  of  the  doctorate
    extension scheme under which his application was considered that it  be
    made no more than 60 days before the expected end of his Ph.D course.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on the basis that  the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

 7. Mrs Pettersen accepted that the respondent had not  acted  lawfully  in
    inviting the appellant to make a fresh application out of time but then
    refused it on the basis that his qualification had been  awarded  (Rule
    245X(n)(iv)).

Decision

 8. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It is re-
    made as follows.  The appeal is allowed insofar as the appellants await
    a lawful decision from the Secretary of State.







Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


