

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/18494/2014
                                                               IA/18333/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated.   |
|on 5 February 2015                            |on 9 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             VIOLETA SADOVSKA &
                                SALEEM MALIK
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the First Appellant:             Mr M D Templeton of Quinn, Martin &
Langan, Solicitors
For the Second Appellant:    Mr D Brown of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:            Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The second appellant, a citizen  of  Pakistan,  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student in April 2011.  He did not study, which he says was  due  to  a
    dispute with his college over fees.  He overstayed.  His first  contact
    with the respondent after arrival was by letter  dated  11  April  2014
    from Drummond Miller (then acting for  both  appellants).   The  letter
    advised that he and the first appellant, a citizen  of  Lithuania,  had
    been in a relationship since February 2013, had resided together  since
    6 April 2014, and planned to marry on 17 April 2014.  They  offered  to
    be interviewed in advance of the wedding.

 2. The appellants were interviewed by Immigration  Officers  on  17  April
    2014, following which the marriage did  not  proceed,  and  immigration
    decisions were made against both  appellants.   Judge  Doyle  dismissed
    their appeals to the First-tier Tribunal by  determination  promulgated
    on 19 August 2014.

 3. The following points are common ground: the appeals turn on the Judge's
    finding that the proposed marriage was of the nature of a  marriage  of
    convenience; there is a distinction between living at the same  address
    and marital, or quasi-marital, cohabitation; and if the Judge's finding
    on the nature of the marriage is  legally  unsustainable,  the  outcome
    should be a remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The grounds of appeal for the first appellant are along  the  following
    lines.  The Judge took the evidence of interviews of the appellants  by
    Immigration Officers as the most important and made  negative  findings
    thereon before going to the other evidence,  an  approach  contrary  to
    Papajorgi [2012] UKUT 00038.  He failed to reach his  decision  on  the
    totality  of  the  evidence  and  ignored  various  items  of  evidence
    supporting the case for the appellant, including  her  contention  that
    she was interviewed without an interpreter and aggressively as a result
    of which she completely lost her confidence.  The Judge fell  into  the
    misunderstanding that the appellant's mother lived in Edinburgh whereas
    she lives in Lithuania.

 5. The grounds of appeal for the second appellant say that his agents  had
    written to the respondent with a prior offer to be interviewed but  the
    respondent nevertheless chose to interview them  at  the  wedding  when
    they were both highly anxious and when no interpreters were used.   The
    Judge failed to take into account the  evidence  of  cohabitation.   He
    thought that the solicitors' letter was part of a grand plan  to  enter
    into a marriage of convenience, when its purposes were to make a  human
    rights allegation to protect an "in country" right of  appeal,  and  to
    avoid disruption of the marriage.  There is  inadequate  reasoning  for
    discounting the positive evidence of a genuine relationship.  There was
    a failure to  follow  Papajorgi  which  lists  criteria  identifying  a
    marriage of convenience, only one of which applied (inconsistency  over
    personal details).

 6.  On  29  September  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade   granted
    permission to  appeal,  thinking  it  "arguable  that  the  Judge  gave
    inappropriate weight to inconsistencies that were mainly evident during
    interviews  in  arguably  stressful  circumstances   and   without   an
    interpreter."

 7. In a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  the  respondent  says
    that the grounds are only disagreement and that the Judge came  to  his
    conclusion having considered all the evidence.





 8. The  appellants'  representatives  adopted  each  other's  grounds  and
    arguments.  As agreed between them, Mr Brown made the first submission.

 9. A supplementary inventory for the second appellant, filed  for  the  UT
    hearing, contains copies of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, the
    EU Commission Handbook on marriages of  convenience,  and  Miah  [2014]
    UKUT 00515.  The inventory  continues  with  evidence  to  support  the
    cohabitation of the appellants since the second appellant was  released
    on bail granted by  the  respondent.   (The  first  claimed  period  of
    cohabitation was from 6 to 17 April 2014, and the second from  16  June
    2014 to the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and continuing.)

10. Mr Brown argued as follows.  The Judge fell into the same error as  the
    decision-maker of treating the interview as the central or even as  the
    only issue and as the starting point - paragraphs 12 (b) (c) and (d) of
    the determination.  There had been significant evidence and submissions
    about deficiencies and unfairness in the interview process.  The second
    appellant was interviewed in her third language (after  Lithuanian  and
    Polish) and the first appellant was interviewed in his second language.
     The Judge did not mention those matters.  The  interview  process  had
    been conducted in breach of common law rights of  fairness,  for  which
    there was no excuse,  the  appellants  having  offered  themselves  for
    interview in advance.  Miah at paragraphs 2, 9 and  11  emphasised  the
    need for procedural fairness in conduct of such interviews.  The  terms
    used by the Judge at paragraph 11(d), "Immigration Officers intercepted
    both appellants" at the Registry  Office,  and  at  12(o),  "the  first
    appellant was found" at the Registry Office, suggested wrongly that the
    appellants had  been  apprehended  in  some  subterfuge.  Papajorgi  at
    paragraph 37 and Miah at paragraph 6 refer to  the  Handbook  guidance.
    At section 4.2.1.2 the  guidance  aims  at  minimising  the  danger  of
    considering a genuine couple as abusers.   The  double  lock  safeguard
    requires identification firstly  of  hints  of  no  abuse.   The  Judge
    adopted "a parody of the correct  approach".   He  considered  negative
    factors first, the wrong way round, and gave positive factors little if
    any consideration.  He should have taken as  his  starting  points  the
    evidence of cohabitation, the attendance of the appellants together  at
    a wedding, a visit  together  to  London,  money  sent  by  the  second
    appellant to the first while  he  was  in  detention,  and  photographs
    showing mutual affection.  In  spite  of  submissions  on  the  correct
    approach and on the positive evidence he began at the wrong  end.   The
    nearest he came to a finding on cohabitation  was  at  11(i)  where  he
    noted signature by both appellants of a lease on 6 April 2014 and their
    statement of 28 March 2014 that they had not yet acted on the  idea  of
    living together.  He made an incorrect finding at  11(a),  repeated  at
    14(c), that the appellant's mother [not just her two sisters] lives  in
    Edinburgh.  The mother's absence on 17 April 2014 from  Leith  Registry
    Office was found to be significant at 12(o), so the point was material.
        He had "drunk from the poisoned well" of the interview evidence and
    fallen into material errors.





11. Mr Templeton said that the Judge had gone wrong  in  principle  in  his
    approach to the interview evidence, and also on the particulars  before
    him.  The first appellant's statement, quoted in her grounds,  stressed
    her terror at  interview,  the  aggression  of  the  interviewers,  her
    English being not of a high standard, and the absence of an offer of an
    interpreter.  The Judge was not bound to accept her evidence but he had
    to explain what he made of  it.   He  did  not  deal  with  documentary
    evidence about the appellants residing at the same address, the  second
    appellant booking a hotel for a romantic break,  and  effectively  said
    nothing  about  cohabitation.  12(j),  which  says  that  evidence   of
    commitment to one another was limited in time, was  no  more  than  lip
    service to matters which should have been the starting point  but  were
    treated as peripheral.

12. Mr Matthews pointed out that at most the appellants shared  an  address
    for only 11 days up to 17 April 2014.  He accepted that the Judge  fell
    into a factual error about  the  first  appellant's  mother  living  in
    Edinburgh.  However, the Judge was correct to note  that  she  has  two
    sisters there.  The Judge's point at 12(o) about the absence  from  the
    wedding of her "friends and female relatives" living in the  same  town
    remained valid after allowing for the error.   No  real  complaint  was
    raised about the interview of the second appellant.  The Judge had  not
    dealt expressly with the complaints of the  first  appellant,  but  any
    attraction in that ground was only  superficial.   It  was  not  to  be
    presumed that the Judge overlooked matters which were before  him,  and
    he did not have to mention all the evidence.  What the  appellant  said
    was in substance not capable of making a difference.  She has  been  in
    the UK since 2007 and worked throughout that period.  Her  English  was
    good enough for that purpose and to form and carry  on  a  relationship
    leading up to marriage, English being the only common language  of  the
    appellants.  The interview questions were straightforward and there was
    nothing to suggest any linguistic difficulty in dealing with them.  The
    records of both interviews show that the appellants were asked if  they
    were happy to be interviewed in English and answered, "Yes".  With  the
    letter of 11 April 2014 the appellants produced a statement from  Arkan
    Hassan, a friend of  the  second  appellant,  who  says  that  the  two
    appellants  met  at  a  disco  night  and  "instantly  hit  it  off  in
    conversation".  Another friend, Ajaz Qureshi,  says  that  he  saw  the
    appellants "at ease in  each  others'  company,  often  finishing  each
    other's jokes" and mentions "the brisk  flow  of  conversation  between
    them".   The first appellant could not realistically say  in  light  of
    that evidence that she was terrified and confused by  simple  questions
    in English.  The appellants made much of offering to be interviewed  in
    advance, but the notice period was very short, and the respondent  does
    not have teams  of  officers  standing  idly  by  to  respond  to  such
    requests.  It was only to be expected under  those  circumstances  that
    the interview came to be on the  day  of  the  proposed  wedding.   The
    appellants anticipated and were prepared for that, so  it  came  as  no
    shock, which made the  inconsistencies  on  obvious  points  even  more
    telling.  The substantive points which the  first  appellant  seeks  to
    address from the interview are whether she has been in Morocco once  or
    three times, which was insignificant; which city the first appellant is
    from, which she accepts she did not remember;  and  the  names  of  his
    brothers and sisters, which she accepts she did not  know.   There  was
    good reason  to  be  sceptical  of  her  claims  about  the  interview.
    Although the appellants  now  made  much  of  those  claims  not  being
    examined, they did not raise any point to  make  the  appellants'  case
    better.  The Judge did not use  the  words  "intercepted"  and  "found"
    incorrectly.  That complaint was  no  more  than  a  semantic  quibble.
    There was no error of treating the evidence in the wrong order.   Under
    the heading "findings of fact" at 11(a)-(j) the Judge set  out  matters
    which were relatively uncontentious,  broadly  tending  to  favour  the
    appellants.  Under the heading "conclusions" at 12(a)-(r)  he  analysed
    the rest of the  evidence,  logically  starting  with  the  interviews.
    While those were at the heart of the case, the  Judge  expressed  other
    concerns, such as the absence of witnesses  from  the  hearing  and  of
    guests from the wedding.  The Judge did not expressly mention that  the
    appellants  shared  an  address  from  June  2014  but  that  does  not
    necessarily mean a genuine relationship.  The one factual error exposed
    was immaterial.  The other grounds had no underlying substance.

13. The response for the  appellants  was  that  the  Presenting  Officer's
    analysis of the evidence  could  not  make  up  for  the  Judge  having
    overlooked it, and it should not be assumed that the  Judge  must  have
    reached similar conclusions.

14. I reserved my determination.

15. In Papajorgi an ECO thought that a marriage of 14 years  and  of  which
    there were two children with everyone living in a common household  was
    one of convenience.  The case turned  on  information  provided  on  an
    application form, not at interview.  What it establishes  is  that  the
    question for a  Judge   is  "...  in  the  light  of  the  totality  of
    information before me,  including  the  assessment  of  the  claimant's
    answers and any information provided, am I satisfied that  it  is  more
    probable than not that this is a marriage of  convenience?"  (paragraph
    39).

16. The  Judge  here  did  not  say  anything  about  the  conduct  of  the
    interviews, and it is correct that a determination should not be upheld
    by reasons  lacking  from  it.   However,  it  is  also  right  that  a
    determination should not be overturned because it is silent on a  point
    which on examination is an empty one.  Miah  emphasises  the  need  for
    procedural  fairness.   There  is  nothing  in  that  case  or  in  the
    information  about  the  interviews  in  this  case  which  shows   any
    unfairness to either appellant which ought  to  have  been  taken  into
    account in assessing their contents.  The letter of 11  April  2014  is
    carefully constructed on the  instructions  of  the  appellants.   They
    offer to be interviewed and do not request interpreters.   They  agreed
    to be interviewed  in  English  on  17  April  2014.   The  Immigration
    Officers had  no  reason  to  doubt  the  appellants'  willingness  and
    capacity to undertake such interviews.

17. The appellants later protest noisily, but they do not show that even if
    something did go wrong about their interviews there  is  anything  they
    might have offered to make their case significantly better.

18. This aspect of the grounds seeks to put an artificial distance  between
    the  appellants  and  the  failure  of  their  case  to  stand  up   to
    straightforward examination.

19. The error about where the first appellant's mother lives is immaterial.
     The  Judge's  point  is  not  much  diminished  by  removing  her  and
    considering only the absence of friends and two sisters.

20. The case for the appellants has been put as strenuously as it could be,
    both in the First-tier Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal.  However,  I
    think that the criticisms of the Judge fall short of their mark.   Read
    fairly and as a whole, the determination sets out the points broadly in
    favour of the appellants at paragraph 11 before turning to analyse  the
    contentious issues at paragraph 12.  That passage  could  not  sensibly
    start  anywhere  else  than  with  the  interviews.   The  sub-headings
    "findings of fact" and "conclusions" are  inaccurate,  but  it  is  the
    content which matters.  The overall analysis is in line with Papajorgi.



21. The appellants have not shown any such error of law as  to  entitle  or
    require the Upper Tribunal to interfere with the determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, so it shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            6 February 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




