
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/18857/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 13 September 2016                          |On 15 September 2016         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                            VIRAL VINODBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bazini, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 22 December  2015,  in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  to
    vary his leave to remain and to remove the appellant under s47  of  the
    Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2006.

 2. No anonymity direction has been sought and none is required.


Background

 3. The claimant is an Indian citizen. He was granted leave to enter the UK
    as a student on 9 December 2009 and his leave expired on 30  May  2011.
    On 21 April 2011 he was granted further leave to remain  as  a  student
    until 18 August 2014. On 17 August 2014 he applied for further leave to
    remain as a Tier 4  (general)  student  migrant.  His  application  was
    refused because his proposed college was not listed as a Tier 4 sponsor
    on 5 May 2015.  He had been informed of this by letter dated 28 January
    2015 and allowed 60 days to obtain a new sponsor and CAS  but  had  not
    done so.  The appellant issued a notice of appeal.  On 2 December  2015
    the appellant's solicitors faxed the tribunal seeking an adjournment on
    the grounds of the appellant's illness which would  be  exacerbated  by
    the distance he lived from the hearing centre and the fact  the  appeal
    was in the float list. They also asked that the appeal  be  transferred
    to a London hearing centre from Birmingham.  It  was  stated  that  the
    appellant's evidence was "very crucial and the appeal cannot be  justly
    determined without the presence of the  appellant".   That  application
    was refused by Judge Grimmett on 2 December 2015 on the basis there was
    no medical evidence.  The FTTJ reconsidered the application on the  day
    of the hearing, 2 December 2015, and decided to proceed.  He  dismissed
    the appeal.


 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was granted  in  the
    following terms:

         "...


         2. The grounds contend that the judge made an arguable error of law
         in failing to grant a request for an adjournment of the hearing  by
         the appellant.  The appeal was listed to be  heard  on  3  December
         2015 at Birmingham Hearing Centre.  The appellant's representatives
         despatched a letter to the tribunal dated 2 December 2015 which was
         received by the Tribunal by facsimile transmission at  13:46  on  2
         December 2015. The appellant's representative's letter  was  before
         the Judge at the hearing. Paraphrasing the contents of the  letter,
         the  appellant  lived  far  from  the  hearing   centre   and   was
         experiencing acute suffering. The judge  remarked  that  a  medical
         note or letter had not been supplied  by  the  representatives  and
         remarked that it was incumbent upon the representatives "to produce
         medical evidence to support the contention that the  appellant  was
         ill". The judge made an arguable error of law in  finding  that  it
         was incumbent on the appellant or his  representatives  to  provide
         medical evidence.  As  it  was,  the  appellant's  representatives'
         letter dated 2 December 2015 contained considerable  detail  as  to
         the appellant's medical condition which effectively  precluded  his
         journey from Harrow to Birmingham for the purpose of attending  the
         hearing.


         3. The consequence of the judge's exercise of discretion so  as  to
         refuse to grant an adjournment was exceedingly serious and  onerous
         for the appellant whose appeal was decided without the judge having
         the benefit of hearing him give evidence. The respondent  has  very
         many cases and does not entertain a personal interest in them.  The
         judge made an arguable error of law in failing to grant the request
         for an adjournment  in  such  circumstances.  The  application  for
         permission is granted."


 5. Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 6. Mr Bazini, for the appellant, accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    notified that his solicitors' application for an adjournment  had  been
    refused by the Tribunal on 2 December 2015, the day before the due date
    for the hearing.  He submitted that the issue was the FTTJ's failure to
    take into account the considerations required by Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  Such an application  could  not  be
    refused on the basis that it was incumbent on the applicant to  produce
    medical evidence; there were a number  of  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account, including fairness and the interests of  justice.   The  issue
    was not, according to Nwaigwe, whether it was open to or reasonable for
    the Judge to refuse the adjournment application. The judge should  have
    considered whether it was fair to do so.  The issue was not whether the
    original refusal of an adjournment should stand; the FTTJ had  embarked
    on a  reconsideration  of  the  application  on  his  own  motion.  The
    appellant's position was that he had not been given a "60  day  letter"
    by the respondent, as should have been evident to  the  FTTJ  from  the
    discrepancy in the dates in the refusal letter. It  was  relevant  that
    the FTTJ did not reject the suggestion that the appellant was  ill;  he
    only noted the absence of medical evidence; there had been no  previous
    adjournments and there was no suggestion of  an  appalling  immigration
    history. The appellant had done nothing wrong. Furthermore, the  FTTJ's
    finding at paragraph 12 was unreasonable and perverse.


 7. Mr Avery noted there had been no application before the  FTTJ.  He  had
    looked at the decision already taken  by  Judge  Grimmett;  the  FTTJ's
    consideration of the background circumstances was in  order.  He  noted
    the  appellant's  claimed  circumstances.  He  noted  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer was ready to proceed and wished to do  so.   He  had
    observed the decision to refuse the application  to  adjourn  had  been
    conveyed to the solicitors.  Whilst the FTTJ may not have made specific
    reference to "fairness" it was implicit that this was in his mind.  His
    decision was appropriate on the facts.  There had been no reference  in
    the grounds of appeal to the FTT to the appellant's not having received
    a 60 day letter from the respondent. Thus the FTTJ's findings  on  that
    issue at paragraph 12 were appropriate.

 8. In reply, Mr Bazini reiterated his earlier submissions and referred  to
    the facts in Nwaigwe which, he said, were  similar:  the  appellant  in
    that case had not served a  bundle,  the  appellant  was  ill  and  the
    solicitors had written in advance of the hearing.

Discussion and Findings

 9. The power to adjourn the hearing  arises  under  Rule  4(3)(h)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


10. In exercising his power under the Procedure Rules the FTTJ was required
    to have regard to the overriding objective and the parties'  obligation
    to co-operate with the Tribunal which are set out at Rule 2:

         "2.- The overriding objective of these  Rules  is  to  enable  the
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


      1) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
          a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to  the
             importance of the case, the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
             anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of  the
             Tribunal;
          b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in  the
             proceedings;
          c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able  to
             participate fully in the proceedings;
          d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and
          e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration
             of the issues.


      2) The Tribunal must seek to give effect to the  overriding  objective
         when it-
          a) exercises any power under these Rules; or
          b) interprets any rule or practice direction.


      3) Parties must-
          a) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and
          b) co-operate with the Tribunal generally.


11. I have been referred to Nwaigwe and I cite the  headnote  for  ease  of
    reference:


         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."


12. The decision of the FTTJ in Nwaigwe was made  in  the  context  of  the
    previous Procedure Rules 2005.  The UT in Nwaigwe found the former Rule
    21(2) to be a  provision  of  critical  importance.  This  provided  as
    follows "The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an  appeal  on  the
    application of  a  party,  unless  satisfied  that  the  appeal  cannot
    otherwise be justly determined".   This is analogous to the  overriding
    objective in the new procedure rules 2014 which is applicable when  the
    Tribunal exercises its power under the Rules and interprets  any  rule.
    The UT noted in Nwaigwe the "fundamental common law right,  namely  the
    right of  very  litigant  to  a  fair  hearing".   Notwithstanding  the
    amendment of the Rules, this principle remains valid  and  indeed  this
    was anticipated in Nwaigwe (paragraph 9) to be the case.


13. I also  note  the  guidance  at  paragraph  7  of  Nwaigwe:  "where  an
    adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is  important
    to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
    the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the test to be  applied  is  that  of
    fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to  a
    fair hearing? Any temptation to review the conduct and decision of  the
    FtT through the lens of reasonableness  must  be  firmly  resisted,  in
    order to avoid a misdirection in law. In a nutshell,  fairness  is  the
    supreme criterion."

14. I am satisfied that, as in Nwaigwe, the FTTJ focussed on the absence of
    medical evidence in reaching his decision, rather than the fairness  of
    the hearing. He also inferred there was a  duty  on  the  appellant  to
    provide such evidence having been  told  the  reason  for  the  initial
    refusal of his application.  There  is  no  such  duty  save  that  the
    appellant should cooperate with the Tribunal according to the procedure
    rules.  Given the absence of any  reference  in  the  decision  to  the
    procedure rules or fairness generally, I am unable to  infer  that  the
    issue of fairness was addressed by the FTTJ.  There is no suggestion in
    the FTTJ's reasons that he doubted the appellant was ill  (albeit  that
    might be inferred).   Given the failure of  the  FTTJ  to  address  the
    issue of whether or not the proceedings could be  conducted  fairly  in
    the absence of the appellant, I find that his decision not  to  adjourn
    the hearing is an error of law. In reaching this  decision  I  bear  in
    mind that the FTTJ was reconsidering the  earlier  application  for  an
    adjournment which had been refused by Judge Grimmett. However, fairness
    is an issue which the FTTJ was obliged to address  in  the  context  of
    considering whether or not to proceed in the absence of  the  appellant
    and since he had taken it upon himself to reconsider  the  application,
    he should have done so in a way which took account of  the  appellant's
    right to a fair hearing.


15. I turn to the issue of whether or not the error of law was material. As
    in the case of Nwaigwe, also a PBS case, "the sole question for the FtT
    was whether, based on an assessment of the  documentary  evidence,  the
    Secretary of State's decision was sustainable".  The FTTJ  was  limited
    to consideration of the evidence of the appellant as submitted with his
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student.  Mr  Avery
    conceded before me that there had been no evidence in the  respondent's
    bundle that the 60 day letter had been sent to  the  appellant.  Indeed
    even the 60 day letter itself was not in  the  respondent's  bundle.  I
    agree with Mr Bazini that the inconsistencies in the dates when the  60
    day letter was sent and the register was checked should have caused the
    FTTJ to consider whether the hearing could have been conducted  fairly,
    given there was no copy of that letter in the respondent's bundle.  The
    absence of the letter from the bundle and any  proof  of  service  also
    calls into question the basis on which the FTTJ was  able  to  find  at
    paragraph 12  that  the  appellant's  application  had  been  "properly
    suspended for the required 60 days to  allow  him  to  submit  a  fresh
    application in a different category".  There was no  evidence  to  that
    effect before the FTTJ.

16. In these circumstances, I find that the error of law is material.

17. The parties agreed that, in such circumstances, the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to  be  taken.
    Mr Bazini requested that this should be at Hatton Cross hearing centre,
    which is closer to the appellant's home, and Mr Avery did not disagree.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  Hatton  Cross  hearing
    centre, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the
    Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),
    before any judge aside from FTTJ Lodge.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 14 September 2016






                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. The respondent is to file and serve a copy of her letter of 28  January
    2015 notifying the appellant he had 60 days in which to  obtain  a  new
    sponsor and CAS, together with proof of service of that letter  on  the
    appellant.


 2. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 14 days before the date of the hearing in the First Tier Tribunal.

 3. The appeal is listed at Hatton Cross with a time estimate of two  hours
    to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 14 September 2016






