
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number IA/18426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th July 2016                    |On 06th September 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                MD RUHUL ALAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr W Talukder
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant entered the UK as a student and subsequently applied to
    remain as the spouse of the Sponsor, a British national. The
    application was refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of
    the 10th of April 2014. The Refusal Letter contained a notice under
    section 120 of the 2002 Act. The Appellant under Notice and Grounds of
    Appeal of the 17th of April 2014 and pursuant to the section 120 notice
    served additional grounds on the 14th of April 20145, this was after
    the first listed hearing had been adjourned in November 2014 and before
    led to an adjournment of a hearing listed on the 22nd of April 2015 for
    the Home Office to consider the new grounds.

 2. The appeal was listed for hearing on the 6th of November 2015 before
    Judge Thorne at Taylor House. It is clear from decision that there was
    a further application for an adjournment as the Home Office had not yet
    considered the Appellant's additional grounds and hoped to do so within
    5 weeks, although that time scale was not guaranteed. For the reasons
    given in paragraphs 18 and 19 the application was refused and the
    appeal was heard in the usual way.

 3. In paragraph 31 the Judge accepted the financial documents that had
    been submitted and referred to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules but
    not to Appendix FM-SE. There had been no cross-examination of the
    Appellant or Sponsor on the documents and it was not suggested that the
    Sponsor was not in receipt of the income.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
    grounds of application of the 2nd of January 2016. It was argued that
    the Judge had not considered paragraph 12 of Appendix FM-SE which
    listed the permitted benefits that provided exemption from the higher
    income threshold and required at least one personal bank statement in
    the preceding 12 months that showed the payment into the account. There
    were no bank statements prior to the application or the section 120
    additional grounds. The Appellant had not met the Immigration Rules and
    the Judge had erred. Permission was granted by Judge Andrew on the 6th
    of June 2016.

 5. The parties attended the hearing in the Upper Tribunal and made
    submissions which are set out in the Record of Proceedings. In addition
    to the basis point being made it was submitted by the Home Office that
    the allowable benefits did not include ESA and if ESA payments were
    excluded from the calculations then the couple did not earn sufficient
    to meet the income support level required. That being the case
    consideration of EX.1 and article 8 would be required. For the
    Appellant it was argued that the Judge had been in a position to assess
    the case as a whole and that the Home Office had not raised these
    issues at the hearing.

 6. The Home Office grounds of application wisely did not criticise the
    Judge for refusing the adjournment application. There had been more
    than sufficient time for the further grounds to have been considered.
    Fairness is obtained by giving a party time to prepare and present
    their case and it was not unfair for the Judge to continue when the
    time allowed has been wasted.

 7. That said the effect of the adjournment was that the Judge placed
    himself in the position of being the primary decision maker. The
    requirements of Appendix FM and FM-SE are well known to be strict and
    prescriptive and an Appellant has to show that all of the requirements
    were met.

 8. The fact that the Home Office Presenting Officer did not question the
    Appellant or Sponsor on the financial aspect of the case is hardly
    surprising, the adjournment application was precisely on the basis that
    the evidence needed to be considered and had not been. In those
    circumstances the Home Office would not have been alert to the issues
    that arose from the further grounds and a failure to address could not
    safely have been taken as an acceptance that they were met. The failure
    to question was a reflection of the lack of appreciation of the
    Appellant's case and it was known that that was the Home Office's
    position.

 9. It was incumbent on the Judge to assess the evidence against the
    requirements of Appendix FM and FM-SE and he failed to do so. I find
    that that was an error because he was aware that the Home Office had
    not considered the additional grounds and as the primary decision maker
    on this point the obligation was on him to consider the evidence and
    the requirements fully. Being aware of the limitations of the Home
    Office understanding of the case he was wrong to take their position as
    an acceptance of indication that the requirements were met and failed
    to make the required assessments.

10. From that finding, that he erred in believing that the financial
    requirements were met and that appropriate supporting evidence had been
    submitted it follows that the Judge should have proceeded to consider
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, article 8 and the possible application
    of the case of Chen. Since those issues involve further findings of
    fact, an assessment of the circumstances of the Sponsor and the
    Appellant and a balancing exercise under article 8 I am satisfied that
    it is appropriate in setting aside the decision to remit the case to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all matters.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I set aside the decision of Judge Taylor in the First-tier Tribunal and
remit the case to be heard de novo by a different Judge.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.



Fee Award

In remitting the appeal I make no fee award which remains a matter for the
First-tier Tribunal on the conclusion of the re-hearing.


Signed:
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 5th September 2016
