
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18910/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August 2014                             |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Karim Kherbache
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge North, promulgated on 14th March 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Bennett  House,  Stoke-on-Trent,  on   10th   March   2014.    In   the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of Karim Kherbache.   The
    Appellant applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Algeria,  who  was  born  on  5th
    August 1969.   He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 15th May 2013, following his application  that
    he had qualified under the long residence Rule  on  account  of  having
    lived in this country for fourteen years under paragraph 276A-D  of  HC
    395.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had regard to the fact that the Appellant had earlier claimed
    residence in the United Kingdom in the name of Toni  Cristallo,  as  an
    Italian national, whereby he had produced  an  Italian  residence  card
    issued in 2005 in Rome, although the Appellant now maintained  that  it
    was not a genuine residence card and that he got  it  from  someone  in
    London about eighteen months or two years previously, at the request of
    his lawyers.  The  judge  held  that  the  Italian  identity  card  was
    genuine.  If the card was not genuine, then the Appellant's credibility
    was damaged because he had made false representations to Leicester City
    Council that he was a European Union citizen.

 4. Second, the judge had  regard  to  the  Appellant's  relationship  with
    Lesley Furness, whom he claims  to  have  met  in  Leicester  in  1999,
    following which they separated for a short while, but  now  claimed  to
    have resumed relationship.  They had not  lived  together  between  May
    2011  and  October  2013.   The  judge  held  that  this  evidence  was
    disingenuous.

 5. Miss Furness did not in her witness statement  say  that  she  and  the
    Appellant had not been living together from 2011 to 2013.  She had  not
    said in her witness statement that she and the  Appellant  had  resided
    continuously from 1999 onwards.

 6. Third, regard was had to the evidence of Nigel Furness, the brother  of
    Lesley Furness, but this evidence  was  also  rejected  as  unreliable.
    Finally, regard was had to Article 8 rights but the judge held that the
    Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  this  either.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  allegation  that  the
    Appellant's partner had been dishonest was  misconceived  because  this
    allegation was not put to Miss Lesley Furness, such as to enable her to
    deal with it.

 8.  Moreover,  there  was  documentary  evidence  before  the  judge  that
    supported her testimony.

 9. On 22nd April 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 14th March  2014,  Mr  Trevelyan  submitted
    that once it was accepted that the Appellant had arrived in the  UK  in
    1999, it was most  unlikely  on  the  evidence  before  the  judge,  to
    conclude that he had then left to go to Italy  from  where  he  got  an
    Italian residence card, not least because page  1  of  the  Appellant's
    second bundle shows evidence of his having opened a bank account on 6th
    August 1996, which was  consistent  with  his  statement  that  he  had
    entered the UK in February of  that  year.   Moreover,  at  B1  of  the
    Respondent's own bundle, there is a letter dated 10th April 2013  which
    confirms that the Appellant registered with  a  doctor  on  11th  April
    1997, and the letter from  the  doctor  makes  it  clear  that  he  has
    remained here.

11. In addition, the skeleton argument (at paragraph 7) refers to a  letter
    at the Appellant's second bundle (at page 143) from Miss Culleson  that
    she met the Appellant in March or April 1999.   But  most  importantly,
    there  was  in  the  Appellant's  second  bundle  (at  page  9  to  10)
    confirmation of his  having  completed  sixteen  qualifying  years  for
    having made national insurance contributions, which would enable him to
    have access to state pension benefits.  Furthermore, page  132  of  the
    Appellant's second bundle also confirms this.

12. Therefore, all the evidence was that, not only was the Appellant in the
    UK since 1996, but he had been working here consistently,  such  as  to
    enable him to accumulate  the  correct  number  of  national  insurance
    contributions.  The reason now why there was an error of law  in  Judge
    North's determination was that there is no  evidence  at  all  that  IJ
    North had assessed any of these documents.  Certainly, no statement  is
    made to this effect by the judge.

13. The failure to have regard to  these  documents,  and  yet  to  make  a
    finding that the evidence given by the Appellant and his witnesses  was
    unreliable, is an error of law.  The evidence has to be  looked  at  in
    its entirety before findings of fact in this regard can be made.

14. Therefore, Mr Trevelyan submitted that this matter should  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing to enable all the
    evidence to be properly taken into account.   The  Upper  Tribunal  has
    established that where there is "procedural unfairness in the way  that
    the hearing is conducted, the only proper course of action is  for  the
    matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. For his part, Mr  Richards  relied  upon  his  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted that Judge North did not fall into error  because  it  was  a
    matter for the judge as to what weight he should place on the  evidence
    before him.  This was especially the case with respect to  someone  who
    had entered with a Greek passport and  subsequently  submitted  Italian
    residence documentation.  The judge was entitled to be sceptical.

16. In reply, Mr Trevelyan submitted that this was  incorrect  because  the
    evidence from Miss Lesley Furness directly contradicted the findings of
    the judge.  The judge had said that Miss Furness  had  only  in  cross-
    examination stated that she was not living together with the  Appellant
    between 2011 and 2013.  This is simply incorrect.  This is because  she
    makes it clear at B9, in the Home Office's own bundle, at paragraphs  2
    to 3, that when she lost her job it was considered prudent for them  in
    March 2011 to separate, until such time as  they  were  able  to  start
    living together again.  Moreover, the Appellant's own letter at B11  to
    the Home Office confirms that he was not living with Miss Furness after
    2011.

17. Nigel Furness himself, the Appellant's partner's brother, stated in his
    witness (see the first bundle at page 5) that, "we all spent  Christmas
    together at my parents" and states that the Appellant  and  his  sister
    spent holidays together every year.  None of this  evidence  was  taken
    into account.



Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside that decision.  My reasons are  that
    the judge here has failed to have  regard  to  vital  documentation  in
    reaching his conclusions as to fact.   A  failure  to  have  regard  to
    relevant circumstances is an error of law.  In this case the  error  is
    such that it goes directly to the assessment of  the  veracity  of  the
    witnesses, namely, of the Appellant, his partner, Miss Lesley  Furness,
    and her brother, Mr Nigel Furness.

19. The documentary evidence was clear that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    living with Lesley Furness from 2011 to 2013, and this was a fact  that
    neither of  these  two  persons  had  attempted  to  conceal  from  the
    Tribunal.  Secondly,  the  documentary  evidence  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant had opened a bank account on 6th August 1996, had  registered
    with his doctor  on  11th  April  1997,  and  had  accumulated  sixteen
    qualifying years of making national insurance contributions, by working
    in the UK for that period of time.  Yet,  none  of  this  evidence  was
    taken into  account  by  the  judge.   Consequently,  the  findings  on
    credibility are unsafe.  For this reason, the  only  proper  course  of
    action is for this  matter  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2, to be heard  by  a  judge  other
    than Judge North.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.   I  remit  this  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge North de novo.

21. No anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014
