
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18960/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 February 2014                            |On 14 February 2014          |
|Prepared 5 February 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              ms faith omorogbe

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Mitchell
                    Simmonds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Walker, who in a determination promulgated on 3
    December 2013 dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to  refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  as  a
    confirmation of a right to reside in  the  UK  as  an  extended  family
    member of an EEA  national  under  Regulations  8(2)  and  (a)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, born on 11 July 1993  had  entered
    Britain with a visit visa on 17 May 2011.  On  21  September  2011  she
    applied for a residence card as  the  extended  family  member  of  her
    maternal  aunt  Owen  Omorogbe.   That  was  refused.   The   appellant
    appealed.  Her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Bart-Stewart on 5 April 2012.  Judge Bart-Stewart had  found  that  the
    appellant had not proved that she was related as claimed  to  her  aunt
    and moreover that there was no evidence of prior dependency. The  judge
    referring to the fact that the only evidence produced were three  money
    transfer receipts dated January, February and March  2011.   The  judge
    had found that the appellant had not only failed to show that  she  was
    related to the sponsor as claimed but also that she had failed to  show
    that she had resided with the sponsor prior to her arrival  in  Britain
    or that she was a dependant.

3.   Judge Walker stated that the starting point  in  the  consideration  of
    the appellant's appeal was the first judge's  determination.   He  took
    into account a DNA report and found that the appellant was  related  as
    claimed to her aunt.

4.   He noted evidence from the appellant  and  her  aunt  relating  to  the
    issue of dependence but found that there were  clear  discrepancies  in
    their evidence and noted  that  the  only  corroborative  evidence  was
    limited to the three money transfers of  January,  February  and  March
    2011.  In paragraph 23 of his determination, he stated that:

         "With regards to dependency in Britain, I accept that the appellant
         is living with her aunt, the sponsor but it does  appear  there  is
         and possibly has been in the past some financial help from  another
         aunt, Cynthia, and who resides nearby in the  UK.   Nevertheless  I
         accept that in the UK the appellant is a member of the household of
         the aunt and  also  a  dependant.   However,  with  regard  to  the
         appellant's time in Nigeria I do not accept that  firstly  she  has
         been a member of her aunt's household.  The aunt left in  2004  and
         whilst the exact date she acquired German citizenship is not  known
         her German passport shows that this was issued on 11 May  2009.   I
         do not accept the appellant has been a dependant of her aunt  while
         she lived in Nigeria."

5.   Judge Walker therefore found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Regulations and dismissed the appeal.

6.   Grounds of appeal claimed that the judge had  not  had  regard  to  the
    judgment in Pedro [2009] EWCA Civ 1358 where the Court made  the  point
    that an appellant's dependency on the EEA  national  sponsor  does  not
    need to have existed before he or  she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    Consequently the judge's decision was wrong and not in accordance  with
    the law.  The grounds stated that this point was also maintained by the
    Court in Bigia & Others [2009] EWCA Civ 79.

7.   On those grounds, Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    granted permission to appeal.

8.   The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response pointing out that case  law
    VN (EEA rights - dependency) Macedonia [2010] UKUT 380 (IAC)  had  made
    it clear that the decision in Pedro applied only to "Regulation 7  core
    family members  and  not  Regulation  8  other  family  members".   The
    respondent also pointed out that there was no evidence of dependency or
    a  household  relationship  existing  at  the  relevant  time  that  is
    immediately or very recently before the EEA national came  to  Britain.
    It was pointed out  that  Bigia  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  79  confirmed  that
    historic or lapsed dependency does not count.  The response went on  to
    say that:

         "At the very minimum when the appellant entered the UK to visit and
         stay with an uncle she was not dependent upon the EEA national, let
         alone the findings that there had  not  been  financial  dependency
         before the appellant had not arrived in the UK."

9.   At the beginning of the appeal  before  me  Mr  Dhanji,  with  complete
    integrity, stated that he accepted that  the  grounds  submitted  which
    referred to the decision in Pedro were wrong and that  it  was  correct
    that the decision  in  Pedro  only  referred  to  Regulation  7  family
    members.  He went on, however, to argue that the judge had erred in his
    consideration of the previous determination in that  as  he  had  found
    that there was in effect a mistake in fact in the determination of  the
    first  judge  all  findings  of  the  first  judge  should  have   been
    disregarded.

10.  I have concluded that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of Judge  Walker.   The  reality  is  that  the  findings
    relating to dependency in the determination of the first judge have  in
    no way been undermined by the fact that the appellant has  been  unable
    to prove the relationship.  There was no additional  evidence  to  show
    dependency at the relevant time.  The only  evidence  (apart  from  the
    oral evidence of the appellant's aunt and the appellant  herself)  were
    the three payment slips of remittances in 2011.  The judge did consider
    the evidence and did  consider  the  discrepancies  therein,  not  only
    between the appellant and her aunt but also between what had been  said
    in evidence before the first judge.  He was fully entitled  to  do  so.
    He was therefore entitled to find that there was no prior dependency.

11.  I note the head note in Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00340 (IAC) that:-

         "(ii)    An important consideration in the  context  of  an  OFM  -
             extended family member case that if a claimant has come to the
             UK without applying for a  family  permit  abroad  (for  which
             provision was made in Regulation 12 of the  Immigration  (EEA)
             Regulations 2006), this will mean that the UK authorities have
             been prevented from conducting the  extensive  examination  of
             the   individual's   personal   circumstances   envisaged   by
             Regulation 12(iii) and in the course of  such  an  examination
             checked the documentation submitted.  If an applicant  chooses
             not to apply from abroad for a family permit under  Regulation
             12 of the 2006 Regulations, thereby denying the UK authorities
             an  opportunity  to  check  documentation   in   the   country
             concerned, he cannot  expect  in  the  burden  of  proof  that
             applies to him when seeking to establish an EEA right."

12.  I consider that the judge was correct to find that  the  appellant  did
    not qualify for a residence permit as an "other  family  member"  under
    the provisions of Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  There was simply no evidence on which he could have  found  that
    the appellant so qualified.

13.  I therefore find that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and his decision dismissing  this
    appeal on immigration grounds and his finding that  the  appellant  was
    not entitled to a residence card as confirmation of a right  to  reside
    in the UK shall stand.

14.  It was not argued before the judge that the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR would be infringed by  the  decision  and  indeed
    that was not argued in the grounds of  appeal  before  me.   Given  the
    appellant's age and  the short length of time that  she  has  lived  in
    Britain, it is clear that such a  claim  would  be  unarguable  in  any
    event.

Decision

15.  This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


