
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18227/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2016                 |On 29 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                               MR SALIM MAHMUD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kennedy, promulgated on 24 February  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 9 August 2016.



Background

 2. On 6 June 2014, the appellant applied for further leave to remain as  a
    Tier 4 (general) student. His application was refused on 27 April  2015
    on the basis that on that date the  proposed  Tier  4  sponsor,  namely
    Superior College, was not listed on the Tier 4  Sponsor  Register.  The
    decision indicated that the  appellant  was  informed  of  this  on  20
    February 2015  and  allowed  60  days  to  obtain  a  new  sponsor  and
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS), which he  had  not  done.
    Consequently, no points were awarded for a CAS or maintenance.

 3. At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent's
    representative served a copy of an email and two letters said  to  show
    that the appellant had been served with a  "60-day  letter,"  which  he
    denied receiving. The appellant's evidence was that the respondent  had
    neglected to update his address and that he received the 60-day  letter
    upon returning to his old address after the said  period  of  time  had
    elapsed. The judge found that it was likely that the appellant received
    the 60-day letter and was willing to turn a blind eye to its  contents.
    Furthermore, the judge found  that  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
    Remain) (Amendment) Order 2013 had no application to a 60-day letter as
    it was not a notice granting or refusing leave.

Grounds of appeal

 4. Permission to appeal was sought on two bases. Firstly,  it  was  argued
    that while regulation 8ZA, did permit service by email,  this  did  not
    apply to a 60-day letter because it was  not  a  decision  to  vary  or
    refuse leave to remain. It was said that the  judge  misunderstood  the
    consequence of the aforementioned points which formed part of counsel's
    submissions. Secondly, the judge's finding that the appellant  received
    the  emailed  60-day  letter  was  unreasonable  and  his  reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's denial unsound. The point was made  that  the
    appellant had been presented with this  evidence  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing and did  not  have  the  opportunity  to  "conduct  a  forensic
    analysis of his email account." The judge's finding that the  appellant
    was content to leave his immigration status unresolved was contrary  to
    the evidence before the judge of his contact with the Home Office.  The
    judge failed to consider that the appellant would have had no reason to
    ignore a 60-day letter.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons sought in the grounds.

 6. The respondent opposed the appeal  in  the  Rule  24  response  to  the
    grounds of appeal received on 26 August 2016. An indication  was  given
    that the respondent was entitled to serve the 60-day letter by email.

The hearing

 7. In advance of the  hearing,  a  speaking  note  was  submitted  on  the
    appellant's behalf, in which it was said that if the appellant had been
    served with the decision by email, the 60-day timeframe had expired.

 8. When this matter came  before  me,  it  became  apparent  that  neither
    representative had seen the email message of  19  February  2015.  Upon
    having sight of  it,  Mr  Singer  no  longer  sought  to  rely  on  the
    submission  made  in  his  speaking  note,  which  was   based   on   a
    misapprehension of the judge's findings. Instead, he  argued  that  the
    said email purported to provide the appellant with a letter  which  had
    yet to come into existence.

 9. Mr Singer argued that in any event, the respondent could  not  rely  on
    regulation 8ZA of the 2000 Order in relation to a  document  which  was
    not a grant, refusal or variation of leave. He referred me  to  several
    authorities, including  R  (on  the  application  of  Mahmood)  v  SSHD
    (effective service - 2000 Order) IJR [2016] UKUT 00057 (IAC).

10. Mr Singer further argued that even if the 60-day letter was a decision,
    the respondent had yet to exhaust  the  options  available  for  postal
    service, given that the judge accepted that the appellant informed  the
    respondent of his new address and service by post was attempted only at
    the old address. With regard to the reliability of the  email  said  to
    have been sent to the appellant, he  asked  me  to  note  that  it  was
    unclear what document was attached and that there was no icon or  other
    indication on the  face  of  the  email  that  there  was  in  fact  an
    attachment. Ultimately, the respondent had not discharged the burden of
    proving service of the 60-day letter on the appellant.

11. Ms Ahmed argued that the grounds of appeal misled  the  judge  granting
    permission. She  made  two  points,  firstly  that  email  service  was
    effective as the appellant had confirmed that it was his correct  email
    address and secondly that the 60-day letter was a grant of leave.

12. In response, Mr Singer emphasised that the appellant already had  leave
    to remain, under section 3C of the 1971 Act, when the 60-day letter was
    composed because he had made an in-time application for  further  leave
    to remain  in  2014.  The  60-day  letter  referred  to  suspension  of
    consideration on that application and was not a decision  on  variation
    of leave.

13. At the end of the hearing, I indicated  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made a material error of law and set aside the  decision  in  its
    entirety. My reasons are as follows.

Decision on error of law

14. Firstly, the judge erred in finding that the email of 19 February  2015
    which was said to have enclosed a 60-day letter dated 20 February 2015,
    was served on the appellant. This scenario clearly makes no sense.  The
    appearance of the email also cast doubt on its reliability owing to the
    absence of any clarity as to what was said to be attached or  any  icon
    or symbol indicating that there was indeed an attachment.

15. Putting the concerns as to reliability of the email aside,  the  letter
    said to be attached was not a grant, variation or refusal of  leave  to
    remain and while the judge appeared to recognise  that  the  regulation
    8ZA had no application, he erred in  leaping  to  the  conclusion  that
    notification by email was therefore effective  for  correspondence  not
    falling within the terms of the said regulation.

16. In addition,  the  judge's  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant
    received the email, notwithstanding his rebuttal of that claim, had the
    effect of reversing the burden of proof given that the  respondent  had
    yet to establish that service of the email and attachment was effected.



17. Lastly, the appellant provided a detailed account  of  having  informed
    the respondent of his change of address (which the  judge  accepted  at
    [13]) and of having spoken to a named individual  in  the  Home  Office
    about his sponsor's loss of a licence at an early  stage.  The  judge's
    conclusion at [14] that the appellant was "willing to turn a blind eye"
    to his problems was, therefore, against the weight of the evidence  and
    unfair. In this too he materially erred.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, de novo, to be  heard  at
Hatton Cross with a time estimate of 2 hours (not before Judge Kennedy).


Signed   Date: 27 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

