
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/18418/15
                                                    IA/18423/15, IA/18420/15
                                                    IA/18431/15, IA/18425/15


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 6th October 2016                 |On: 9th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MOI
                                     PUI
                                     FAI
                                     DOI
                                     FOI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are a family comprising father, mother, C1 born in 2008,
    C2 born in 2011 and C3  born  in  2014.   They  are  all  nationals  of
    Nigeria.




    Anonymity

 2. Three of the Appellants are minors. Two of them have significant health
    concerns.  I do not regard it as in their best interests to have  their
    identities revealed in the public domain,  and  for  that  reason  have
    decided, having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders to make an order in respect of all five Appellants  in
    the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellants  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    The Appeal Before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. This appeal is brought, with permission[1], against a decision by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davies to dismiss the linked appeals  of  the  five
    Appellants.

 4. The  case  advanced  before  Judge  Davies  was  that  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate breach of the family's Article 8 rights to remove them
    to Nigeria. The skeleton of that argument was as follows:

        . C2 and C3 are  suffering  from  Homozygous  Sickle  Cell  Disease
          (SCD). Medical evidence was produced, inter alia from Dr Andrew M
          Will, Consultant Paediatric Haematologist of  Central  Manchester
          University Hospitals, to the effect that both children are  being
          kept well in the UK by regular medication  and  monitoring.   The
          vast majority[2] of children with  this  disease  in  sub-Saharan
          Africa die before they are five.  That  is  because  the  disease
          destroys the ability of their spleen to function.  The result  is
          that if the child is bitten by  a  mosquito  carrying  falciparum
          malaria, he or she will usually die within a few  hours.  At  the
          date of the appeal before Judge Davies C2 was four and C3 was  20
          months' old

        . All the children were born in the UK and it  would  be  in  their
          best interests to remain here

        . At the date of the appeal C3 had lived in the UK  for  more  than
          seven years

        . It would not be reasonable for C3 to leave the UK. She has  grown
          up here and has her own established private life. If  removed  to
          Nigeria with her family the likely consequence would be that  she
          would quickly  experience  the  death  of  both  of  her  younger
          siblings.  In  all  of  the  circumstances  that  would  not   be
          reasonable.

        . The appeals of the adult Appellants should therefore  be  allowed
          with reference to s117B(6) of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
          Asylum act 2002, the decision of the  President  McCloskey  J  in
          Treebhawon and Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT  674  (IAC)  and
          that of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705
          [at 14-20].

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard submissions and evidence from  the  first
    Appellant, who was representing himself, his wife  and  children.   The
    Respondent was represented by Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Ogbewe,
    who submitted that treatment for sickle cell disease was  available  in
    Nigeria and  that  the  disease  is  prevalent  there.   The  Appellant
    accepted that both he and his wife would be able to find employment  in
    Nigeria. He is a qualified lawyer, she an accountant. Having had regard
    to those factors the Tribunal found "I  do  not  accept  there  is  any
    evidence whatsoever to suggest that it would be unreasonable to  expect
    [C1]  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  her   parents".    The   reasoning
    underpinning that finding was that both parents could work.

 6. In respect of C2 and C3 the Tribunal dealt very shortly with Article  3
    ECHR, finding "no evidence" to establish that 'return' to Nigeria would
    result in inhuman and degrading treatment, nor  their  imminent  death.
    The Tribunal did not think Article 8 engaged at all  by  the  decision.
    If it was, the Tribunal made the following finding in the alternative:

         "It is clear that treatment for sickle cell disease is available to
         persons in Nigeria where the disease is more prevalent than in  the
         United Kingdom. I appreciate the risks identified  in  the  medical
         evidence to the children [C2] and [C3] but I do  not  accept  those
         risks are such to engage [C2] or [C3]'s  Article  8  or  Article  3
         rights"

    And further at 28:

         "It is also clear from the principle Appellant's  evidence that  he
         will be well able to provide his children with both  education  and
         the healthcare that is available in Nigeria and as such can provide
         living conditions for the children [C2] and [C3] to enable them  to
         continue to receive treatment for sickle cell disease and alleviate
         the risk to them that is identified in the  medical  evidence  i.e.
         from the bite of a malarial fly".

 7. The appeal was thereby dismissed.







    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The detailed grounds of appeal were drafted  by  the  First  Appellant.
    He submits that Judge Davies erred in his approach to the  decision  to
    the extent that the decision must be set aside. It is submitted that:

              i) The Appellants did not have a fair hearing. It  is  alleged
                 that Judge Davies declined to hear the second Appellant who
                 had wished to give evidence, that he packed up his computer
                 and files whilst the first  Appellant  was  still  talking,
                 that he refused to listen to further submissions  and  that
                 the entire hearing took no more than 30 minutes;

             ii)  There  was  a  failure  to  adequately  consider  material
                 evidence specifically relied upon by the Appellants, namely
                 the extensive written  material  from  Dr  Will  about  the
                 medical conditions of C2 and C3;

            iii) The determination does not contain  an  assessment  of  the
                 children's best interests in compliance  with  s55  of  the
                 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.




    Error of Law

 9. At a hearing on the 12th October 2016 I  considered  the  grounds.  The
    Appellants were represented by the First Appellant appearing in person,
    and the Secretary of State by Mr McVeety,  Senior  Presenting  Officer.
    Having heard their submissions I found, for the  reasons  that  follow,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to contain errors of  law  such
    that it must be set aside.

10. I deal first with grounds (ii) and (iii) because  I  find  them  to  be
    obviously made  out.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains  no  'best  interests'  assessment.   The   consideration   of
    'reasonableness' is confined to the observation that  the  parents  are
    educated and could work. At paragraph 28 the Tribunal appears  to  find
    (although it is not clear) that the family could "alleviate"  the  risk
    of the children being bitten by a  mosquito  because  they  are  middle
    class.  The evidential foundation for that finding is not explained  in
    the determination.  Whilst the point may be a good one (I do not know),
    the Tribunal nowhere considers the risk that there may be  to  a  child
    whose parents are  professionals.  I  find  it  hard  to  imagine  that
    mosquitos differentiate on that basis. Nor does Judge Davies  recognise
    the evidence from the First Appellant that at least one  child  in  his
    own family - a niece - had quickly succumbed to malaria as a result  of
    his underlying sickle cell disease, having  only  shortly  returned  to
    Nigeria from the USA.

11. The real difficulty with the scant reasoning at paragraphs  27  and  28
    (cited above) is that it fails to grapple with  the  detailed  evidence
    provided by Dr Will.  Dr  Will  explains  that  falciparum  malaria  is
    considered endemic in 97% of Nigeria and epidemic in 3% of the country.
     A child with the form of sickle cell that C2 and C3 have will be "very
    likely to die within a few hours of the bite".  That is  the  cause  of
    death for the  "vast  majority"  of  the  75%-95%  children  with  this
    underlying condition who die before they reach  their  fifth  birthday.
    Dr Will does set out the measures that can be taken to avoid the  onset
    of the disease, such as taking an  anti-malarial  prophylaxis,  but  he
    writes that it is not possible to take these  drugs  for  more  than  a
    short time.  None of the available anti-malarial drugs are licensed for
    long-term use. They are generally used for 4 weeks or less. Longer term
    use (more than a few months) is associated with increased risk of  side
    effects, some of which are life-threatening.     It  was  his  measured
    assessment that return of these children would "put them at grave  risk
    of death from falciparum malaria".

12. Before me Mr McVeety conceded that the determination is  flawed  for  a
    failure to properly consider the evidence of Dr Will.  Although  it  is
    touched upon at paragraph 27  ("I appreciate the  risks  identified  in
    the medical evidence to the children") there is no analysis of  it,  no
    recognition of Dr Will's opinion that these children would be at "grave
    risk" if returned  to  Nigeria  and  no  explanation  at  all  for  the
    conclusion that those risks do not engage Article 8 or Article 3.

13. The determination is set aside for those errors alone. I would  further
    note however that the assessment of C1's best interests, and whether it
    is 'reasonable' that this qualifying child leave the United Kingdom  is
    entirely absent. The fact that her  parents  could  get  jobs  was  one
    relevant consideration. The starting point however was the Respondent's
    own guidance about  the  significance  of  a  period  of  seven  years'
    residence for a child.  It has long been  recognised  (at  least  since
    1995) that after such a period a child will have put down roots in this
    country and established  a  private  life  distinct  from  his  or  her
    parents: see MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  and  PD  and  Others
    (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) [2016]  UKUT 108.  The effect  of
    this guidance is that 'strong reasons' will be required before a  child
    can be expected to leave. None of that  figures  in  the  very  limited
    analysis in this determination.

14. It follows that I need not deal with the allegations about the  conduct
    of the Judge at the hearing. Whilst the first Appellant has provided  a
    detailed statement of his perception about what  happened,  I  have  no
    information from Mr Ogbewe and Judge Davies has not  to  date  provided
    any comment.  In the circumstances I do not consider it appropriate  to
    make any findings on this ground.




    The Re-Made Decision

15. The hearing resumed on the 6th December 2016. Very helpful  submissions
    were made by  both  the  First  Appellant  and  Mrs  Aboni.  The  First
    Appellant gave brief oral evidence.  At  the  close  of  submissions  I
    indicated that the appeals would be allowed. I set out below the  legal
    framework that I have applied, and my reasons for allowing  the  linked
    appeals of this family.

    Legal Framework

16. The rule relating to applications for leave to  remain  on  grounds  of
    established private life in the United Kingdom is 276ADE:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix  FM;
         and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii) has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or

         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has  spent  at
         least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

17. It is accepted that neither of the adults in this family have lived  in
    the country long enough to satisfy the requirements as to age or length
    of residence in sub-paragraphs (iii) and (v). The only potential avenue
    open to them would be to rely on sub-paragraph (vi). In Bossade  (s117B
    A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT  415  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal  considered  the  test  of  "very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration" (in the context of the rules relating to deportation). The
    Tribunal did  not  elucidate  on  what  factors  might  establish  such
    obstacles, but found  the  test  to  be  a  "stringent"  and  demanding
    standard.   This   would   accord   with   the   established   European
    jurisprudence on 'foreign' private life  cases.  As  the  Secretary  of
    State puts it in her guidance:

         "A very significant obstacle to integration means  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return. The decision maker is looking for  more
         than obstacles. They are looking to see  whether  there  are  "very
         significant" obstacles, which is a high threshold. Very significant
         obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates  that  they
         would be unable to establish a  private  life  in  the  country  of
         return, or where establishing a private  life  in  the  country  of
         return would entail very serious hardship for the applicant[3].

18. C1 was born in the United  Kingdom  in  November  2008  and  so  as  of
    November 2015 she became a 'qualifying child', that is to say  one  who
    had lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years
    or more[4].  These applications were made in August 2014 and so  it  is
    accepted that at the date of application C1 could not hope  to  qualify
    for leave to remain with reference to sub-paragraph (iv). It is however
    accepted by Mrs Aboni that in the context of a human rights appeal, the
    question of whether she qualifies for leave under  the  rule  today  is
    relevant. The parties were in agreement that the matter of  whether  it
    is 'reasonable' for C1 to leave the United Kingdom under  276ADE(1)(iv)
    is the same question to be asked when considering the position  of  her
    parents under s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

          (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

19. It is, for the moment at least, the position that this section is to be
    interpreted as follows. Decision-makers must have regard to all of  the
    factors listed at (1)-(5) when assessing Article 8 claims, but in cases
    where the applicant can show  both  limbs  of  sub-section  (6)  to  be
    satisfied, an appeal must succeed on Article 8 grounds: Treebhawon  and
    Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC), MA (Pakistan) [at  14-20].
       There being no dispute that the adult appellants in this case have a
    genuine and parental relationship with a qualifying child, the question
    is whether it would be 'reasonable' to expect that child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  How is that question to be addressed?

20. The genesis of the 'seven year' provision was the concession  known  as
    DP5/96.  That policy, and those which followed, created a general,  but
    rebuttable,  presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"
    proceed in cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously
    to the age of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at
    an early age,  7  years  or  more  of  continuous  residence  had  been
    accumulated[5]. Although there have been shifts and amendments to  this
    policy over the years, the government has consistently maintained  that
    a residence of at least 7 years' duration is a  significant  benchmark.
    As the  policy  statement[6]  which  accompanied  the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) puts it: "a period of 7 continuous years spent
    in the UK as a child will generally establish  a  sufficient  level  of
    integration for family and private life  to  exist  such  that  removal
    would normally  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child"  [my
    emphasis].    The Hansard record of the debate in the House of Lords on
    the introduction of section 117B(6) (in the Immigration Act 2014)  sets
    out the government's position on the significance  of  the  seven  year
    mark, as explained  by  then  Home  Office  Minister  Lord  Wallace  of
    Tankerness:

         "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the age of seven,
         he or she will have moved beyond simply having his or her needs met
         by the parents. The child will be part of the education system  and
         may be  developing  social  networks  and  connections  beyond  the
         parents and home. However, a child who has not spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom either will be  relatively  young  and  able  to
         adapt, or if they are older, will be likely  to  have  spent  their
         earlier years in their country of origin or another  country.  When
         considering  the  best  interests  of  the  child,  the   fact   of
         citizenship is important but so is the  fact  that  the  child  has
         spent  a  large  part  of  his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom"[7].

21. The current policy statement reaffirms that this is the starting  point
    for  consideration  of  the   rule.     The   Immigration   Directorate
    Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes'  ("the  IDI")
    states:

         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect  a  non-British  Citizen
         child to leave the UK?

         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived  in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than 7 years.

         The  decision  maker  must  consider  whether,  in   the   specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to live in another country.

         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to  each  child
         in the UK in the family individually, and  also  consider  all  the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker  should
         also engage with any  specific  issues  explicitly  raised  by  the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.

    (emphasis added)

22. All of this guidance recognises that after a  period  of  seven  years'
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   That is the  starting  point,
    and the task of the Tribunal is to then look to other factors to decide
    whether, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  these  displace  or
    outweigh the presumption that interference with that private life  will
    normally be contrary to the child's best interests.  Those factors  are
    wide-ranging and varied. The IDI gives several examples including,  for
    instance, the child's health,  whether  his  parents  have  leave,  the
    extent of family connections to the country of proposed return.  In  MA
    (Pakistan) Elias LJ (albeit reluctantly) accepted  that  it  must  also
    encompass matter pertaining to the family as  a  whole,  including  the
    factors at s117B(1)-(5) as they relate to the parents.  The  assessment
    of what is "reasonable" will call for the  Tribunal  to  weigh  all  of
    these matters into the balance  and  to  see  whether  they  constitute
    "strong reasons" - the language of the current IDI -  to  proceed  with
    removal notwithstanding the established Article 8 rights of  the  child
    in the UK.

    My Findings

23. I first consider whether the adults in this family could succeed  under
    sub-paragraph (vi) of 276ADE(1). They are both Nigerian, and  are  well
    equipped to embrace life in that country,  having  grown  up  and  been
    educated there. They are both highly qualified  and  there  can  be  no
    criticism of Judge Davies' finding that they would be able  to  make  a
    living should they return home. The only "obstacle" that they  face  is
    the health of their youngest children.  That  is  certainly  a  serious
    problem for them. I had an opportunity to hear directly from the  First
    Appellant about his concerns  for  their  welfare.  He  became  visibly
    emotional when he spoke of the death of his niece. She  had  been  born
    and grown up in the United States and had travelled to Nigeria when she
    was six years old.   She lived with her  parents  in  Benin  City.  Her
    mother was a caterer, her father a criminologist who  was  teaching  at
    the time.  They had enjoyed  a  good  standard  of  living,  but  their
    daughter was dead within a year.   The  family  have  now  returned  to
    America and are living in New York.  Having heard that evidence I  have
    no doubt that both the First Appellant and his wife  are  terrified  of
    the prospect of having to live with the day to day  fear  of  a  single
    insect bite causing fatal injury to  one  of  their  children.   It  is
    however the fear that many thousands of Nigerian parents live with, and
    although there can be no doubt that it is a heavy burden indeed, it  is
    not a matter that  constitutes  an  obstacle  to  integration.  As  the
    Respondent's guidance suggests, this is a rule framed  to  reflect  the
    jurisprudence on the protection of private  life  in  'foreign'  cases.
    There does not need to be a complete nullification of private life, but
    it must be a flagrant and substantial interference for the  article  to
    be engaged in these circumstances. Whilst I know that the  prospect  of
    return to Nigeria fills the adult appellants with dread, the reality is
    that they would be able to find a home, make friends, get jobs and  re-
    establish relationships with other family members.  The  Nigerians  who
    live with sickle cell have private lives. The disease itself  does  not
    prevent them enjoying that right.

24. There is no rule which could conceivably  apply  to  C2  and  C3.   The
    integrity of the family as a whole  is  of  paramount  importance  when
    considering  their  position  and  this   in   itself   is   sufficient
    justification to consider Article 8 'outside of the rules'  in  respect
    of the whole family.  As I  note  above  C1  could  not  have  met  the
    requirements of 276ADE(1)(iv) at the date of her application since  she
    had not at that point reached the 'seven-year mark'. Whether she  meets
    it today is the same question  to  be  considered  when  assessing  the
    position of her parents under s117B(6). I therefore proceed directly to
    considering the Article 8 rights of the adult appellants.

25. I am satisfied that Article 8 is engaged by the decision to remove this
    family.   The adults and C1 certainly have an established private  life
    in the United Kingdom; at their young age C2 and C3 arguably  less  so.
    Each member of the family shares a family life with  each  other.   The
    removal of all of them would interfere with the private  lives  of  the
    older Appellants.

26. I find that the Secretary of State has the power in law to make removal
    decisions in respect of persons who do not have  any  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules and that such decisions are rationally  connected  with
    the legitimate Article 8(2) aim of protection of the economy.

27. In considering  whether  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellants  is
    necessary in a democratic society (in  pursuit  of  the  aim  mentioned
    above) and proportionate, I must have regard to  all  relevant  factors
    including the matters listed at s117B(1)-(6) NIAA 2002 rehearsed above.
     I begin with sub-section (6), following the suggested structure in  MA
    (Pakistan).

28. It is not in dispute that the  adult  Appellants  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with their daughter C1, who  was  born
    and brought up in the United Kingdom and is  now  8  years  old.   Like
    other 8 year olds she attends school,  has  developed  interests,  made
    friends and has established good relationships with her  teachers.  She
    has, to use the language of the IDI, "put down roots". Having regard to
    the various policies  and  ministerial  statements  set  out  above,  I
    consider that this is a private life that attracts substantial  weight.
    Whereas an adult could reasonably be expected to replicate that private
    life in Nigeria, different considerations arise in the case of a child,
    particularly one who has known no  other  life.   Change  is  generally
    disruptive for children but in the case of C1 there  is  an  additional
    element which would mean relocating to Nigeria would be more  difficult
    than usual. If the family were to move to this malarial zone, I find it
    to be very likely that this would be hugely stressful for the  parents.
    The First Appellant and his wife  are  very  likely  to  become  wholly
    preoccupied with the constant pressure of ensuring that C2 and  C3  are
    wearing  repellent,  taking  medication,  seeing  doctors,  and   under
    netting.  Their lives would be far from normal.  It is difficult to see
    how C1 would be able to simply take up  from  where  she  left  off  in
    Manchester. Her life in Nigeria would be constantly overshadowed by the
    prospect of her siblings falling ill. There is of course the very  real
    possibility that one or both of them  would  become  ill,  and  on  the
    evidence of Dr Will, such illness would very likely be fatal.   All  of
    this would have a very substantial negative impact on C1.   Taking  all
    of those matters particular to the child into account, I find  that  it
    would be contrary to C1's best interests to interfere with the  private
    life that she has developed in this country.

29.  Against  those  matters  I  must  weigh  the  countervailing   factors
    identified by  Mrs  Aboni.  In  accordance  with  MA  (Pakistan)  these
    submissions reflected the public interest as it  is  identified  in  ss
    117B (1)-(5) of the 2002 Act.

30. I find that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.   Neither  adult  appellant  currently  qualifies  for
    further leave to remain under the Immigration Rules. I do note  however
    that they have both had valid leave at all times since they entered the
    United Kingdom. The First Appellant and his  wife  entered  the  UK  in
    September 2007  with  leave  to  enter  as  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrants.  This was subsequently varied to Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work).
    In 2011 the Third Appellant returned to study and so reverted  to  Tier
    4; the  First  Appellant  became  her  dependent.    That  leave  still
    subsisted when these human rights applications were made and before  me
    Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that  in  accordance  with  section  3C  of   the
    Immigration act 1971 they still have leave today.  There have  been  no
    breaches of immigration control that weigh against the family.

31. It is in the public interests that persons who seek to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom are financially independent. It is accepted that C2  and
    C3 have had extensive recourse to the services of the NHS.  This  is  a
    matter I must have regard to.   This aside, the Appellants have,  since
    their arrival in the United Kingdom been financially independent. I  am
    satisfied that they would continue to be so. The First Appellant  is  a
    lawyer, his wife a qualified accountant.

32. It is in the public interest that persons who seek leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom are able to speak English. All of the Appellants who
    are old enough to talk do so in fluent English. This is not therefore a
    matter that weighs against them.

33. I attach little weight to the private life of the adults, since it  has
    been established at a time when they have known  their  status  in  the
    United Kingdom to be 'precarious'.  That must also be the  position  in
    respect of the children, although I must also  take  into  account  the
    fact that C1, C2 and C3 had no say in, and  no  understanding  of,  the
    legal or moral choices made by their parents.

34. I have weighed all of those matters in the round. Having done  so,  and
    having reminded myself of the language used  in  the  Respondent's  own
    guidance, I am not satisfied that it would be 'reasonable' to expect C1
    to leave the United Kingdom.  Unlike  the  child  in  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 she is a qualifying child who  prima  facie  has  a
    claim under the Rules.  The assessment of 'reasonableness' is not  akin
    to a proportionality balancing exercise where no such claim arises. The
    guidance states that there must be 'strong reasons' to require  her  to
    leave the United Kingdom today.  The only matters  that  weigh  against
    her are arguably the recourse that her younger siblings have had to the
    NHS, and the  fact  that  no  other  member  of  her  family  currently
    qualifies for further leave to remain. I am not  satisfied  that  these
    are sufficient reason to interfere with her private life in the  United
    Kingdom, particularly in light of the significant difficulties that  C2
    and C3, and consequently the whole family,  would  face  in  trying  to
    relocate to Nigeria.   In the final analysis the  Secretary  of  State'
    submissions came down to this: it must be reasonable for her to  leave,
    because her parents have no right to remain and  would  be  going  with
    her.  Even absent the terms  of  the  Respondent's  own  guidance,  the
    fallacy in that argument is exposed by the language of  the  rules  and
    statute themselves. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), EX.1 and  section  117B(6)
    must be assumed to all mean the same thing when they ask whether it  is
    reasonable that a  child  leave.  They  all  provide  for  persons  who
    currently have no leave to be able to regularise their  position.    It
    would make no sense if such applications could be  defeated  simply  by
    pointing to the fact that the applicant,  or  her  parent,  is  without
    leave, or not entitled to any more, at the date that the application is
    considered.

35. I am not satisfied, having regard to all of  these  matters,  that  the
    countervailing factors are such that there are  in  this  case  'strong
    reasons' that would make it reasonable to disrupt the only life that C1
    knows.

36. It follows that the appeals of the adult appellants  must  be  allowed,
    since it is not in the public interest to remove them. The appeal of C1
    would fall to be allowed because she  qualifies  for  leave  to  remain
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and there would therefore  be  no  public
    interest in removing her today. Mrs Aboni realistically  conceded  that
    in these circumstances the appeals of C2 and C3 should also be  allowed
    with reference to Article 8 outside of the rules.

    Decisions and Directions

37. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.

38. The decision in the appeals is remade as follows:

    'The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds".

39. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    5th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on the 2nd
June 2016 but was granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge
Grubb on the 27th June 2016
[2] Between 75% and 95% (letter from Dr Wills dated 1st August 2014)
[3] Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:
10-Year Routes August 2015.
[4] Section 117D(1) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
[5] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LJ in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[6] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[7] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014

