
IAC-FH-AR/V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18636/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th March 2015                              |On 30th March 2015         |
|Prepared on 17th March 2015                     |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between
                          MR MOHAMMAD ARIFUL HAQUE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  10th  December  1987.
    He appeals with leave against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Goodrich sitting at Taylor House who dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal on the papers against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  9th
    April 2014.  That decision was  to refuse the  Appellant's  application
    for further leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and to refuse
    to issue a biometric residence permit to the Appellant  and  to  remove
    the Appellant by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The Appellant first entered the  United  Kingdom  at  Heathrow  on  2nd
    October 2006 with entry clearance valid until 31st October  2009  as  a
    student.  On 21st March 2010 he was granted leave to remain until  30th
    November 2011 as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  under  the  points-based
    system and this was extended until 25th September 2012 and again  until
    30th January 2014.   On 8th April 2014 the Appellant applied for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant stating that he had been appointed to  be
    the data entry and IT manager  at  a  company  called  3A  Distribution
    Limited trading as Sententious who were based in Ilford,  East  London.
    They had offered him a permanent position by letter dated 20th February
    2014 with a starting date of 10th March 2014 at �18 per hour with a  45
    hour week.  It was the refusal of this application which gave  rise  to
    the present proceedings.

Immigration Law and Rules relevant to the Appellant

3.   A migrant who has had leave in the United Kingdom  as  (inter  alia)  a
    student or a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  must  satisfy  (inter  alia)
    paragraph 245HD(d) of the Immigration Rules  in  order  to  be  granted
    leave as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  This provides that  an  applicant
    must have completed and passed a UK  recognised  Bachelors  or  Masters
    degree and not a qualification of equivalent  level   which  is  not  a
    degree.

4.   In addition an applicant under a  points-based  system  must  score  50
    points under Appendix A for Attributes which  includes  30  points  for
    sponsorship and 20 points  for  appropriate  salary  together  with  10
    points under Appendix B for  English  language   and  10  points  under
    Appendix C for maintenance funds and in each case provide the specified
    documents.  The burden of proof of establishing that  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules are met rests upon the Appellant and  standard
    of proof is the usual civil standard of a balance of probabilities.

Documentation Considered

5.   On the file was the Respondent's bundle  which  comprised:  immigration
    information on form PF1; Tier  2  application  form  received  on  31st
    January 2014; copies of the Appellant's passport; reasons for  refusal;
    notice of appeal against the Respondent's decision  with  statement  of
    the  Appellant,  confirmation   of  acceptance  for   job   issued   by
    Sententious, copy of the University of Hertfordshire award of a  degree
    of Bachelor of Arts  with  second  class  honours  19th  June  2012  in
    business administration and transcript of the Appellant's results.  The
    Appellant did not provide any documentation for the hearing.

The Explanation for Refusal

6.   The Respondent refused the application for two reasons. The  first  was
    that the Appellant had provided a copy of the Bachelors  degree  issued
    by the University of Hertfordshire with his application  but  this  was
    not acceptable as it was not an original document.  The  Appellant  had
    not provided the documents specified under Appendix B to show  that  he
    had obtained an  academic  qualification  which  met  or  exceeded  the
    recognised standard of a Bachelors degree as the copy document from the
    University of Hertfordshire was not acceptable.  The second reason  was
    that the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant had provided a
    valid certificate of sponsorship reference number in  relation  to  the
    job offer from Sententious.  The letter from Sententious  offering  the
    Appellant the position of data  entry  and  IT  manager  had  quoted  a
    Sponsor  licence  number  "04011242YKPB".   This  was   not   a   valid
    certificate of sponsorship reference  number  and  thus  there  was  no
    record to show that the Appellant had been assigned  a  certificate  of
    sponsorship at the time of the application.  He was  awarded  0  points
    for sponsorship and it followed that he could not  receive  any  points
    for appropriate salary.   The  Appellant  was  awarded  10  points  for
    maintenance funds.

7.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  he  had
    completed his Bachelors degree at the University of  Hertfordshire  and
    was therefore entitled  to  the  necessary  points.   Further,  he  had
    submitted a valid certificate of sponsorship. He had never  broken  any
    Rules and had always abided by  the  law.   His  removal  would  breach
    Article 8.

The Proceedings at First Instance

8.   On receipt of the notice of appeal the First-tier Tribunal issued  form
    IA37 on 13th May 2014 indicating that the  appeal  would  be  heard  on
    Thursday 23rd October at Taylor House.  Notice  was  sent  out  to  the
    Appellant who was unrepresented and to the Respondent.  On 20th October
    2014 the Appellant sent a fax to the Tribunal stating that due  to  his
    health condition he was not able to attend the court hearing  on  23rd.
    Attached to his fax was a letter from Dr S Khaled of  the  Eagle  House
    Surgery in Enfield who confirmed that the Appellant was suffering  from
    "persistent diarrhoea and vomiting and is therefore not fit  to  travel
    or attend the court hearing next week".  The doctor's  certificate  was
    dated 17th October 2014 and thus covered the period in which the appeal
    was due to be heard. The fax was received on 22nd October 2014, the day
    before the hearing was due to take place.

9.   It does not appear that this correspondence  was  placed  before  Judge
    Goodrich because the Tribunal sent an email to the  Appellant  on  23rd
    October 2014 in the afternoon (after  the  Appellant's  case  had  been
    called on for hearing at Taylor House)  stating  that  the  Appellant's
    correspondence had been  passed to Taylor House to be dealt with.   The
    Judge was therefore unaware why, when the matter was called  on  before
    her, the Appellant had not attended. She proceeded  to  deal  with  the
    matter in the Appellant's absence. The Judge noted  the  provisions  of
    paragraph  245AA  which  relate  to  documents   not   submitted   with
    applications.  Where an applicant has submitted specified documents  in
    which some of the documents in  a  sequence  have  been  omitted  or  a
    document is in the wrong format,  for  example  not  on  letter  headed
    paper, or is a copy and not an original document or  does  not  contain
    all of the  specified  information,  the  Respondent  may  contact  the
    applicant and request the correct documents.   However  documents  will
    not  be  requested  where  the  Respondent  does  not  anticipate  that
    addressing the omission or error will  lead  to  a  grant  because  the
    application would be refused for other reasons.

10.  The Judge considered that the Respondent was entitled to decide not  to
    exercise discretion under paragraph 245AA so as to request the original
    degree certificate because, even if the Appellant were able to  provide
    the original degree certificate, the second issue in  relation  to  the
    validity of the  certificate  of  sponsorship  reference  number  would
    remain.  The Respondent was unable to verify that  the  certificate  of
    sponsorship reference number supplied was valid because  the  reference
    number was not recognisable.  The Respondent's decision  not  to  grant
    the  Appellant's  application  outside   the   Rules   in   exceptional
    circumstances was correct.  Irrespective of the  issue  of  the  degree
    certificate the Appellant could not be awarded the necessary 30  points
    for sponsorship with a valid certificate  of  sponsorship.   The  Judge
    also dealt with the Appellant's claim under  Article  8  and  dismissed
    that as well.

The Onward Appeal

11.  The Appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    arguing that he was very surprised that the Tribunal had not given  him
    the  chance  to  justify  himself.   He  had  received  a   reply   and
    acknowledgement from the Tribunal indicating that his  request  for  an
    adjournment due to ill health had been forwarded on and would be  dealt
    with  accordingly when in fact it was not.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davidge on  17th  December  2014.   In
    granting permission to appeal she wrote:

         "The Appellant raises an issue relating  to  the  fairness  of  the
         proceedings.  The Judge determined the appeal on the papers on 23rd
         October apparently on the basis that although listed  for  an  oral
         hearing the Appellant had  not  appeared  and  there  had  been  no
         request for an adjournment.  The Appellant attaches  evidence  with
         this application that he had in fact applied for his  oral  hearing
         to be adjourned."

    The Respondent replied to the grant of permission stating that she  was
    unable  to  comment  on  the  medical  documentation  adduced  or   the
    application  which  had  been   made  for  an   adjournment   as   such
    documentation had not been provided.  The Respondent was  not  prepared
    to concede that there was a procedural failing or if there was that  it
    was material.

The Error of Law Stage

13.  In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine in the first place whether there was an error of law  in  the
    determination at first instance. If there was  then  I  would  set  the
    determination aside and consider how best the matter should be  further
    dealt with. If there was not, then the decision at first instance would
    stand.

14.  Following the grant of permission to appeal the Tribunal  fixed  Friday
    30th January 201t5 at 2.00 p.m. to hear the Appellant's appeal  against
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.  On 29th January the Appellant sent a
    fax to the Tribunal requesting an adjournment again for health reasons.
     This time the Appellant produced a letter from Dr  Ian  Rubenstein  at
    the Eagle House Surgery dated 29th January  2015  which  stated  "I  am
    sorry but Mr Haque has sustained an ankle injury and he is not  fit  to
    travel to give evidence at court".  Attached to the Appellant's fax was
    a statement of fitness for work signed by the surgery advising that due
    to "another ankle injury" the Appellant was not fit to work.

15.  The application for an adjournment came  on  the  papers  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Dawson who replied to  the  Appellant's  application  as
    follows:

         "This is the second occasion that the Appellant  has  requested  an
         adjournment for health reasons. The first was  when  his  case  was
         listed before the First-tier Tribunal which  has  resulted  in  the
         grant of permission to appeal.  It  is  noted  that  Dr  Rubenstein
         considers that the Appellant is unable to attend court  because  of
         his ankle injury.  On this occasion the request  will  be  granted.
         The case will be relisted for a further  hearing.  It  is  unlikely
         that a further adjournment on health grounds will be granted and it
         is therefore important that the Appellant ensures a  representative
         is in place who can appear on his behalf should  the  Appellant  be
         unable to do so himself."

16.  The Tribunal adjourned the matter until 17th March 2015  when  it  came
    before me. At the outset of  the  hearing  the  Appellant  applied  for
    another adjournment this time on the grounds that he had  instructed  a
    solicitor Mr Tariq Mahmood, who was unable to attend court  because  Mr
    Mahmood's wife was in hospital. Mr Mahmood had called  and  texted  the
    Appellant to say he would be unable to represent the  Appellant  today.
    There was nothing on the court file from a solicitor and the  Appellant
    himself did not know the name of Mr Mahmood's firm. Nor did he know why
    Mr Mahmood had not instructed someone else to attend in his absence  or
    indeed why the court had not been informed by Mr Mahmood's firm  of  Mr
    Mahmood's inability to attend.

17.  It was not at  all  clear  from  the  Appellant's  explanation  why  Mr
    Mahmood was unable to attend court to represent one of his clients,  in
    this  case  the  Appellant,  while  his  wife  was  in  hospital.   The
    application  for an adjournment was opposed by the Respondent.  I noted
    that this was the third application for  an  adjournment  made  by  the
    Appellant. The previous  two had been  on the basis of the  Appellant's
    own ill health. This third application was now being made on the  basis
    of the ill health of his solicitor's wife.  There  was  no  documentary
    evidence of any kind to support the Appellant's application.

18.  I considered the case of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418.  The head  note  to
    that case reads that in most cases the question  will  be  whether  the
    refusal [to adjourn] deprived the affected party of his right to a fair
    hearing.  Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on  fairness
    grounds it is important to recognisee that the question for  the  Upper
    Tribunal is not  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted  reasonably.
    Rather the test to be applied is  that  of  fairness.   Was  there  any
    deprivation of the affected party's right to a  fair  hearing?  Nwaigwe
    concerned a case where the Tribunal had proceeded in the absence of  an
    Appellant. New Procedural Rules had come into operation for the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 20th October 2014.  These had provided that the First-
    tier Tribunal may adjourn or postpone a hearing.   In  Nwaigwe  it  was
    said this less proscriptive formula reinforced the necessity of  giving
    full effect in every case  to  the  common  law  right  and  principles
    discussed previously.

19.  Importantly at paragraph 11 the President of the  Upper  Tribunal  went
    on to say:

         "The next question which arises is whether this error  of  law  was
         material. I consider that it was not since the  sole  question  for
         the First-tier Tribunal was whether, based on an assessment of  the
         documentary  evidence,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision   was
         sustainable."

    The Upper Tribunal went on to find that the Respondent's assessment  in
    that case was unassailably correct.  It  followed  therefore  that  the
    refusal to adjourn the hearing was not unfair since the Appellant could
    not on any showing have succeeded.  The Appellant's attendance  whether
    represented or otherwise could not have  made  any  difference  to  the
    outcome.  In that case therefore it was found that an  adjournment  and
    relisting was inappropriate.

20.  Applying this case to the instant case  before  me,  there  was  little
    doubt that the Appellant had been deprived of a  fair  hearing  by  the
    fact that his application for an adjournment  on  the  grounds  of  ill
    health had not been  put  before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    consider.  Whether the trial Judge would have granted  the  adjournment
    or proceeded nevertheless was immaterial, the issue  should  have  been
    put but due to administrative difficulties it  was  not.   I  therefore
    found that there was a material error of law in the determination  such
    that it fell to be set aside.

21.  The next issue  was  whether  in  those  circumstances  I  should:  (a)
    proceed to rehear the matter; (b) remit the matter back to  the  First-
    tier to be heard again or (c) adjourn  the rehearing  to  another  date
    for the Appellant to make arrangements for his representation.

22.  I did not consider that  the third alternative  was  a  realistic  one.
    There was very little evidence indeed to suggest that the Appellant had
    arranged  representation.   There  was  nothing  in  support   of   the
    Appellant's  application  for  an  adjournment  from  a  solicitor   in
    circumstances where the  ordinary  requirements  of  professional  duty
    would require a solicitor to inform the  Tribunal  if  his  office  was
    unable to arrange representation for a  client.   The  application  was
    somewhat vague as it was not even the case that the  solicitor  himself
    was unwell and nothing to say what was wrong with the solicitor's  wife
    that required her husband's constant attention. The Appellant had on at
    least two previous applications for  an  adjournment  been  careful  to
    obtain documentation in support of his application.  I took  particular
    notice of the fact that Upper Tribunal Judge  Dawson  had  specifically
    directed  the  Appellant  to  ensure  that  he   had   some   form   of
    representation on the next occasion. In those circumstances it made  it
    even more pressing that the Appellant would be in a better position  to
    apply  for  an  adjournment  and  would  have  something  rather   more
    substantial to put before the Tribunal when requesting an  adjournment.
    I was not prepared to adjourn the matter and considered that  the  test
    of fairness was such that the case should proceed there and then. I did
    not  consider  that  this  case  came  within  the  Senior  President's
    Direction for the remittal of the appeal to the First-tier.  The issues
    in the case were very straightforward and could  be  readily  resolved.
    The matter thereafter proceeded.

The Re-hearing

23.  The Appellant indicated that he had  brought  with  him  to  court  the
    original  of  the  University   of   Herefordshire   Bachelors   degree
    certificate. As to the certificate of sponsorship, he had  received  an
    email from  the  Respondent  asking  for  further  information  as  the
    Respondent said they could not find the certificate of sponsorship from
    their system.  He had approached Sententious about the query over their
    sponsorship number and they had said they could not take the matter any
    further unless they were requested to do so in which case they help him
    if needed with any paperwork.

24.  In closing for the Respondent  it  was  argued  that  it  was  entirely
    unclear why, if Sententious had a valid sponsorship  number,  that  had
    not been produced as this was now the  third  hearing  which  had  been
    scheduled. The appellant had had ample time  to  obtain  the  necessary
    documents. In closing the Appellant indicated  that  he  had  contacted
    Sententious about their sponsorship documentation.

Findings

25.  The main difficulty in this case for the Appellant is that he  has  not
    produced a valid certificate  of  sponsorship  number  indicating  that
    Sententious was entitled to offer him the position of data  control.  I
    accept the Appellant's evidence that he now has  the  original  of  his
    University  of  Hertfordshire  degree  certificate.   He  said  he  was
    reluctant to send it to the Respondent in case it  was  mislaid.   That
    was not in my view a good reason. The Respondent was  entitled  to  see
    the  original  and  the  Appellant  should  have  provided  it  to  the
    Respondent. However, the Respondent was under no obligation to ask  for
    the document under paragraph 245AA of  the  Immigration  Rules  if  the
    Appellant's application was bound to fail in any event for  some  other
    reason. In this particular case the application was bound  to  fail  in
    any event because the Appellant could not provide a  valid  certificate
    of sponsorship number.  The Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration
    Rules on the issue of the certificate of sponsorship (see below) and in
    those circumstances there was no reason why the Respondent should  have
    requested the original degree certificate since it would have  made  no
    difference to the eventual outcome of the case.

26.  He has known what the objection to  his  application  was  since  April
    2014 when the refusal notice was issued. The Appellant has  had  almost
    one year to make enquiries of Sententious as  to  why  they  quoted  an
    invalid  sponsorship  number  and  if  appropriate  what  the   correct
    sponsorship number was.  He has not done that.  All he has done  is  to
    refer the matter to Sententious only to be told that they would provide
    the necessary paperwork if requested.  They have  not  done  that.   In
    those circumstances the  conclusion is inescapable that he has not been
    able  to  produce  evidence  to  show  that  Sententious  had  a  valid
    certificate of sponsorship number because they  do   not  have  such  a
    number. The conclusion must be that they were  not entitled  to  employ
    the Appellant as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  The Appellant's evidence to me on  the  point  was  vague  and
    somewhat confused.   What  both  sides  did  agree  on  was  that  that
    Appellant had been asked by  the  Respondent  for  further  information
    about the certificate of sponsorship number by  an  email  but  as  the
    Respondent pointed out, there had been no  substantive  reply  to  that
    email. The Appellant had no  answer  to  the  objection  taken  by  the
    Respondent as long ago as April 2014.

27.   The  Appellant  had  argued  in  his  notice  of  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision that it breached Article 8.  It is  difficult  to
    see how such as claim could  be made out. The Appellant does not  claim
    to have any family life in this country but has established  a  private
    life of sorts in the last eight years or so  whilst  studying  in  this
    country. That private life would be interfered with by requiring him to
    return to Bangladesh but would be in accordance with the legitimate aim
    of immigration control since the Appellant has  produced  documentation
    in the form of a claimed certificate sponsorship number which  was  not
    correct.

28.   In  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  interference  with   the
    Appellant's private life by his removal which occurs  pursuant  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued, I bear in mind the requirements of Section 117A-
    D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Appellant's
    private  life  has  been  established  whilst  his  status   here   was
    precarious, being that of a  student.   He  cannot  now  bring  himself
    within the Rules and therefore he  seeks  to  remain  in  this  country
    outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.  Given that his  private
    life was established while his status was precarious, little weight  is
    to be ascribed to it in the balancing act. On the  other  side  of  the
    equation, however, there are  substantial  reasons  why  the  Appellant
    should be removed, particularly given the fact that he  has  sought  to
    submit a false certificate of sponsorship number to the Respondent. The
    decision to remove is proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued and I
    dismiss the appeal under Article 8.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

I have re-made it by the  decision  by  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
under the Immigration Rules and under the Human Rights Convention.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 27th day of March 2015
.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the Appellant's appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed this 27th day of March 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
