

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/18116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On March 11, 2015                    |On March 18, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                               MR HABIB ALADE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Afzal (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who claimed to have  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 1991 as a visitor. On November 30,  2006  he  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain but this was refused. On  September  28,
    2010 he applied for a family membership card as the spouse  of  an  EEA
    national, which was refused. However, he was granted a  residence  card
    until June 2, 2016. On  January  17,  2013  he  applied  for  permanent
    residence on the basis of a retained right of residence because he  was
    divorced from his EEA national wife, Renata Varayova in accordance with
    Regulations 10 and 15 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  On
    April 7, 2014 his residence card was revoked on the  grounds  that  his
    marriage was a marriage of  convenience  (sham)  in  the  first  place.
    Relevant to this current appeal the respondent stated:

      a. The marriage was one of convenience.

      b. The appellant had failed to prove his former  wife  was  exercising
         treaty rights as at the date of the divorce.

 2. The appellant appealed on April 16, 2014, under section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    2006 Regulations.

 3. The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Thorne
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on August 15,  2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on August 19,  2014  he  refused  the  appellant's
    appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on August  26,  2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred. On September  29,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal French refused  permission  to  appeal  on  all  grounds.  The
    appellant renewed his appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on  October  22,
    2015 Upper Tribunal Allen gave permission  to  appeal  finding  it  was
    arguable the FtTJ had  not  addressed  the  documentary  evidence  that
    appeared to place the appellant and his ex wife  at  the  same  address
    over a period of several years.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant was in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Afzal submitted:

      a. The respondent had not raised sufficient  issues  to  question  the
         veracity of the marriage. The Tribunal made clear in Papajorgi (EEA
         spouse marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  38  that  there
         was no burden on the appellant to demonstrate a marriage was not  a
         marriage of convenience unless  the  respondent  provided  evidence
         justifying suspicion.

      b.  The  appellant  and  his  ex  wife  had  provided  evidence   that
         demonstrated they lived at the  same  property  and  the  fact  the
         appellant was able to produce evidence of  his  ex-wife's  payslips
         and bills in joint names meant there should have been no issue over
         the marriage.

      c. The fact the appellant had fathered  two  children  with  the  same
         woman during their marriage  was  not  a  reason  to  question  the
         marriage. One child had been born when the  parties  were  together
         but the other had been conceived after they had split.

      d. The parties married on September 26, 2008 and  their  marriage  had
         ended on June 7, 2012. The parties had therefore been together  for
         more than three years and there was ample evidence  they  had  been
         living  together  for  at  least  twelve  months  as  required   by
         Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations.

      e. The mother of the appellant's children did not actually live at his
         house during the marriage but visited  and  used  the  address  for
         postal purposes. He had not authorised her to allow her  mother  to
         say she was coming to stay at the house and the FtTJ was  wrong  to
         place any weight on this.

      f. There was evidence the ex wife was working  and  exercising  treaty
         rights albeit there was no documentary evidence that she was  doing
         this at the date of the divorce but that was not necessary  because
         the appellant had demonstrated they  had  been  married  for  three
         years and lived together for at least 12 months. Even  if  she  had
         been on job seekers allowance she would  have  satisfied  the  2006
         Regulations.

 7. Mr McVeety adopted the Rule 24 response  dated  January  28,  2015  and
    submitted the FtTJ had  not  erred.  The  respondent  had  revoked  the
    residence card because information came to her attention that suggested
    this marriage was one of convenience. The appellant's  claim  that  the
    marriage was not a sham marriage had to be considered in the  light  of
    the fact the appellant had fathered three children with the same  woman
    between 2007 and 2012. Additionally, the woman's mother had applied for
    a visit visa on two occasions in April 2009 and August 2011 to come and
    stay with her daughter at his house. The respondent had  satisfied  the
    standard of proof placed on her and the burden of proving the  marriage
    was no a sham lay on the appellant. The FtTJ  heard  the  evidence  and
    found it was a sham marriage and consequently the appellant  could  not
    benefit from any of the 2006 Regulations.  It  was  irrelevant  whether
    they were married for more than three years or lived  together  for  at
    least one of those years. Even if the FtTJ had been wrong to  find  the
    marriage was one of convenience the appellant  had  failed  to  produce
    evidence that his ex-wife had been exercising treaty rights as  at  the
    date of the divorce. The findings made were open to the  FtTJ  and  the
    appeal should be dismissed.

 8. Mr Afzal emphasised that there was evidence of the  parties  living  at
    the same address between 2008 and 2011 and he  fact  the  name  on  the
    bills was not altered was due to failure to notify the utility company.



 9. Having considered the submissions I reserved my decision.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. There are in effect two issues that I am invited to consider and during
    the hearing I discussed both issues  with  the  representatives.  These
    issues were firstly was the FtTJ entitled to find the  marriage  was  a
    marriage  of  convenience  and  secondly  whether  the  appellant   had
    demonstrated  his  ex  wife  had  met  the  requirements  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

11. Both parties referred to the decision of Papajorgi (EEA spouse marriage
    of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 as in fact did the FtTJ. Although
    the grounds of appeal suggested the FtTJ was wrong to place the  burden
    of proof on the appellant I am satisfied, as was Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal French that the FtTJ correctly stated the approach to  be
    taken in paragraphs [26] and [27] of his determination.  Mr  Afzal  did
    not pursue this issue before me but did argue that the FtTJ should  not
    have considered the marriage at all as the  respondent  had  failed  to
    show any reasonable suspicion.

12. I do not agree with Mr Afzal's submission on this issue. The respondent
    revoked the appellant's residence  card  specifically  because  of  the
    relationship with the other woman and the fact the other woman's mother
    had stated on two visit visa application forms that she would be coming
    to stay with her daughter at the appellant's house. The respondent  was
    entitled to have concerns over a marriage in  circumstances  where  the
    appellant appeared to be having a relationship  with  another  Nigerian
    national and that relationship ended  in  a  child  shortly  before  he
    married, a child whilst they were together and a further  child  before
    they were divorced. As Mr McVeety  properly  submitted  having  affairs
    with three different women was not evidence  of  a  good  marriage  but
    where the appellant had sexual relations with the same woman before  he
    married and continued the relationship during and  possibly  after  the
    marriage this suggested something else.

13. I am satisfied there was reasonable suspicion and the burden  therefore
    switched to the appellant to prove on the balance of probabilities that
    his marriage was not a marriage of convenience. The FtTJ had regard  to
    the appellant's oral evidence as well as the documents  submitted.  The
    FtTJ had regard to the documents submitted and whilst he does  not  set
    out each and every document he demonstrated  in  his  determination  an
    engagement with the documents. The utility bills places  the  appellant
    and his ex-wife in the property but that evidence was, in the  view  of
    the FtTJ, outweighed by the evidence relating to the other  woman.  The
    absence of a reference to the bills does not amount to an error because
    I am satisfied that the FtTJ's recording of the evidence in  paragraphs
    [18] to [21] and his subsequent findings in paragraphs  [27]  and  [28]
    meant his conclusion would have been the same.

14. However, the FtTJ did not leave matters at that because  he  went  onto
    consider the other requirements.  As  the  refusal  letter  states  the
    application had to be considered under Regulations 10  and  15  of  the
    2006  Regulations.  Importantly,  Regulation  10(5)(b)   requires   the
    appellant to have been residing in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the Regulations and at paragraph [65] of  Ahmed  (Amos;  Zambrano;
    reg 15A(3)(c)  2006  EEA  Regs)  [2013]  UKUT  89  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    confirmed this to be the case, following Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552, when
    it stated:

         "... Given that we have held that to acquire a  retained  right  of
         residence under both the Directive 2004/38/EC and  under  the  2006
         Regulations it is necessary for an ex-spouse to show that  her  (or
         his) Union citizen/EEA national spouse was exercising Treaty rights
         in the UK at the time of the  divorce  (in  the  form  of  a  legal
         termination of the marriage)...."

15. In Samsam (EEA: revocation and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165
    (IAC) the Tribunal said at paragraph [37]-

         "When considering whether a retained right of residence exists  the
         person concerned  must  be  the  spouse  of  a  former  spouse  who
         exercised the relevant Treaty right.  The  overall  sense  of  this
         seems to be that in the case of a family member seeking to  acquire
         a retained right of residence, such a person must show that the  EU
         national remains a worker  etc  at  the  time  that  the  right  of
         residence is claimed to accrue (here the time of the  divorce)  and
         if so the family member (and in  the  case  of  death  or  divorce,
         former family members) has a personal right of retained residence."

16. The FtTJ found in paragraph [32] his ex-wife was not exercising  treaty
    rights  as  at  the  date  of  termination.  Contrary  to  Mr   Afzal's
    submissions there was no evidence that she was exercising treaty rights
    in June 2012 because all the evidence produced ended in late  2010  and
    early 2011. There was no evidence for most of 2011 or any part of 2012.
    I referred Mr Afzal to his bundle and in particular pages [11] to  [17]
    and he could not identify any evidence that she was  seeking  work.  He
    submitted that if she was claiming job  seekers  allowance  that  would
    suffice but no evidence of this had been submitted.

17. Accordingly, even if the FtTJ had been wrong about the  marriage  being
    one of convenience the appellant nevertheless failed to  prove  he  met
    the requirements of Regulations 10 and 15. Merely  being  together  for
    three years with one year in the same house did not satisfy the Rules.

18. I therefore find there is no error in law.

    DECISION

19. There was no material error. The original decision shall stand.

20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.


Signed:     Dated: March 17, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:     Dated: March 17, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
