

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18965/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2014                               |On 8 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                           NAUSHAD RUNEL CHOWDHURY
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Hassan of Universal Solicitors,

For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on  07
    January 1992, against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Brenells) issued on 06 May  2014  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 14 May 2013  refusing  to  grant  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.


 2. The application was refused on the basis that the appellant  could  not
    meet the  English  Language  test  and  that  in  the  application  had
    submitted a letter and bank statement from  Prime  Bank  Limited  which
    were false. The decision letter dated 14 May 2013 records as follows:


    "I am satisfied that the documents were false because:
    On sending your letter and statement for verification with our overseas
    verification team , it was confirmed by the bank that the  transactions
    recorded on your submitted statement did not  match  with  the  records
    held by the bank, and consequently the  statement  for  your  submitted
    account were confirmed as non genuine. "

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and in his grounds  argued
    that the statement that he had  submitted  was  genuine  and  had  been
    issued by the bank. It was  further  argued  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to make any or any adequate enquiries before reaching a decision
    about the genuineness of the documents and had  failed  to  follow  the
    guidance in RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT00086.

The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal

 4. The appeal was heard by  Judge  Brenells  on  10  April  2014  and  his
    decision was issued on 06 May 2014. It was accepted that the  appellant
    could meet the required English language test in the rules as they  did
    not require all the tests to be passed on the same  day.  However,  the
    respondent relied on the issue that false documents had been submitted.
    The judge referred to the document verification report relied on by the
    respondent and a letter produced in evidence on behalf of the appellant
    purporting to come from Prime Bank Limited (page 7 of  the  appellant's
    bundle "A") which said that the statement the bank had provided to  the
    appellant was accurate. It was argued on behalf of the  appellant  that
    the correct document verification procedure not been complied with  and
    that no evidence of the precise procedure  had  been  provided  by  the
    appellant [11].

 5. The judge referred to a copy of the published guidance (General Reasons
    for refusing valid from 28  February  2012)  which  said  "ideally  you
    should ask the authority  which  issued  the  document  information  to
    confirm in writing that it is not genuine". The judge commented that it
    did not require every report to demonstrate written  confirmation.  The
    judge accepted the contents of the document verification  report  [12].
    He commented that there was nothing in the letter from the bank  at  A7
    which indicated that the statement the bank issued  and  the  statement
    the appellant submitted with his application were the  same.  He  found
    that the application had been refused for proper reasons. He went  onto
    consider Article 8 but found that there was  no  adequate  evidence  to
    establish that Article 8 was engaged or that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to continue studies on return to Bangladesh.


The Grounds and Submissions

 6. In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge was wrong to  make
    a substantive decision on the basis of  mere  assumptions  rather  than
    substantive evidence and unreasonably discarded  evidence  material  to
    the appeal. It is further argued that the judge was wrong to shift  the
    burden of proof on to the appellant to disprove the allegation  against
    him and had erred by failing to take note  of  the  published  guidance
    that ideally the issuing authority should confirm in writing  that  the
    document was not genuine.

 7. In his submissions Mr Hassan argued that the evidence relating  to  the
    falsity of the document was hearsay  and  should  not  be  regarded  as
    admissible. The judge had further erred by not taking into account  the
    advice set out in the respondent's policy guidance and argued that  the
    respondent had failed to discharge the required standard  of  proof  in
    the light of the fact that the evidence produced  was  not  independent
    and there was  positive  evidence  produced  from  the  bank  that  the
    appellant's account was genuine.

 8. Mr Jarvis submitted that the  evidence  in  the  document  verification
    report was admissible and it had been for  the  judge  to  decide  what
    weight to give to it. The policy guidance was simply guidance.  It  had
    been a question of fact for the judge to assess what weight to give  to
    the conflicting evidence. He had reached a decision  properly  open  to
    him for the reasons he gave.

Assessment of where there is an Error of law

 9. The issue for me at this stage of the appeal is whether the judge erred
    in law such that his decision should be set aside. It is argued firstly
    in submissions that the judge was wrong to take  into  account  hearsay
    evidence but the judge is entitled to take into  account  any  evidence
    relevant to the matters in issue, but it is  for  him  to  decide  what
    weight to give to that evidence. It was  then  argued  that  the  judge
    erred by failing to  take  into  account  the  policy  guidance.  This,
    however, refers to the fact that "ideally" evidence should be  obtained
    in writing and refers to the  standard  of  proof  but  the  judge  was
    clearly aware of this policy as he referred in [11] to the desirability
    of obtaining confirmation in writing and in  [6]  to  the  need  for  a
    higher standard of probabilities.

10. It has been confirmed that  there  is  only  one  civil  standard,  the
    balance of probabilities, in Re B (children) [2008]  UKHL  35  but  the
    judge's reference to a higher balance of probabilities is simply  short
    hand for recognising that the more serious an allegation  is  the  more
    cogent the evidence needs to be in assessing whether  the  standard  is
    met. It was argued that the judge failed to give proper weight  to  the
    fact that the appellant had produced a letter from the bank saying that
    the statement provided to him was  accurate.  However,  the  judge  was
    entitled to note and take  into  account  that  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate that the statement the  bank  issued  and  the  statement  the
    appellant submitted with his application were the same.

11. When granting permission to appeal Judge Osborne said  in  [4]  of  the
    grant that she was satisfied that it was a serious allegation to  raise
    in refusing an application, namely  that  a  false  document  had  been
    provided and she was not satisfied that the evidence relied upon by the
    respondent was either in a suitable form or of the  requisite  strength
    to raise a  justifiable  suspicion  that  a  false  document  had  been
    provided whereupon the burden of proof  would  pass  to  the  appellant
    overcome the allegation.

12. When granting permission the judge  was  right  to  identify  what  she
    regarded as arguable grounds. However, I am not satisfied that this  is
    a case where the evidence relied upon by the respondent was  not  in  a
    suitable form or not of sufficient strength to raise a case to  answer.
    The document verification report records information received from  the
    bank. It is correct (and the point was emphasised in submissions)  that
    there was a contradiction in the document where the dates at one  point
    are recorded as August 2012 and at another as December 2012 but this in
    all likelihood is simply a clerical error. There is no doubt  that  the
    relevant dates are the balances on the two  separate  dates  in  August
    2012. In addition to this evidence from the bank, the  entry  clearance
    officer recorded his experience in detecting forgeries.

13. When considering the evidence relied on by the appellant the judge  was
    entitled to note that the appellant had adopted his  written  statement
    and was not tendered to cross examination [4] and the fact  that  there
    was nothing in the letter from the bank to link the statement the  bank
    issued and the statement the appellant submitted. There is  nothing  to
    indicate that the judge took the view that the burden  of  proof  would
    pass to  the  appellant  to  overcome  the  allegation.  The  appellant
    produced evidence to refute the respondent's evidence. It  was  then  a
    matter for the judge to assess that evidence and decide what inferences
    could properly be drawn. There  is  nothing  in  the  determination  to
    suggest that the judge regarded the appellant  as  under  a  burden  to
    refute the allegation made by the respondent.

Summary

14. I am satisfied that the judge's findings and conclusions were  properly
    open to him for the reasons  he  gave.  The  assessment  of  whether  a
    document is false is essentially a question of fact for  the  judge  to
    assess in the light of the evidence as a whole. I am not satisfied that
    he erred in law as asserted in the grounds and  submissions,  which  in
    substance are an attempt to re-open and re-argue  issues  of  fact.  In
    these circumstances the appeal must be dismissed.


Decision

15. The judge did not err in  law  and  the  decision  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal stands.










Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


