

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber     Appeal Number:  IA/18815/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Promulgated                       |
|On 19 January 2015                |On 21 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                           Ms Leonara Tajada Ebre
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1.   This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to  the
    respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 4 November 2014
    in respect of the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  M  K
    Lawrence who allowed the appeal of this appellant to the limited extent
    that the matter was remitted to the respondent for a  lawful  decision.
    The determination was promulgated  on  27  August  2014.  For  ease  of
    reference, I continue to  refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2.   The appellant is a Filipino national born on 30 November  1958.   She
    arrived on 4 August 2002 with entry clearance  as  a  domestic  worker.
    Extensions were granted but the latest application made on 10 May  2012
    was refused on 9 January 2013. An appeal was lodged and  the  appellant
    argued that the Secretary of State had erred in describing  her  as  an
    overstayer when it was plain from the endorsement in her passport  that
    she had been here with valid  leave  when  her  application  was  made.
    Consequently, the matter was remitted back to the  Secretary  of  State
    for reconsideration but was refused again on 8 May 2013. The  appellant
    appealed again and her appeal was allowed to the limited extent that it
    was sent back to the  Secretary  of  State  yet  again,  for  a  lawful
    decision to be made. It is that decision which the Secretary  of  State
    challenges.

Appeal hearing and findings

 3.   Mr Melvin relied on the grounds for permission at the hearing  before
    me on 19 January 2015. Ms Allen relied on  her  Rule  24  response  and
    submitted that the judge had acted correctly. She pointed out that  the
    problem was that the Secretary of State had not  applied  the  rule  in
    force at the date of the application as she was required to do  by  the
    terms of HC760. Ms Allen clarified that she was not  referring  to  the
    post 9 July 2013 rules but to the  pre  13  December  2012  changes  to
    paragraph 159G which introduced the word "lawfully" into sub  paragraph
    (ii) and made provision  under  159G-SD  for  specified  documents.  By
    deciding the application under the rules post  13  December  2012,  the
    Secretary of State  had  considered  the  wrong  rules  and  had  acted
    unlawfully. In the circumstances, she maintained  that  the  judge  had
    been right to remit the matter back to the Secretary  of  State  for  a
    lawful decision.

 4.   Having considered Ms Allen's submissions,  Mr  Melvin  accepted  that
    they had merit although he did not accept that it had been  shown  that
    the appellant would succeed in her application even if the correct rule
    was considered.

 5.   I am not concerned at this stage with  whether  or  not  the  initial
    application would succeed. However, it is plain that the  Secretary  of
    State did not apply the  correct  rules  when  she  considered  it.  It
    follows that her decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  The
    grounds argue that the judge should have proceeded to  have  considered
    the  applicable  rules  himself,  however  as  he  made  clear  in  his
    determination, he was reluctant to become the primary  decision  maker.
    He was properly entitled to take that stance; the  principle  that  the
    Secretary of State should ordinarily be the primary decision  maker  is
    an established one (for example, see SM [2014]  UKUT  00064  (IAC)).  I
    therefore conclude that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  make  an
    error of law in deciding to allow the appeal and to  remit  it  to  the
    Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made.

Decision

 6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an error of law. I  uphold
    his decision to allow the appeal to the extent that it is  remitted  to
    the Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made.






    Signed:


    Dr R Keki?
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    20 January 2015



