
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18121/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd August 2016                         |On 2nd August 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                KOLAWOLE [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant against a
    judgment of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 12th  November  2015
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever.  The Appellant in this  case  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria born on 1st July 1962.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in March 2005. He
    then re-entered with his  pregnant  wife  in  February  2006  and  they
    overstayed. In the intervening period they have had  a  total  of  four
    children. On 18th May 2009 the Appellant submitted an  application  for
    leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules.  That  application  was
    refused in August  2009  without  a  right  of  appeal.  The  Appellant
    requested a reconsideration of  that  decision  which  was  maintained.
    However, eventually the Secretary  of  State  did  look  again  at  the
    application and issued another refusal, with a right of appeal, on 29th
    April 2015.

 3. The appeal came before Judge Lever in October 2015  at  Manchester  and
    the Appellant gave evidence. He claimed to be financially dependent  on
    family and friends in the UK, never having worked. In Nigeria he worked
    as a banker and his wife worked in telecommunications. His children had
    no health problems and the family all shared one room in the home of  a
    friend who also had a  five-year-old  child.  All  four  children  were
    attending school and had received medical care.

 4. The Judge at paragraph 14 of his decision found little  credibility  to
    the Appellant or the case he advanced. The  Appellant  raised  a  quasi
    asylum claim during the course of the appeal  and  although  the  Judge
    declined to deal with the asylum claim he  did  make  factual  findings
    adverse to the claim.

 5. The Appellant claimed to have  converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity
    which the Judge disbelieved, with reasons, finding that claim to  be  a
    recent invention by the Appellant. He did not accept that the Appellant
    had  ever  been  Muslim.  The  Appellant  had  made  inconsistent   and
    contradictory  claims  in  relation  to  his  claim  that  the  central
    difficulty was his father who had been an Imam; claiming elsewhere that
    his father had died in 2005, before the Appellant came to  the  UK.  He
    also claimed  to  have  no  known  relatives  in  Nigeria  which  again
    contradicted his claim to be at risk from his family.

 6. In his consideration  of  the  Article  8  claim  the  Judge  proceeded
    straight to Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Appellant
    being unable to bring himself within Appendix FM.  He noted that he was
    required to consider section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. In that regard he noted that none  of  the  Appellant,
    his wife or children had status in the UK. The  couple  had  chosen  to
    have children but their  family  and  private  lives  were  against  an
    unlawful background. The information before the First-tier Tribunal  in
    relation to their private lives  was  very  limited.  There  were  some
    letters of support but nobody came to give evidence. The Judge did  not
    believe that the Appellant had never worked during his time in  the  UK
    and it was highly unlikely that they had survived as a  family  of  six
    with only help from friends. He found that the Appellant had sought  to
    disguise the reality of  his  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
    referred to the family's claimed involvement with the church but  again
    no witnesses attended to support him in that claim.

 7. The Judge noted that the Appellant had provided  information  regarding
    the children's progress at school, which in reality was the core of his
    case. He was seeking to remain in the UK on the  basis  that  the  best
    interests of the children were to remain in the UK and on that basis he
    and his wife should be able to remain also.

 8. At paragraph 25 of the Decision and Reasons the judge noted that  blame
    did not attach to the children for  having  developed  a  private  life
    while in the UK unlawfully. He noted that education  is  compulsory  in
    the UK but expressed concern that this family, unlawfully  in  the  UK,
    could access both education and health care without any right to do so.
    He noted the children had no learning difficulties or health  problems.
    He noted that was nothing to suggest that the children did not  possess
    the innate flexibility and adaptability that  many  children  have.  He
    noted that there are schools in Nigeria and that English is the  common
    language in Nigeria. He found the children could adapt quickly to  life
    and schooling within Nigeria.

 9. The Judge then noted that the Appellant and his wife had both  been  in
    paid professional employment in Nigeria and could do so again.  He  did
    not accept that they had no links with Nigeria. Although it was claimed
    that the Appellant's wife has family in the UK, there was  no  evidence
    as to the level of contact with  them  and  they  had  neither  written
    letters of support nor attended to give evidence. If in truth there was
    any financial support from friends or family members there was  nothing
    to prevent that continuing once the family returned  to  Nigeria  while
    the Appellant and his wife resettled and obtained employment. There was
    no evidence that the children had any relationship  with  other  family
    members outside the immediate family.

10. At paragraph 27 the Judge found that the children's best interests were
    to remain with their parents, to become familiar with  and  absorb  the
    culture, lifestyle and attitudes of their home country. This, he  said,
    was something that in his view it would be wrong to deny them. He found
    that they will be able to continue their education  without  difficulty
    and have the security of being in their home country  where  both  they
    and their parents have the security of status and nationality.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal who felt it  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to give adequate consideration to the children  given  that  the
    eldest child had lived continuously in the UK for more than seven years
    and there had been no specific consideration  of  the  children's  best
    interests.

12. The grounds also refer to paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

13. The Appellant, before me,  confirmed  that  his  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was indeed based on the Judge's treatment of the children  and
    the eldest child in particular, who was now 10 years of age.

14. The reference in the grounds of paragraph 276 ADE and  the  failure  of
    the Judge to consider  it  being  an  error  of  law  is  misconceived.
    Paragraph 276 ADE requires a child to have resided  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of seven years at the date of  the  application.  The
    application in this case was in 2009, when he  had  only  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for three years. Paragraph  276  ADE  therefore  had  no
    application and it was not an error of law therefore  not  to  consider
    it.

15.  The  Judge  has  considered  the  best  interests  of   the   children
    specifically and found that their best interests lie  in  returning  to
    Nigeria, the country of their nationality, with their parents. They are
    entitled to live in the country of their nationality in  the  same  way
    that British children are entitled to live in the UK. The  Judge  noted
    the  children  had  no  difficulties  which   would   make   resettling
    unreasonable. Further,  while  children  cannot  be  punished  for  the
    misdemeanours  of  their  parents,  when  considering  whether  it   is
    reasonable to expect them to leave the UK all factors  are  relevant  -
    including their parents' immigration history.

16. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal   does not  contain
    a material error of law and I uphold it.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.



Signed                              Date 2nd August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
