
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/18361/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 December 2016                 |On 03 January 2017                |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                          GILBERT OLAMIYI OBIDIMEJI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Holt counsel instructed by Perera & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is a resumed hearing after a hearing on 31 August 2016  when  I  set
   aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies who had  dismissed
   his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 30  April
   2015 to refuse to grant an application for leave to remain in the  UK  on
   the basis of his family and private life  and  to  remove  him  from  the
   United Kingdom.

Background
3. The Appellant was born on 25 August 1992 and is a national of Nigeria.
4. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1999.  He  could  produce  no
   evidence of lawful entry and was served with a notice of  illegal  entry.
   He made a human right claim  in  2013  which  was  refused.  He  made  an
   application on 22 August 2014 which  was  considered  by  the  Respondent
   under  Appendix  FM  and  Paragraph  276ADE.  The  application  was  also
   considered in relation to Article 8 on the basis of his relationship with
   Cherry Rafu and their 3  biological  children  and  Ms  Rafu's  child  by
   another male and his child by Caroline  Okunuanne  and  no  circumstances
   were found to warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Law
 5. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability.
 6. The Appellant's  appeal  is  pursuant  to  Section  82(1)  (b)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')  which
    provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where  the  Secretary
    of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim.  S84  of  the  Act
    provides that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be brought on  the  ground
    that a decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.
 7. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014). Section 117 (3) provides that  the  'public  interest  question'
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
 8. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."



 9. In relation to the granting of leave outside the Rules I remind  myself
    of what was said in the Court of Appeal in SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387
    in paragraph 33:


    "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does  not  apply
    in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is  accurate
    to say that the general position outside the sorts of special  contexts
    referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to  be
    identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in
    Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as  strict
    as a test of  exceptionality  or  a  requirement  of  "very  compelling
    reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria) in the context  of  the  Rules
    applicable to foreign criminals), but which gives appropriate weight to
    the  focused  consideration  of  public  interest  factors   as   finds
    expression in the Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules  in
    Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at  para.  [29],
    which has been tested and has survived scrutiny  in  this  court:  see,
    e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ


  10. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"


11. I have taken into account the guidance given in R (on  the  application
    of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ  705  in
    relation to the issue of reasonableness in section 117B 6 of  the  2002
    Act.

12. In relation to those factors that have to be  considered  in  assessing
    the issue of reasonableness at paragraph 45 it states:
    "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct of  the
    applicant and any other matters relevant to the  public  interest  when
    applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5), so should it
    when  considering  the  question  of   reasonableness   under   section
    117B(6).....
    But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-
    standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
    court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh"  criterion.
    It seems to me  that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
    reasonableness  criterion  in  section  117B(6).   It  would   not   be
    appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply  because  I   have
    reservations whether it is correct.   Accordingly,  in  line  with  the
    approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the
    Secretary of State's submission on this point is correct and  that  the
    only significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven year  rule
    is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of  leave
    to remain being granted."


13. As to the relevance of the Respondents policy in relation to  Appendix
    FM and children at paragraph 46-47 it states:

    "46.Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact  that  a
    child has been here for seven years must be  given  significant  weight
    when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the  Secretary
    of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form  of  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)
    and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which  it  is  expressly  stated
    that once the seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied,  there
    need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
    instructions were not in force when the cases  now  subject  to  appeal
    were determined, but in my view, they merely confirm what  is  implicit
    in adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period  of  time  the
    child will have put down  roots  and  developed  social,  cultural  and
    educational links in the UK  such  that  it  is  likely  to  be  highly
    disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK. That may  be  less
    so when the children are very young because the focus  of  their  lives
    will be on their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious  as
    they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong
    expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK
    with his parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a
    primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


    47.Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness  test  where  the
    focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that  leave
    must be granted whenever the child's best interests are  in  favour  of
    remaining. I reject Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the  best  interest's
    assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness  question.  If
    Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome
    of the leave application, it would have said so."


Evidence

14. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason
    for refusal letter. There was a bundle of documents frm the  Appellant.
    I was also provided with a copy of a family tree  which  confirmed  the
    following in relation to the children in this case:
15. By Caroline Chinyere Okuwuanne a British Citizen the  Appellant  has  a
    child Diamond  Oluwagbenga  Arinza  Akinmolayan  Obidimeji  who  was  a
    British Citizen born on 4 July 2007.
16. By Cherry Rafu a Nigerian National who has limited leave to  remain  in
    the UK the Appellant has 3 children:
        . Gold Taiwo Akinmolayan Obidemeji born 15 April 2008. He has leave
          to remain until 15.3.2019.
        . Silver Kehinde Akinmolayan Obidemeji born 15.4.2008. He has leave
          to remain until 15.3.2019.
        . Samuel  Idowu  Williams  Ayomilekan  Akinmolayan  Obidemeji  born
          12.11.2011. he has leave until 15.3.2019.
17. Ms Rafu has a child by another father: Comfort Oluwakemi Ogunleye  born
    9.5.2004 who is a British Citizen
Final Submissions
18. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates made the following submissions:
          a) He conceded that two of the children were qualifying  children
             for the purpose of section 117B 6.
          b) He accepted that whilst he would normally argue that the  best
             argument walls for four the appellant to return to Nigeria and
             reapply for entry clearance  the  fact  that  there  were  two
             children by different mothers in balance had  shifted  against
             it being appropriate for the appellant to return  and  reapply
             for entry clearance.
          c) He accepted that  the  application  for  entry  clearance  may
             amount to more than a temporary separation would he  urged  me
             to consider R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM
             - Chikwamba -  temporary  separation  -  proportionality)  IJR
             [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)..


19. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Holt made the following submissions:
          a) The appellant had genuine and  subsisting  relationships  with
             multiple qualifying children.
          b) He argued that the Gold and Silver were qualifying children by
             virtue of having lived in the UK for more than seven years and
             that of comfort was a  qualifying  child  because  she  was  a
             British citizen.
          c) The Respondent accepted that it  was  unreasonable  to  expect
             these children to leave the UK and  therefore  no  matter  how
             little weight was given to the appellants private  and  family
             life and public interest did not require his removal.
          d) In relation to whether it would be reasonable to  require  the
             Appellant to be removed temporarily in order to make an  entry
             clearance application Mr. Bates had conceded that  this  would
             not necessarily be a temporary separation in  that  the  entry
             clearance  application  could  drag  on.   The  situation  was
             complicated by the being multiple qualifying children  and  in
             this case the balance fell in favour of the Appellant.
Findings
20. On balance and taking the evidence as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
    following findings
21. The Appellant appeals the decision of the Respondent on the basis  that
    the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

22. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


23. I am satisfied that the Appellant and Ms Rafu and  their  3  biological
    children and her child by another male have a family life in the United
    Kingdom and this was not challenged by the Respondent.  The  him  being
    in a relationship for nine years.





If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


24. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


25. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate his conduct
    by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


26. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy his private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


27. In making the assessment I have also taken into account  ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)  of  the
    UNCRC which states that "in all actions  concerning  children,  whether
    undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities   or
    legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a  primary
    consideration."

28. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

29. I am satisfied that three of the children in this case  are  qualifying
    children for the purpose of s 117B 6 of the 2002 Act: Gold, Silver  and
    Comfort.  I am unable to make a  finding  in  relation  to  Diamond  as
    although he is a British citizen there is no reference to the nature of
    the relationship that he enjoys with the Appellant. Gold and Silver are
    qualifying children because it is accepted the Appellant has a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with them and they have both lived  in  the
    UK for more than 7 years continuously and  Comfort  because  she  is  a
    British citizen. The starting point is that it is in the best interests
    of children to be brought up by their mother and father.  In this  case
    it would appear from the witness statement of Ms Rafu dated  8  October
    2015 that the 3 qualifying children live with her enjoying very regular
    access to the Appellant who lives with his parents indeed the Appellant
    is described as their primary carer by Miss Rafu as she works in  order
    to sustain the family.  I am satisfied that it is in the best interests
    of children to continue to have the stability  and  continuity  of  the
    Appellant as part of their family life


30. The Respondents did not seek to  suggest  in  this  case  that  it  was
    reasonable for the children to leave the UK given the  length  of  time
    they have spent here, the fact that they had never been to Nigeria  and
    presumably the complicating factor that Comfort is the child of another
    father who currently has leave to remain in the UK.   It  is  suggested
    that this is a case where Mr Bates conceded that the  Respondents  view
    was that while it would not be  reasonable  to  remove  the  Appellants
    permanently it would not be disproportionate to require him  to  return
    to Nigeria and make an entry clearance  application  on  the  basis  of
    these relationships.


31. I have reminded myself on  R  (on  the  application  of  Chen)  v  SSHD
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC). However I am satisfied that the ratio  of  the
    case was that there may be cases  in  which  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being  enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where
    temporary separation to enable an individual to make an application for
    entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it will  be  for
    the individual to place before the Secretary  of  State  evidence  that
    such  temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately   with
    protected rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon  the  case-
    law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.  In this case,  it  was
    conceded by the Respondent that the separation would not be  temporary.
    It is not challenged that Ms Rafu works while the Appellant  cares  for
    the children and the this facilitates her ability to work  which  could
    impact on her ability to meet the financial requirements of the  Rules.



32. I accept that the Appellant has a very poor immigration history and his
    family and private life have been established while his status has been
    precarious. I also accept he has an appalling record  for  offences  of
    drink driving although the last conviction would appear to be in  2012.
    It is a case however where the Respondent  concedes  that  family  life
    could not continue in Nigeria because of  the  complicating  factor  of
    children born from different relationships.  Taking all of the evidence
    in this case into account but particularly  the  circumstances  of  the
    children I am persuaded, on balance, that  given  the  public  interest
    does not require the Appellants removal where  he  has  a  relationship
    with a qualifying children  it  does  not  in  this  case  require  his
    temporary removal for the purposes of applying for entry clearance.

Decision

33. The appeal is allowed.

Signed                                                              Date
2.1.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

