
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/18194/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th July 2017                     |On 19th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Adnan [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Asjad, promulgated on 30th March 2017, following the  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 31st January 2017.   At  the  hearing,  the
    judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  and  therefore  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  [  ]
    1989.  He entered the UK on 25th December 2012 with entry clearance  on
    a spouse's visa, which was valid until 17th March 2015.  He applied for
    further leave to remain in the UK under the  parent  route,  which  was
    refused on 28th April 2015 and that is the decision under appeal.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is married to [NH], a British citizen,
    and they have a son, [AA], who was born on [ ]  2009.   Their  marriage
    had broken down, but on 21st June 2016,  the  Birmingham  County  Court
    made directions for the Appellant to begin  preparatory  sessions  over
    two consecutive weeks, in relation to his child, with direct supervised
    contact on a fortnightly basis.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that, notwithstanding there being  contact  arrangements
    in  place  at  the  time  of  the  hearing,  and  notwithstanding   the
    Appellant's evidence that during the four hours of contact session that
    he has with his child, that he plays, talks and eats with his son  (see
    paragraph 18), nevertheless, none of this

         "Amounts to the Appellant playing an active  role  in  his  child's
         upbringing.  Although the contact arrangements are a means by which
         the child is able to have some sort of a  relationship  with  their
         parent, the evidence before me shows that it is the mother  who  is
         taking the active role in the child's upbringing and she  is  doing
         so on her own" (paragraph 19).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 27th July 2017, Mr  Mills  submitted  that,
    notwithstanding  that  there  was  a  Rule  24  response  against   the
    Appellant's appeal following the rejection of his claim by Judge Asjad,
    the  plain  fact  here  was  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Asjad  was
    unsustainable in  the  face  of  a  Family  Court  contact  order,  the
    genuineness of which could not be challenged, such that it  was  simply
    not open to the judge to go behind it and to  say  that  there  was  no
    parental relationship between the Appellant and his son.

 7. The child was a British citizen.  It was not reasonable for him  to  be
    removed with his father to Pakistan.   The  Secretary  of  State's  own
    policy in relation to such matters was set out in SF (Albania), and  on
    that basis the appeal should be allowed.

 8. Mr Islam, appearing on behalf of the  Appellant,  submitted  that  this
    must be an appropriate course of action.

 9. Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  In the  light  of  Mr  Mills'  submissions,  which
    recognises that there was an error of law, I conclude that the  judge's
    decision was vitiated by a material error.

11. As the grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal on 5th June  2017
    made clear, "since the Family Courts appear to have examined the matter
    in depth and decided in favour of the Appellant having contact with his
    son it is arguable that the finding of no parental relationship was not
    open to the judge on the evidence".

12. It was neither here nor there as  to  whether  the  Appellant,  as  the
    child's father, ought to have played a more active role, or not.  Given
    my finding that there is an error of law,  I  remake  the  decision  as
    follows.

13. This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th September 2017
