
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/18871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On August 24, 2015                   |On August 28, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS MONIKA JALOTA
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Cutting (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a national of India and on March 4, 2013 she  made  an
    application for a residence card as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The respondent  refused
    that application on November 28, 2013 under Regulation 10(5) and  10(6)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as she was
    not satisfied the appellant had retained rights.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    2006 Regulations.

 4. The matter came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Dineen  on
    November 28, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on March 27,  2015  the
    Tribunal allowed her appeal.

 5. The respondent applied for  permission  to  appeal  on  April  1,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert on June 1, 2015.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  the  Tribunal   had   incorrectly
    approached the issue in hand because  as  stated  in  the  respondent's
    grounds of appeal the EEA national had neither ceased to be a qualified
    person nor ceased to reside in the United Kingdom. His absence from the
    United Kingdom had been temporary and the Tribunal had therefore  erred
    in allowing the appeal under Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations.

 8. By agreement I found there was an error of law and  I  set  aside  that
    decision.

 9. Mr Cutting, on behalf of the appellant,  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    should have considered the appellant's appeal either  under  Regulation
    14(2) of the 2006 Regulations if it had  found  the  EEA  national  was
    temporarily unable to work or alternatively  should  have  allowed  the
    appeal under Regulation 15(1)(6) of the 2006 Regulations on  the  basis
    that the EEA national was permanently unable to work.

10. Ms Brocklesby-Weller agreed that this was the  only  outstanding  issue
    for the Tribunal to consider as she accepted  the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to either a residence card or permanent residence depending on
    whether the medical evidence reached the necessary  level  required  to
    enable an immediate grant of permanent residence under Regulation 15.

    CONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS

11. The appellant's husband is an EEA national who arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in or around July 2010. The respondent did not take issue  that
    he had been working between July 2010 and January 2013 when  he  ceased
    work due to illness. Whilst it was not accepted the  EEA  national  had
    worked continuously it was accepted that he had accumulated  two  years
    employment in the United Kingdom.

12. Medical evidence has been produced and that medical  evidence  includes
    two letters from the hospital. Both letters confirm  the  EEA  national
    suffered brain damage following an epileptic fit.

13. On October 27, 2014  Slough  Borough  Council  provided  an  assessment
    report and concluded that the EEA national  was  entitled  to  services
    from the local authority.

14. A recent letter dated August 19, 2015 from the doctor confirms that the
    EEA national continues to suffer from epilepsy and behavioural problems
    due to a brain injury and that medication was taken  to  control  those
    problems. The doctor concluded he was unable to work although  no  long
    term prognosis was given.

15. Evidence that he was in receipt of Personal Independence Payment  until
    May 21, 2019 (at the earliest) was provided. This report confirmed  the
    EEA national needed supervision to manage his  toilet  needs,  dressing
    and undressing, he needed an aid or appliance  other  than  glasses  or
    contact lenses to read or  understand  the  basic  or  complex  written
    information, he was unable to stand  and  move  more  than  200  metres
    either aided or unaided and he was unable to follow a familiar  journey
    without assistance of a third party.

16. Mr Cutting invited me to find  that  the  medical  evidence  and  other
    evidence demonstrated that the EEA national was permanently  unable  to
    work and in those circumstances I was invited to allow the appeal under
    Regulation 15 of the 2006 regulations and  grant  the  application  for
    permanent residence.

17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller did not  make  any  specific  submissions  on  the
    medical issue but merely invited me to consider  the  evidence  and  to
    decide for myself whether the relevant threshold  was  met  bearing  in
    mind there was no consultant report saying he would be unable to work.

18. Having considered the medical evidence, I am left in no doubt that  the
    EEA national will ever return to  work.  The  report  provided  by  the
    Department for Work and Pensions makes it clear that the  EEA  national
    cannot do anything for himself. The  medical  evidence  confirms  brain
    damage and whilst the epilepsy is not a reason for him being unable  to
    work it is the cause of his brain damage. The medical evidence produced
    makes it clear that his incapacity is not temporary.

19. I am satisfied having considered all of the available evidence that the
    appellant is entitled to permanent residence under Regulation  15(1)(d)
    as the family member of a worker who was ceased activity.

    DECISION

20. There was a material error.  I set aside  the  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under Regulation 10 the original decision and allow  the  appeal
    under Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award payable.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
