

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated:                 |
|On 2 June 2014                                |On 3 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between


                           SURENDER REDDY RIKKALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Vishal of Malik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 7 April  2014  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brenells which refused the appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 1 May 2013 refusing leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

 2. It was common ground that the point before me was narrow. The appellant
    provided a copy of a contract with his initial application.  There  was
    no dispute that the copy of the contract did not meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 41-SD (c) (4) (iii) of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules
    as it was not signed by the appellant on every page. The appellant then
    provided an original contract which was considered by the respondent in
    the refusal letter dated 1 May 2013. It was found wanting as it did not
    contain the post code of the other contracting party. That  meant  that
    it fell foul of paragraph 41-SD (c) (4) (iii)  (3)  which  specifically
    requires the "postal code" of the other party involved in the contract.



 3. Judge Brenells found for the  respondent,  finding  at  [17]  that  the
    provisions of paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules could not assist
    the appellant. Judge Brenells reasoning was that the  relevant  version
    of paragraph 245AA (b) (ii) referred to the respondent seeking remedial
    action by an appellant where "a document is in the  wrong  format"  and
    the absence of the post code of the other contracting party was  not  a
    "format" issue.

 4. I did not find that Judge Brenells erred in making that finding  or  in
    relying on it to dismiss the appeal as the evidential requirements were
    not met. It was not my view that the absence of the post  code  of  the
    other contracting party from the contract provided  by  the  appellant,
    indeed, from both contracts provided, was a shortcoming that  could  be
    properly characterised as relating to "the wrong format" such that  the
    appellant fell to benefit from paragraph 245AA (b) (ii). The  contracts
    were in the correct format but, as found  by  Judge  Brenells,  omitted
    information specifically required by the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant also sought to rely on the respondent's  policy  relating
    to evidential flexibility. The case of Rodriguez  (Flexibility  Policy)
    [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC) was overturned by the Court of Appeal in SSHD v
    Rodriguez and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 2. It was held that the  Secretary
    of State had not been under any obligation  to  afford  applicants  for
    leave to remain as Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrants  in  the  United
    Kingdom any opportunity to remedy defects in their under her evidential
    flexibility policy. The Court of Appeal indicated that  the  evidential
    flexibility policy was not designed to  give  an  applicant  a  general
    opportunity first to remedy any defect or inadequacy in an  application
    or supporting documentation so as to save the application from  refusal
    after consideration.

 6. In light of the above I did not find that there was any legally binding
    obligation upon the respondent to invite the appellant  to  remedy  the
    defect in  the  contract  he  provided.  The  common-law  principle  of
    fairness does not impose such an obligation and  nor  do  the  specific
    provisions of 245AA of the Immigration Rules.

 7. I was referred to Shebl (Entrepreneur: proof of contracts) [2014]  UKUT
    00216 (IAC). At [5] the Upper Tribunal says this:

        "The Secretary of State's position  is that the  Immigration  Rules
        envisage a contract included in  a  single  document,  and  that  a
        series of documents that together show all material required by the
        Rules does not constitute "a contract".  We can see no proper basis
        for that assertion.  The intention behind the  Rules  is  that  the
        claimant be able to show that he is genuinely trading.  It  strikes
        us as inconceivable that the entrepreneur route was to be  confined
        to the types of trading in  which  contracts  are  made  by  single
        documents.  Paragraph 41-SD very properly specifies that there must
        be documentary evidence sufficient to show genuine  contracts,  and
        containing sufficient information to enable the Secretary of  State
        to check the matter with the other parties for the contracts if she
        chooses to do so.  But there  is  a  world  of  difference  between
        requiring contracts to be evidenced by a  proper  paper  trail  and
        requiring each contract to be contained in a single  document.   In
        our judgment the Rules require the former, but not the latter."

 8. I did not find that could assist this appellant. It  is  not  that  the
    required information was available, just in different documents  before
    the respondent which was the case in Shebl. The post code of the  other
    contracting party was not available at all. The appellant  argues  that
    the  respondent  could  have  found  it  easily,  demonstrated  by  the
    appellant in his appeal bundle at pages 19 and  20,  where  a  "google"
    search of the details that were  provided  for  the  other  contracting
    party and the director of that company brought up  full  (and  entirely
    consistent details) including the post code. It remains the  case  that
    the burden was on the appellant to provide those documents not for  the
    respondent  to  seek  them  from  the  appellant  or  look   for   them
    independently herself.

 9. For these reasons I do not consider that the First-tier  Tribunal  made
    an error in law.  The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 2 June 2014
UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT










