

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18270/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 26 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               FARZANA KAUSAR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Khan, St Pauls Chambers, Birmingham


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Immigration and appeal history

 1. Ms Kausar was born on 15 June 1971 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.   She
    arrived in the UK on 13  September  2011  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor that acted as leave to  enter  to  29  February  2012.   On  23
    February 2012, she applied to vary her leave so as to remain in the  UK
    to care for her three children, born in 1994, 1998 and  1999,  who  are
    all British citizens.

 2. Ms Kausar's children were brought to the UK by  their  father,  also  a
    British citizen, in November 2009.  He and Ms Kausar married in 1993 in
    Pakistan but were divorced on 20 September 2012.  Ms Kausar  had  given
    permission for her children to be brought temporarily to the UK and  it
    was as a result of their father refusing to  return  them  to  Pakistan
    that prompted her to seek entry clearance as a visitor so she could  be
    reunited with them.  Her intention was simply to visit;  however,  soon
    after arriving here she discovered that the children's father  was  not
    providing adequate care.  It was this discovery that led Ms  Kausar  to
    seek permission to remain in the UK, the children having been abandoned
    by their father.

 3. On 7 May 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  to  vary  Ms  Kausar's
    leave.  The reasons given for this decision were that the  requirements
    set out at paragraph EX.1. of appendix FM to the immigration rules were
    not met because she had failed to demonstrate that she was  enjoying  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  her  children.   The
    basis for this decision was the lack of documentary  evidence  to  show
    contact between Ms Kausar and her children, despite  a  request  on  13
    March 2013 for such evidence to be provided.

 4. At the same time, the Secretary of State made a decision to remove  the
    appellant by way of directions under s.47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 5. In making her decision not to vary leave, the Secretary of State relied
    on paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1.(d) of appendix FM.  For convenience,  we  set
    out the provisions of section R-LTRPT: Requirements for  limited  leave
    to remain as a parent as they were at the date of decision in the annex
    to this determination.  As will become  clear  below,  central  to  the
    issues we have to resolve is how those provisions are to be interpreted
    and applied.

 6. Ms Kausar appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of
    State's decisions as she was  entitled  to  do  under  s.82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. At  the  hearing  of  her
    appeal, the Secretary of  State  withdrew  the  s.47  removal  decision
    because she accepted she did  not  have  power  in  law  to  make  that
    decision (the amendments to s.47 of the  2006  Act  introduced  by  the
    Crime and Courts Act 2013 entering into force on 8 May 2013).  Thus the
    appeal was limited to consideration of the refusal to vary leave.

 7. The parties raised a number of issues before and  during  the  hearing.
    Ms Kausar said she met the requirements of paragraph EX.1  of  appendix
    FM to the immigration rules but if she could  not  benefit  from  those
    provisions, then her appeal should succeed on article  8  ECHR  applied
    directly.  The Secretary of State  argued  that  Ms  Kausar  could  not
    benefit from paragraph   EX.1 as she had leave to enter as  a  visitor.
    As such, she did not meet  the  immigration  requirements  set  out  in
    paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.  For convenience, article 8 and  paragraph  EX.1
    are set out in the annex to this determination  although,  as  will  be
    seen, we do not need to consider the content of either in detail.

 8. After setting out the competing positions, the Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal made the following observation:

        "However, in my  interpretation  of  the  rules,  even  though  [Ms
        Kausar] came here as a visitor she can benefit from  the  rules  if
        she meets the criteria of paragraph EX.1 ..."

    The judge went on to find  that  Ms  Kausar  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1 and allowed the  appeal  on  that  basis.   Despite  the
    alternative basis on which the appeal was pursued, the  judge  did  not
    consider article 8 ECHR directly and made  no  finding  as  to  whether
    article 8(1) was  engaged  or  whether  the  immigration  decision  was
    proportionate in all the circumstances.

 9. Because there was a lack of explanation as to  why  the  judge  decided
    paragraph EX.1 applied to Ms Kausar's  case,  the  Secretary  of  State
    applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, such permission
    being granted on 27 February 2014.

10. There are a couple of preliminary points we need to make before we  can
    address the issues arising in the appeal.

11. We recognise that at some point between the making of  the  immigration
    decisions and the hearing, the Secretary  of  State  changed  the  case
    against the appellant.  Although she had  stated  in  her  reasons  for
    refusal letter of 7 May 2013 that the variation application was refused
    because the requirements of paragraph EX.1 were not met, at the hearing
    the submissions made on her behalf were that Ms Kausar could not access
    any benefit of paragraph EX.1 because she was in the UK as a visitor.

12. Although we are concerned that the failure of a case worker to properly
    apply the immigration rules is somewhat misleading, we accept  that  it
    was open to the Secretary of State to correct the basis for refusing to
    vary leave to remain at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  It does not appear that the change in the reasons  for  refusal
    was detrimental to Ms Kausar's case and there is no argument  that  the
    judge's decision to proceed was unfair in any way.

13.  We  mention  that  the  Secretary  of  State's   grounds   of   appeal
    inadvertently refer to the provisions in section  R-LTRP:  Requirements
    for limited leave to remain as a partner of  appendix  FM  and  not  R-
    LTRPT.  We accept that this  reference  was  unintended  and  that  the
    issues we need to consider relate to section R-LTRPT.  It may  be  that
    any findings we reach will by analogy apply to section R-LTRP and other
    provisions within appendix FM but this should not be regarded as  being
    automatic for reasons we identify below.

Submissions

14. Mr Mills clarified the Secretary of State's position.  He  stated  that
    paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1 meant that Ms Kausar's immigration  status  as  a
    visitor prevented her from accessing  paragraph    EX.1.   This  was  a
    deliberate measure introduced to preserve the integrity of the  visitor
    route.  The visitor route  meant  people  coming  to  the  UK  with  an
    intention  to  leave  did  not  have  to  meet  the  requirements   for
    settlement.  If it were possible to switch within the immigration rules
    to a long term category after arrival, then the requirements  to  enter
    as a visitor would have to be strengthened.

15. As Ms Kausar could not meet  the  immigration  status  requirement,  Mr
    Mills argued that she could not meet  the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a parent.  He argued that the judge had no basis in  law  for
    interpreting paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1 in the way he  had;  paragraph  EX.1
    did not apply to Ms Kausar because she was a visitor.

16. Mr Mills acknowledged that in circumstances where there are exceptional
    circumstances,  then  the  Secretary  of  State  would   exercise   her
    discretion "outside the rules".  In this case that had  not  been  done
    because at the date of decision the Secretary of  State  had  concluded
    that there was insufficient evidence to  show  that  Ms  Kausar  had  a
    parental relationship with her children.

17. Mr Mills accepted that the position was now somewhat different in light
    of the judicial findings made in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  are
    unchallenged.  Mr Mills was satisfied on the findings  made  that  this
    was an exceptional case and Ms Kausar should succeed  under  article  8
    ECHR applied directly.

18. Mr Khan argued (as he had submitted in the  First-tier  Tribunal)  that
    the words in parenthesis at the end of paragraph   E-LTRPT.3.1  applied
    to all three indents (i.e. (a), (b) and (c)) and not  just  to  (c)  as
    alleged by  Mr  Mills.   As  such,  the  judge's  interpretation,  that
    paragraph EX.1 could be applied even though the appellant had leave  to
    enter as a visitor, was correct and there was no error on  a  point  of
    law.  In the alternative, he accepted Mr Mills's  concession  regarding
    the direct application of article 8.

Discussion

19. This case raises the issue of the interpretation and application of the
    immigration rules relating  to  private  and  family  life  rights.  We
    recognise that since this appeal was heard the Immigration Act 2014 s19
    has come into force. Because we find  that  Ms  Kausar  cannot  succeed
    under Appendix FM ie under the Immigration Rules in force at  the  date
    of the decision for reasons we set out below and because it is conceded
    by Mr Mills that Ms Kausar succeeds under  Article  8  because  of  the
    particular circumstances of her case, we have not  set  out  in  detail
    arguments and submissions that were put to us at the hearing. The  fact
    that this determination has not been promulgated until after 28th  July
    2014 does not impact on the concession  by  Mr  Mills  that  Ms  Kausar
    succeeds in her appeal against the decision on human rights grounds and
    would thus be eligible for the grant of discretionary leave to  remain.



20. In order to understand the  competing  arguments  and  to  be  able  to
    explain our conclusions, we begin by summarising our  discussions.   We
    have divided these into three areas, each of which has an impact on how
    we are to interpret and apply the immigration rules.

Discussion (1): Interpreting the immigration rules

21. Our discussions began  by  identifying  how  we  should  interpret  the
    immigration rules.  We established there was no dispute  regarding  the
    following points.



The authoritative versions of the immigration rules

22. The only authoritative version  of  the  immigration  rules  are  those
    contained in the Statements of Changes to Immigration Rules  made  from
    time to time and as presented to Parliament.

23. In this respect, we must have regard (at the date of the  decision  the
    subject of the appeal) to two  Statements  of  Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules, those presented to Parliament on 13 June 2012 (HC 194) and on 22
    November 2012 (HC 760).  The former introduced appendix  FM,  including
    the first version of section R-LTRPT.  The latter  included  amendments
    to that  section  (paragraph  s  377  to  393).   As  we  have  already
    indicated, the annex to this determination contains the  provisions  as
    they were at the date of decision.

Interpretation of legislation: the Human Rights Act 1998

24. When interpreting any primary or subordinate legislation, we must  have
    regard to s.3 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  and  ensure  that  any
    legislation is read and given effect in a way which is compatible  with
    the rights protected under the ECHR insofar as  they  are  incorporated
    into the laws applicable in the UK.

25. However, we recognise that this does not permit us to alter the meaning
    of any legislation even if it is incompatible.  This is clear from  the
    application of sections 3(2) and 6(2) of the 1998 Act, bearing in  mind
    that the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules are provisions  made
    under s.3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

Natural and ordinary meaning

26. The Supreme Court confirmed the proper  approach  to  interpreting  the
    immigration rules in Mahad and others v SSHD [2009] UKSC 16, [2010] Imm
    AR 203.  Lord Brown advised:

    10. There is really  no  dispute  about  the  proper  approach  to  the
        construction of the Rules. As  Lord  Hoffmann  said  in  Odelola  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230,  1233
        (paragraph  4):

         "Like any other question of construction,  this  [whether  a  rule
             change applies to all  undetermined  applications  or  only  to
             subsequent applications] depends upon the language of the rule,
             construed against the  relevant  background.  That  involves  a
             consideration of the immigration  rules  as  a  whole  and  the
             function which they serve in the administration of  immigration
             policy."

     That is entirely consistent with what Buxton LJ (collecting together a
        number of dicta from past cases concerning the status of the rules)
        had said in Odelola in the Court of Appeal ([2009] 1 WLR 126)  and,
        indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the House of Lords  decision
        in Odelola) in the present case. Essentially it comes to this.  The
        Rules are not to be construed with all the strictness applicable to
        the construction of  a  statute  or  a  statutory  instrument  but,
        instead, sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning  of
        the words  used,  recognising  that  they  are  statements  of  the
        Secretary  of  State's  administrative  policy.  The   respondent's
        counsel readily accepted that what she meant in her written case by
        the proposition "the question of interpretation is . . .  what  the
        Secretary of State intended his policy to be" was that the  court's
        task is to discover from the words  used  in  the  Rules  what  the
        Secretary of State must be taken to have intended. After all, under
        section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971, the  Secretary  of  State
        has  to  lay  the  Rules  before  Parliament  which  then  has  the
        opportunity to disapprove them. True,  as  I  observed  in  Odelola
        (para 33): "the question is what the Secretary of  State  intended.
        The rules are her rules." But that intention  is  to  be  discerned
        objectively from the language used, not  divined  by  reference  to
        supposed policy considerations. Still  less  is  the  Secretary  of
        State's  intention  to   be   discovered   from   the   Immigration
        Directorates' Instructions (IDIs) issued  intermittently  to  guide
        immigration officers in their application of the  rules.  IDIs  are
        given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act
        which provides that:

             "In the exercise of their functions under this Act  immigration
             officers shall act in accordance with  such  instructions  (not
             inconsistent with the immigration rules) as may be  given  them
             by the Secretary of State . . ." (emphasis added).

27. We, of course, are bound to follow this approach.

Discussion (2): The interrelationship  between  the  immigration  rules  and
article 8 ECHR

28. The second area  of  discussion  considered  the  relationship  of  the
    provisions in the immigration rules describing private and family  life
    rights and article  8  ECHR.   We  need  to  bear  in  mind  how  these
    provisions relate in order to interpret the  text  we  are  considering
    because we must interpret those provisions in context.

29. There is of course much case law on this subject, most recently set out
    by the Court of Appeal in R(MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985.
    Although that judgment was handed down after we heard this  appeal,  it
    is of course highly relevant in helping us to understand how we  should
    interpret the relationship between the provisions  in  the  immigration
    rules and in article 8 directly.

30. We draw attention to paragraph 135 of MM(Lebanon):

         135.  Where the relevant group of  IRs  [immigration  rules],  upon
         their proper construction provide a  "complete  code"  for  dealing
         with a person's Convention rights in the context of a particular IR
         or statutory provision, such as in the case of "foreign criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with  that  code,  although  reference  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is  not
         such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will  be  more
         at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and  UK  and  Strasbourg
         case law."

31. As this describes the agreement we reached with the parties during  the
    hearing, even though we rely on  an  authority  not  available  to  the
    parties during the hearing, there  has  been  no  need  to  recall  the
    hearing or ask for further submissions.



Is appendix FM a "complete code"?

32. The Secretary of State has argued in many  cases  that  the  provisions
    relating to private and family life rights now contained  in  paragraph
    276ADE of and appendix FM to the immigration  rules  form  a  "complete
    code", by which we understand her to be saying that  there  is  nothing
    else to consider in relation to article 8.  Where it is not a  complete
    code, then it may be that a decision made under the  immigration  rules
    is unsustainable.

33. The Upper Tribunal and  senior  courts  have  considered  this  general
    proposition in a number of cases, most recently synthesised in  Shahzad
    (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  85  (IAC).   The  Upper  Tribunal
    discussed this issue in paragraphs 23 to 31 of its  determination.   It
    concluded in paragraphs 30 and 31:

        30. It follows from the other part of the ratio of MF [MF (Nigeria)
        [2013] EWCA Civ 1192] -  that  the  new  rules  on  deportation  of
        foreign criminals are a  complete  code  because  they  contain  an
        express provision requiring consideration in the Article 8  context
        of "exceptional circumstances" and "other factors" - that any other
        rule which has a similar provision will also constitute a  complete
        code (rule S-EC.1.4, dealing with exclusion, would  seem  to  be  a
        further example);


        31. Where an area of the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
        mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
        and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
        640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
        of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
        granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
        purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
        circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


34. Where there is an express requirement to  have  regard  to  exceptional
    circumstances and other factors, such provisions are  likely  to  be  a
    complete code.  In relation to appendix FM, the provisions relating  to
    exceptional circumstances and other factors are set  out  in  paragraph
    EX.1.  They reflect the factors that would have  to  be  considered  in
    relation to article 8 when considering  family  life  issues  involving
    partners and children.  A decision  made  under  paragraph  EX.1  will,
    therefore, usually inform the Tribunal as  to  whether  a  decision  is
    lawful or not in relation to protected human rights and it will usually
    be unnecessary to determine any human rights issues separately as to do
    so would be to repeat the task already completed.

35. But where there are factors relevant to a person's private  and  family
    life rights which are not considered under the immigration rules,  then
    the Tribunal will consider them as there will be good reason  to  apply
    article 8 directly.  It will be for the Tribunal to decide what factors
    might be relevant and  will  have  regard  to  the  guidance  given  in
    paragraph 31 of Shahzad to do so.

36. There is no requirement for the Tribunal to  consider  each  and  every
    possible factor raised by an appellant because  many  points  will  not
    reach the appropriate threshold.  As the Court of Appeal identified  in
    VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5, [2009] Imm AR 436, which at paragraph 31
    concluded:

        31. ... the correct test is now to be found in EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]
        UKHL 41. But recognition should be given ... to the  conclusion  at
        which the AIT arrived (�44) that,  if  a  removal  is  to  be  held
        disproportionate, "what must be shown is more than a mere  hardship
        or a mere difficulty or mere obstacle. There is a seriousness  test
        which requires the obstacles or difficulties to go  beyond  matters
        of choice or inconvenience."

37. Where it is shown that there will be more than mere hardship or a  mere
    difficulty or mere obstacle, then the threshold suggested in Nagre  and
    Gulshan is likely to be met.  It is, of course,  for  an  appellant  to
    show that this threshold is met and if that is  not  established,  then
    there is no reason for the Tribunal to apply article 8 directly.

Paragraph EX.1 not free standing

38. The Upper Tribunal identified in Sabir (Appendix FM - paragraph    EX.1
    not free standing) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC) the following approach  to  the
    immigration rules:

         It is plain from the architecture of the Rules as regards  partners
         that EX.1 is "parasitic" on the relevant Rule  within  Appendix  FM
         that otherwise grants leave to remain. If EX.1 was intended to be a
         free-standing element some mechanism of identification  would  have
         been used. The structure of the Rules as presently drafted requires
         it to be a component part of the leave granting Rule. This  is  now
         made plain by the respondent's guidance dated October 2013.

39. It is accepted that in terms of appendix FM of the  immigration  rules,
    the only provision that  permits  consideration  of  compassionate  and
    other factors is paragraph EX.1.  In light  of  Shahzad,  if  paragraph
    EX.1 is not engaged, then the decision under the immigration rules will
    not have considered any compassionate or other factors and the Tribunal
    will have to consider whether  it  is  necessary  to  apply  article  8
    directly for these issues to  be  addressed.   If  the  factors  to  be
    considered meet the "seriousness test" we have  already  described  and
    the Tribunal decides article 8 must be considered, then it will use the
    tried and tested step-by-step approach set out in  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] Imm AR 381 in an appeal where a person relies on
    article 8 rights in relation to family life in order to decide  if  the
    immigration decision is lawful or not.

40. In other words, the Tribunal will move from considering the  ground  of
    appeal relating to whether the immigration decision  is  in  accordance
    with the immigration  rules  to  considering  whether  the  immigration
    decision is unlawful under s.6 of the 1998 Act.

41. We focus here on family life rights merely because it is on those  that
    we were addressed during the appeal.  Although a similar  approach  may
    apply to considerations of private life rights, the  structure  of  the
    immigration rules is wholly different and we make no assumptions  about
    how those provisions relate to article 8.

Discussion (3): The structure of appendix FM

42. There is one further aspect of our discussions that is of relevance  to
    our consideration of the proper interpretation of paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1
    of appendix FM and that is how it  and  appendix  FM  as  a  whole  are
    structured.

43. A person seeking leave to remain as a parent under section R-LTRPT must
    meet various requirements, which are set out under separate headings in
    appendix FM.  To meet the requirements as a parent, a person will  have
    to meet the requirements relating to:

     a. Suitability (see paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1.(c) or (d));
     b. Relationship (see paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2 to 2.4);
     c. Immigration status (see paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1 to 3.2);
     d. Financial (see paragraph E-LTRPT.4.1 to 4.2); and
     e. English language (see paragraph E-LTRPT.5.1 to 5.2).

    Reading through the provisions contained in these sections, it is clear
    that in any one section paragraph EX.1 might apply.  There is reference
    to paragraphs EX.1 in all five sections.

44. The structure of appendix FM shows that it is necessary for a person to
    meet the requirements of each section.  If a person does not  meet  the
    specifications in one section and paragraph EX.1 is  not  available  to
    them, then they cannot meet the requirements of  that  section.   As  a
    result, such a person cannot meet the requirements of  the  immigration
    rules. Therefore, as an example, the fact  that  paragraph  EX.1  might
    apply where a parent cannot meet the financial  requirements  does  not
    mean that EX.1 applies to the whole of their application or appeal.  In
    other words, the fact that paragraph EX.1 applies in  relation  to  the
    financial requirements does not permit it to be read across as applying
    in the other sections.  Each set of  requirements  has  to  be  treated
    independently.

45. In the present appeal, the arguments relate to whether  Ms  Kausar  was
    able to access paragraph EX.1 in relation  to  the  immigration  status
    requirements.  The fact that she  may  have  been  entitled  to  expect
    paragraph EX.1 to have been applied in relation to any or  all  of  the
    other sets of requirements is immaterial because each section  contains
    discrete provisions.

    Our findings: Error on a point of law

46. Having identified with the parties the context  in  which  we  have  to
    consider the immigration rules and  the  various  factors  we  have  to
    consider, we  can  consider  their  opposing  arguments  regarding  the
    meaning of paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.

47. We recognise that if we can read paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1 in  a  way  that
    makes it possible for a person  in  the  UK  as  a  visitor  to  access
    paragraph EX.1, then it would mean that the Tribunal would be  able  to
    consider exceptional circumstances and  other  factors  when  assessing
    whether the requirements of the immigration rules had been met in terms
    of the immigration status requirements.  This would,  in  effect,  mean
    that any consideration of private and family  life  rights  would  fall
    within the immigration rules and it would be unnecessary to have regard
    to article 8 directly unless exceptional circumstances are shown.

48. However, we also recognise  that  we  cannot  change  the  natural  and
    ordinary meaning of the immigration rules  to  achieve  this  end.   We
    acknowledge Mr Mills's submission that there is a specific reason which
    justifies why the immigration status requirements prevents a person  in
    the UK as a visitor benefitting from  paragraph  EX.1.   The  question,
    therefore, is whether the natural and ordinary meaning of the  relevant
    provision is open to more than one interpretation.  If  there  is,  and
    one interpretation is more compatible with the human rights convention,
    then that will be a reason to prefer that interpretation.

49. We  move  to  consider  the  wording  of  paragraph  E-LTRPT.3.1.   The
    provision was introduced into the immigration rules by the Statement of
    Changes in Immigration Rules (HC 194) presented  to  Parliament  on  13
    June  2012.   The  full  text  is  set  out  in  the  annex   to   this
    determination; the relevant part reads:

        Immigration status requirement
        E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK -
             (a) as a visitor;
             (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less;
             (c) on temporary admission.

    As introduced it is clear that there was no exception or alternative to
    these provisions.  There was no route to paragraph EX.1.

50. In addition, we recognise that the three provisions relate to  separate
    categories of  immigration  status.   Although  (a)  and  (b)  are  not
    mutually exclusive because a visitor will  usually  have  leave  for  a
    period of 6 months or less, they are  independent  of  each  other.   A
    visitor is a person who has been granted leave to enter or remain under
    part 2 of the immigration rules  (paragraphs  41  to  56ZG).   Not  all
    visitors will have leave granted for a period of six  months  or  less;
    similarly, not all those granted leave for six months or less  will  be
    visitors.  Of course, a person  on  temporary  admission  cannot  be  a
    visitor or a person granted leave (see paragraph 21 of  schedule  2  to
    the 1971 Act).

51. It follows that if a person fell within (a),  (b)  or  (c),  then  they
    would not be able  to  meet  the  immigration  status  requirement  and
    therefore would not be able to benefit from the provisions relating  to
    parents in the immigration rules.

52. For clarity, we mention that the only reference to paragraph EX.1 under
    the  heading  immigration  status  requirement  was  in  paragraph   E-
    LTRPT.3.2.  A person whose immigration status fell into  paragraph   E-
    LTRPT.3.1 (a), (b) or (c) would not be able to  access  paragraph  EX.1
    through paragraph E-LTRPT.3.2 because  that  avenue  is  only  open  to
    someone who is in the UK in  breach  of  immigration  laws.   A  person
    falling within paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1 is not in  breach  of  immigration
    laws.

53. On 22 November 2012, another Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules
    (HC 760) was presented to Parliament.  Paragraphs 385 and 386  of  that
    Statement amended paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1 in two ways.

        385.  In Appendix FM paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.(b) after "less"  insert
        ",unless that leave was granted pending the outcome of family court
        or divorce proceedings".

        386.  In Appendix FM  paragraph  E-LTRPT.3.1.(c)  after  "temporary
        admission" insert "or temporary release  (unless  paragraph    EX.1
        applies).".

    These amendments result in paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1. reading as follows:

        Immigration status requirement
        E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK -
             (a) as a visitor;
             (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or  less,
             unless that leave was granted pending  the  outcome  of  family
             court or divorce proceedings;
             (c)  on  temporary  admission  or  temporary  release   (unless
             paragraph EX.1 applies).

54. As we have indicated, the Statements of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules
    presented to Parliament are the  only  authoritative  versions  of  the
    immigration rules.  How third parties might choose to set them out does
    not lend any weight to how they are to be interpreted.

55. The fact that the changes in HC 760 make separate changes to paragraphs
    E-LTRPT.3.1.(b) and (c) indicates  to  us  that  the  amendments  apply
    specifically to each provision as  stated  and  not  to  the  whole  of
    paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.  This is the natural and ordinary meaning of the
    changes.  This leads us to find that the phrase in parenthesis  applies
    solely to those on  temporary  admission  and  temporary  release.   In
    addition,  we  see  nothing  in  HC  760,  including  its   explanatory
    memorandum, that  suggests  significant  changes  were  being  made  to
    paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.  The amendments to (b) and  (c)  merely  provide
    exceptions to those provisions whilst retaining the  overall  structure
    originally brought in.  We  have  already  identified  that  the  three
    indents as introduced are independent provisions and as that  structure
    is preserved it is not possible to link the  words,  "unless  paragraph
    EX.1 applies" to any  provision  other  than  temporary  admission  and
    temporary release.

56. The fact that each of  the  provisions  in  paragraph   E-LTRPT.3.1  is
    independent means that we cannot consider drawing  any  parallels  with
    other parts of appendix FM such as paragraph E-LTRPT.5.1  where  it  is
    accepted that the words, "unless paragraph   EX.1 applies"  applies  to
    all four indents. Paragraph E-LTRPT.5.1 sets out the  English  language
    requirement.  Although it concludes with the same phrase, its structure
    is different to paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.

57. In addition, we recall that the fact that a person  might  be  able  to
    access the provisions in paragraph EX.1 in relation to any  or  all  of
    the other requirements in section R-LTRPT does  not  assist  as  it  is
    necessary to meet each set of requirements.  Ms Kausar  was  unable  to
    meet the immigration status requirement and therefore  could  not  meet
    the requirements of section R-LTRPT: Requirements for limited leave  to
    remain as a parent.

58. As we find there is only one natural and ordinary meaning to  paragraph
    E-LTRPT.3.1., it prevents a person in the UK  as  a  visitor  switching
    immigration status to that of a parent, even though this  may  not,  in
    some circumstances, be compatible with article 8. For these reasons  we
    reject Mr Khan's argument regarding the interpretation of paragraph  E-
    LTRPT.3.1.  This means  that  the  appellant  could  not  rely  on  the
    application  of  paragraph  EX.1  to  meet   the   immigration   status
    requirement.

59. Since we heard the appeal, we have identified that changes made to  the
    immigration rules on 10 July 2014 will alter paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1  and
    3.2 from 28 July 2014.  Paragraphs 60 to 64 of the Statement of Changes
    in Immigration Rules (HC 532, 10 July 2014) provides:

         60. In Appendix FM at the end of paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.(a) insert
         "or".
         61. In Appendix FM delete paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1.(c).
         62. In Appendix FM for paragraph E-LTRPT.3.2. substitute: "E-
         LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -
         (a) on temporary admission or temporary release, unless paragraph
         EX.1.
         applies; or
         (b) in breach of immigration laws (disregarding any period of
         overstaying for
         a period of 28 days or less), unless paragraph EX.1. applies.".

60. We make no assessment of these changes because they do not apply to the
    appeal we are determining.  However, we note that the  changes  reflect
    Mr Mills's submission that a person with leave to enter as a visitor or
    for a period of six months or less cannot benefit from  paragraph  EX.1
    of appendix FM.

61. From all that we have considered, it follows that we  find  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  on  a  point  of  law  because   he   has
    misinterpreted the law.  He had no power to find that  the  immigration
    decision was not in accordance with the immigration rules.

Setting aside and remaking the decision

62. As we have already identified, the First-tier Tribunal Judge determined
    the appeal solely by application of paragraph EX.1.  The fact that  the
    judge had no power to do so means that the decision has to be set aside
    because there are insufficient reasons given for allowing the appeal.

63. We have found  that  Ms  Kausar  cannot  meet  the  immigration  status
    requirement of section R-LTRPT of appendix FM.  She  accepts  that  she
    cannot meet the private life requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE
    or any other provisions of the immigration rules.  For these reasons we
    can only conclude that the immigration decision is in  accordance  with
    the immigration rules.

64. Given the concession by Mr Mills that Ms Kausar succeeds in her  appeal
    on human rights grounds  given  the  particular  circumstances  of  her
    appeal we allow her appeal on human rights grounds and  find  that  the
    immigration decision is contrary to Ms Kausar's protected  family  life
    rights.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.



We remake the decision to

    1. dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules

    2. allow the appeal on human rights  grounds  against  the  immigration
       decision of 7 May 2013.


                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy
Annex: extracts from appendix FM to the Immigration Rules as at the date  of
decision

Section R-LTRPT: Requirements for limited leave to remain as a parent

R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited or indefinite  leave  to
remain as a parent or partner are-
 (a)     the applicant and the child must be in the UK;
 (b)     the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited  or
    indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner; and either
 (c)     (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  Section  S-LTR:
    Suitability leave to remain; and
     (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements  of  Section  ELTRPT:
    Eligibility for leave to remain as a parent, or
 (d)      (i)  the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTR:
    Suitability leave to remain; and
     (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraph s  E-LTRPT.2.2-
    2.4. and E- LTRPT.3.1.; and
     (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.

Section E-LTRPT: Eligibility for limited leave to remain as a parent

E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a parent all  of  the
requirements of paragraph s E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2. must be met.

Relationship requirements
E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-
 (a)     under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or where the
    child has  turned 18 years of age since the applicant was first granted
    entry clearance or leave to remain as a  parent  under  this  Appendix,
    must not have formed an  independent  family  unit  or  be  leading  an
    independent life;
 (b)     living in the UK; and
 (c)     a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or
 (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years  immediately
    preceding the date of application and paragraph EX.1. applies.
E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-
 (a)     the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for the child
    or the child normally lives with the  applicant  and  not  their  other
    parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in the UK);or
 (b)     the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be-
     (i) a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;
     (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here  includes  a  person
    who has been in a relationship with the applicant  for  less  than  two
    years prior to the date of application); and
     (iii) the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave to  remain
    as a partner under this Appendix.
E-LTRPT.2.4.
 (a)     The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-
     (i) sole parental responsibility for the  child,  or  that  the  child
    normally lives with them; or
     (ii) access rights to the child; and
 (b)     The applicant must provide evidence  that  they  are  taking,  and
    intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's upbringing.

Immigration status requirement
E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-
 (a)     as a visitor;
 (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less, unless that
    leave was granted pending  the  outcome  of  family  court  or  divorce
    proceedings;
 (c) on temporary admission or temporary release (unless paragraph    EX.1.
    applies).
E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
laws, (disregarding any period of overstaying for a period  of  28  days  or
less), unless paragraph   EX.1. applies.

Financial requirements
E-LTRPT.4.1. The applicant must provide evidence that they will be  able  to
adequately maintain and accommodate themselves and any dependants in the  UK
without recourse to public funds, unless paragraph EX.1. applies.
E-LTRPT.4.2.  The  applicant  must  provide  evidence  that  there  will  be
adequate accommodation in the UK, without recourse to public funds, for  the
family,  including  other  family  members  who  are  not  included  in  the
application but who live in the same household,  which  the  family  own  or
occupy exclusively, unless paragraph EX.1. applies: accommodation  will  not
be regarded as adequate if-
 (a)     it is, or will be, overcrowded; or
 (b)     it contravenes public health regulations.

English language requirement
E-LTRPT.5.1. If the applicant has not met  the  requirement  in  a  previous
application for leave as a parent or partner,  the  applicant  must  provide
specified evidence that they-
 (a)     are a national of a majority English speaking  country  listed  in
    paragraph  GEN.1.6.;
 (b)     have passed an English language test in speaking and listening  at
    a minimum of level A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference for
    Languages with a provider approved by the Secretary of State;
 (c)     have an academic  qualification  recognised  by  UK  NARIC  to  be
    equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD in
    the UK, which was taught in English; or
 (d) are exempt from  the  English  language  requirement  under  paragraph
    ELTRPT. 5.2, unless paragraph EX.1. applies.
E-LTRPT.5.2. The applicant is exempt from the English  language  requirement
if at the date of application-
 (a)     the applicant is aged 65 or over;
 (b) the applicant has a disability (physical or  mental  condition)  which
    prevents the applicant from meeting the requirement; or
 (c)     there are exceptional circumstances which  prevent  the  applicant
    from being able to meet the requirement.


Section EX: Exception
Paragraph EX.1. This paragraph applies if
 (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with a child who-
      (aa)    is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years
          when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis that this
          paragraph  applied;
      (bb)    is in the UK;
      (cc)    is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously for
          at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
          application; and
     (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK;
    or
 (b)     the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK or
    in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
    outside the UK.
