
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18824/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 January 2017                        |On 06 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                               SUMAREE NAK-IN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Balroop, Counsel instructed by Arkas Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Thailand born on 1 August 1983 who
      entered the UK as a student in May 2010. On 23 January 2015 she
      applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her relationship
      with her partner and daughter, both of whom are British citizens.


   2. On 1 May 2015 the application was refused. She appealed to the First-
      tier Tribunal ("FtT"), where her appeal was heard by FtT Judge Oxlade.
      In a decision promulgated on 11 July 2016, the judge dismissed the
      appeal. The appellant now appeals against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   3. The judge found, firstly, that the appellant did not meet the
      eligibility requirements of the Immigration Rules. He then considered
      the appeal outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.


   4. In assessing whether removal of the appellant from the UK would be
      proportionate, the judge's starting point was to consider the best
      interests of her daughter, who was born on 15 December 2014. He made
      the following findings about her:
   a. She is a British citizen;
   b. She lives with the appellant and her father, who is a British citizen;
   c. She is breast fed, although also eats solid food;
   d. The appellant is her primary carer;
   e. Her father spends considerable amounts of time with her when not
      working; and
   f. If the appellant were removed to Thailand she would take her daughter
      with her but that would be a choice as the daughter could remain in
      the UK with her father, with whom she has a close relationship.


   5. The appellant adduced a GP report about her daughter which stated that
      removing her from either parent would be damaging. The judge gave the
      report little weight on the basis that there was no explanation for
      the conclusion.


   6. The judge found, at paragraph [44], that if the appellant were to
      leave the UK "she would choose to take her daughter with her to live
      in Thailand until she seeks entry clearance" and that whilst in
      Thailand she and her daughter would be able to live with the
      appellant's parents or could rent a property. He found that the
      appellant "could make an out of country application, pending which her
      daughter could stay with her without significant short or long term
      implications".


   7. The judge then stated:


      "The IDI [Immigration Directorate Instructions Family Migration] asks
      the decision maker to test whether the British child would be "forced"
      to leave the UK; I find that she would not be forced; it would be the
      mother's choice, the child could equally remain with her father with
      whom she is quite used to living and who shares parental
      responsibility and by his account is 'hands on'. Whist he may wish to
      continue to work and support the application from abroad, these are
      choices. I do not find the appellant's removal would force the child
      to leave the UK."


   8. At paragraph [45] the judge concluded his analysis of the child's best
      interests by stating:
         "I do not find that her best interests would not be served by
         travelling to Thailand with her mother, for a relatively short
         period, whilst entry clearance is obtained."


   9. The judge then referred to Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), stating:


         "Nor is there a breach of Section 117B(6) caused by the appellant's
         removal, as whilst she has a genuine and subsisting relationship I
         do not find out [sic] that it would not be reasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK with the mother for a relatively short
         period."


  10. The judge highlighted that the appellant's relationship was entered
      into at a time when her status was precarious. He also found that the
      appellant and sponsor were aware of the visa limitations and that they
      had a "game plan" to find a way around the Immigration Rules.


  11. The judge concluded that:

         "a temporary interference with the appellant's, sponsor's and
         child's family and private life is proportionate to the need to
         maintain effective immigration control and that the appellant's
         removal would be neither a breach of the IDI, the best interests of
         the child, nor section 117B of the 2002 Act as to
         unreasonableness".


Grounds of appeal and submissions

  12. Mr Balroop, in both his submissions and the grounds of appeal, argued
      that the judge made a material error of law in his approach to the
      question of whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's
      daughter to leave the UK. The judge found that it would be reasonable
      for her to leave the UK for a "short period". Relying on the
      Immigration Directorate Instructions Family Migration: Appendix FM
      Section 1.0b Family Life and Private Life: 10 year routes dated August
      2015 ("the IDI") Mr Balroop argued that the respondents' policy as
      well as the case law does not draw a distinction between a British
      child leaving the UK for a short period or a long period and in either
      case it would not be reasonable to expect a child who is a British
      citizen to leave the UK.


  13. The judge found that it would be the appellant's "choice" to take her
      daughter with her to Thailand. Mr Balroop argued that this
      misconstrues the reality where in fact there would not be a choice.
      The child would need to accompany her mother for several reasons
      including that the appellant is the primary carer, she breast feeds
      her daughter, and if the daughter were left with her father he would
      not be able to work as many hours with the consequence that he would
      not be able to meet the financial requirements to enable the appellant
      to return to the UK as his partner.


  14. Mr Nath's response was that under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
      having a child is not a trump card. The judge had looked at the
      relevant factors to determine what would be reasonable and reached a
      considered conclusion based on the particular factual matrix. In these
      circumstances, there was no basis to find an error of law.
Consideration


  15. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides that:


      (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-


      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and


      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.


  16. There is no dispute in this appeal as to whether the appellant has a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with her daughter. Nor is it in
      question that the daughter, who is a British citizen, falls within the
      definition of a "qualifying child". The only issue under Section
      117(B)(6), therefore, is the reasonableness of expecting the
      appellant's daughter leave the UK with her mother.


  17. Factors relevant to the question of whether it would be reasonable for
      the appellant's daughter to leave the UK are wide ranging and
      encompass all aspects of the public interest pertaining to the
      appellant and her family. It is not solely a matter of the child's
      interests. See MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


  18. In the context of a British Child a highly relevant consideration is
      the respondent's own policy, as set out in the IDI.


  19. The IDI states at section 11.2.3:

      "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take
      a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a British
      Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force that
      British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child.
      This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.
      ....
      Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
      primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
      always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to
      expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or
      primary carer.


      In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
      parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
      child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
      subsisting parental relationship.


      It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
      conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
      such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise
      stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in
      the EU.


      The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:
             . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in
             paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;
             . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person
             has repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration
             Rules."


  20. In my view, it is clear that it would be inconsistent with the IDI to
      remove the appellant from the UK. Firstly, removing her would mean
      that her daughter would also have to leave the UK. Even though the
      appellant and her partner have a choice about where the daughter lives
      (in that they could 'choose' for her to stay with her father in the
      UK) the reality, as accepted by the judge, is that the child would
      accompany her mother to Thailand.  Accordingly, removing the appellant
      means that a British child would be expected to leave the EU.


  21. Secondly, the IDI makes clear that if a child could remain in the UK
      with another parent, it is appropriate to refuse to grant leave only
      where "the conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to
      considerations of such weight as to justify separation". Examples of
      such conduct given in the IDI are criminality and "a very poor
      immigration history". In this case, there is no indication of either
      criminality or poor immigration history on the part of the appellant.
      On the contrary, the appellant has a good immigration history, having
      never been in the UK without leave to remain.


  22. The judge found that removal of the appellant from the UK for a short
      period would not be contrary to the IDI.  However, the IDI does not
      distinguish between long and short periods and a plain reading of the
      IDI leads inextricably to the conclusion that removing the appellant
      would be contrary to the guidance it contains concerning parents of
      British citizen children. The misinterpretation of the IDI by the FtT
      is a material error of law such that the decision will need to be
      remade.


  23. In remaking the decision I have conducted a balancing exercise to
      assess the proportionality of the appellant's removal, having regard
      to the factors enumerated in Part 5A of the 2002 Act.


  24. Weighing against the appellant is that (a) she does not meet the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules and the maintenance of
      immigration control is an important public interest; and (b) her
      private and family life was formed at a time when her immigration
      status was precarious.


  25. However, on the other side of the scale is that:
   a. It is in the best interests of the appellant's daughter to remain in
      the UK. At the hearing to remake the decision, the appellant submitted
      further evidence (without objection from Mr Nath) in the form of a
      letter dated 12 January 2017 from her daughter's GP. The letter
      described the daughter as having language delay and possible
      development problems/learning difficulties with possible autistic
      spectrum disorder. I accept, on the balance of probabilities, that the
      GP's description of his patient is accurate. Given the daughter's
      potential disabilities, I consider it to be firmly in her best
      interests to avoid the substantial disruption to her life that would
      result from either moving to Thailand or being separated from her
      mother.
   b. The respondent's own policy under the IDI is to not remove people in
      the appellant's circumstances (see paragraphs [20] and [21] above).
   c. The appellant's daughter is a British citizen who, on the balance of
      probabilities, would have to leave the UK if the appellant were
      removed.
   d. The appellant has a good immigration history.
   e. The appellant speaks English and has not been a financial burden on
      the state.


  26. In the balancing exercise I attach particular weight to the fact that
      the consequence of removing the appellant is that very young British
      child who appears to have developmental problems will either be
      removed from her country or separated from her mother and that the
      respondent's own policy as expressed in the IDI does not favour
      removal of the appellant. In these circumstances, the balancing
      exercise yields the clear conclusion that the appellant's private and
      family life rights under Article 8 ECHR must prevail over the public
      interest.

Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

B.  I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.




|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 3 February 2017               |


