
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18582/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 December 2014                           |On 6 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       NITHYA KUMARI PUDHUMALAI RAMESH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, Counsel



                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.   The respondent to this appeal, Ms Nithya Kumari  Pudhumalai  Ramesh,
      is a citizen of India born on  2  June  1988.  The  appellant  is  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department, who has appealed with  the
      permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  Judge  of
      the First-tier  Tribunal  Seelhof,  who  allowed  Ms  Ramesh's  appeal
      against the decision, dated 2 May 2013, to refuse to vary her leave as
      a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and to remove her under section 47  of
      the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2.   It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. We shall therefore refer to  Ms  Ramesh  from
      now on  as  "the  appellant"  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
      respondent".


   3.   We were not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   The  appellant  came  to  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  Student  and  was
      subsequently granted further leave as a Tier 1 Post-Study Worker.  She
      was awarded an MSc in Computing by London Metropolitan  University  on
      21 October 2010. She made an  in-time  application  for  leave  as  an
      Entrepreneur on 26 October 2012. In her application she explained  she
      had set up a company, called Technology South Ltd, which she  operated
      from her home in Watford.


   5.   Her application was refused on 2 May 2013 by reference to  paragraph
      245DD(b) of the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")  because  she  was
      awarded 0 points for Attributes. The decision-maker  decided  she  had
      not submitted sufficient evidence with her application. In particular,
      her name was not stated on the advertising material she submitted  and
      the web address indicated did not lead  to  the  appellant's  website.
      Further, the  business  contracts  she  submitted  did  not  show  the
      landline number of the third party. These were mandatory  requirements
      under paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A of the rules.


   6.   The appellant's grounds of appeal argued these were minor  omissions
      which could be easily rectified. The respondent had either  failed  to
      apply paragraph 245AA of  the  rules  or  her  evidential  flexibility
      policy.


   7.    Judge Seelhof agreed and held the respondent's decision was not  in
      accordance with the law. In reaching his conclusion he considered this
      was a case of minor evidential issues which related to errors  in  the
      format of evidence rather than a failure to provide it.


   8.   The grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  argued  the  judge  had
      misdirected himself in law because the evidential  flexibility  policy
      did not extend to providing applicants with an opportunity  to  remedy
      any defects or inadequacy in the application or  supporting  documents
      (Rodriguez v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 2).


   9.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P M J Hollingworth.


  10. The appellant had not filed a response opposing the  appeal  prior  to
      the hearing but, having  been  instructed  late,  Ms  Iqbal  helpfully
      provided us with one setting out her  submissions  and  appending  the
      relevant documents.

  11. We heard submissions as to whether the judge had made a material error
      of law in his decision. Ms  Isherwood's  submissions  focused  on  two
      points:


         (1) As held in Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:  bank  letters;  evidential
         flexibility) [2014] UKUT 00295 (IAC), the  question  of  whether  a
         policy exists is one of fact. There was no evidence that  a  policy
         on  evidential  flexibility,  independent   and   freestanding   of
         paragraph 245AA, survived the introduction of that paragraph in the
         rules. We observe the same point was made  in  Akhter  and  another
         (paragraph  245AA:  wrong  format)  [2014]  UKUT  00297  (IAC)   at
         paragraph 15.


         (2) Even if the judge was right to apply the evidential flexibility
         policy, he nonetheless erred in his application of it.


  12. In reply Ms Iqbal argued the judge had been right to apply the policy,
      whether it was the policy in force at the date of application  or  the
      revised policy which had come into force by the date of decision.  She
      provided copies of both versions of the policy  and  took  us  to  the
      relevant paragraphs.


  13. Ms Isherwood maintained the judge  erred  and  she  placed  particular
      reliance on paragraph 92 of Rodriguez (supra).


  14. It was common ground between the parties that paragraph 245AA  of  the
      Rules did not assist this appellant. The judge was  wrong  to  say  in
      paragraph 5 of his determination that  the  rule  did  not  come  into
      existence until after the date of application in this case, which  was
      26 October 2012. The rule was in force from 6 September 2012. However,
      the rule as then drafted made no provision (as it has  done  in  later
      versions) for documents not containing all the specified  information.
      Ms Iqbal's submissions traced the changes to the rule.


  15. We reserved our decision  as  to  whether  the  judge's  decision  was
      vitiated by error of law.


   Error of law


  16. We find there is no material error of law in the judge's decision  and
      therefore his decision allowing the appeal (to the limited extent that
      the respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the  law)  shall
      stand for the following reasons.


  17. We deal with the first of Ms Isherwood's  points  as  follows.  It  is
      clear that the existence of a policy having a life  outside  paragraph
      245AA of the Rules is a  question  of  fact  (  see  Durrani,  Akhter)
      (supra). The  burden  of  establishing  its  existence  rests  on  the
      appellant in an appeal. However, Ms Iqbal took us to  the  policy,  or
      policies, in question. As at the date  of  application,  there  was  a
      policy in the shape of  the  PBS  Process  Instruction  on  Evidential
      Flexibility, dated 17 June 2011.  This  was  the  document  which  was
      discussed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rodriguez  (supra)  on  the
      understanding that it had been subsumed within paragraph 245AA of  the
      Rules as from 6 September 2012 (see paragraph 47). However,  Ms  Iqbal
      also showed us a  second  document,  entitled  Points-based  system  -
      evidential flexibility, dated 12 March 2013. This policy was in  force
      as at the date of decision in this case, which was 2 May 2013. In  the
      introductory section this documents stated as follows:


         "This  guidance  pulls  together  cross  cutting   guidance   which
         previously existed in separate products, and  amalgamates  relevant
         information from other operational instructions."


  18. We understand this to mean that there had been guidance  in  existence
      previously and the document was an attempt to "codify"  such  guidance
      into a single document. We are left in little doubt that an evidential
      flexibility policy survived the introduction of paragraph 245AA of the
      Rules


  19. The heading over the last paragraph on the same page quoted  above  of
      the March 2013 document suggests that that particular document applied
      to applications made on or after 13 December 2012, in which  case  the
      relevant document for the purposes of this appeal would have been  the
      earlier one. However, it makes no difference  which  document  applied
      because they both contained similar provisions  insofar  as  they  are
      relevant to this appeal.


  20. As said, Ms Iqbal took us through the relevant passages.  Annex  A  to
      the June 2011 document listed the type of documents which  it  may  be
      appropriate to request. They included the following:


          "o  T1 Entrepreneur

            .     missing information from the required letters / documents
            ..."


  21. Ms Iqbal was not able to show us the equivalent list  from  the  March
      2013 document for good reasons which she explained. It  is  accessible
      only from the archive section of  the  respondent's  website  and  the
      links no longer work to bring up separate documents. She told us there
      is reference to missing information in the guidance and we accept  her
      word on this.


  22. The two documents referred to by  the  respondent  in  justifying  her
      decision that the rules were not met fell squarely into this category.
      The advertisement provided did not contain the  appellant's  name  and
      the contract did not contain the client's telephone number.


  23. The judge erred in regarding these errors  as  being  "errors  in  the
      format" for the reasons explained in  Akhter  (supra).  However,  that
      error is not material given the breadth of the  policy  which,  unlike
      the rules then in force, did embrace missing information.


  24. For the avoidance of doubt, the fact that these might  be  classed  as
      minor omissions would  not  be  the  reason  for  the  decision  being
      unlawful. The rules mean what  they  say.  However,  the  unlawfulness
      arises as a result of the failure of the respondent to recognise  that
      she had a discretion to request amended documents or information  from
      the appellant before issuing a refusal.


  25. We gave  careful  consideration  to  Ms  Isherwood's  second  argument
      regarding the correct application  of  the  policy.  We  set  out  the
      applicable passage from Rodriguez:


         "92. In this regard it is quite true that the introduction  to  the
         process instruction flagged up  two  significant  changes,  one  of
         which was that "there is no limit on the amount of information that
         can be requested from the applicant". But it is to  be  noted  that
         that is immediately qualified by the instruction that requests  for
         information  should  not  be  speculative  and  -  as  subsequently
         reiterated - there must be sufficient reasons to believe  that  any
         evidence requested existed. The same point is made in step 3 of the
         procedure table - taking the example of bank statements  (specified
         documents), the example given is that of  bank  statements  missing
         from a series: see also what is  said  in  this  regard  under  the
         heading "Maintenance" at page 10 of the instruction. Taken overall,
         the Evidential Flexibility process instruction is demonstrably  not
         designed to give an applicant the opportunity first to  remedy  any
         defect or inadequacy in the application or supporting documentation
         so as to  save  the  application  from  refusal  after  substantive
         consideration."


  26. Ms Isherwood argued this case fell outside the  terms  of  the  policy
      because the case  owner  was  not  required  to  speculate  about  the
      existence of correct  documents.  However,  after  giving  the  matter
      careful consideration, we disagree with her for the following reasons.




  27. We do not believe the case owner would be required to  engage  in  any
      speculation whatsoever in relation to the  decision  whether  to  seek
      clarification  from  the  appellant.  Firstly,  in  relation  to   the
      contract, the judge was right to point out that it was  simple  common
      sense to infer that the third party who entered into a  contract  with
      the appellant and gave their address would also have a landline number
      which could be easily ascertained. The intention behind  the  rule  is
      that the appellant be  able  to  show  she  is  genuinely  trading  by
      producing documents which enable the respondent to  check  the  matter
      with other parties  (see  Shebl  (Entrepreneur:  proof  of  contracts)
      [2014] UKUT 00216 (IAC), paragraph 5). We find it  was  not  necessary
      for the respondent to speculate in order to see the  need  to  request
      the telephone number.


  28. Secondly, regarding the advertisement, it might have been  speculative
      to request other advertising material  showing  the  appellant's  name
      because there was no reason to suspect that such  a  document  already
      existed. However, the  appellant  had  provided  the  address  of  her
      website on which her name was clearly stated. Although the case  owner
      appeared to have problems opening the page, the judge did not. He  was
      entitled to accept the appellant's evidence that this was  advertising
      material available at the time she made her application.


  29. We accordingly dismiss the appeal.


NOTICE OF DECISION



     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  of
    law and his decision allowing the appeal is confirmed.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 13 December 2014






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal



