
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18135/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          MS NKEIRUKA KELECHI OKALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr P Corben, counsel instructed by Legacy Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the  decision,  promulgated  on  30  July
         2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge Porter (hereinafter referred  to
         as the FTTJ).

    Background

      2. The appellant married  Mr  Germain  Comlan  Essenam  Caccavelli,  a
         French national, on 23 October 2013. She sought a Residence Card as
         confirmation of her right of residence as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
         national. In  refusing  her  application  on  30  April  2015,  the
         Secretary of State concluded that the appellant was a  party  to  a
         marriage of convenience owing to the comments  of  the  appellant's
         son to immigration officers to the effect that  the  appellant  was
         residing solely with him and not the aforementioned  EEA  national,
         that there was no evidence at the address suggesting that  the  EEA
         national lived there; that the  appellant  had  signed  a  marriage
         questionnaire in  which  she  stated  that  she  intended  to  live
         permanently with the EEA  sponsor  and  that  her  son  had  to  be
         prompted  by  immigration   officers   to   mention   the   claimed
         relationship with the EEA national.

      3.  In  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant  asserted  that  the
         appellant's son was a registered mental health patient and was  not
         competent at the time owing to his state  of  mind.  The  appellant
         also denied that she had been working as her son had stated and  it
         was said that she had been  shopping  with  her  husband  when  the
         immigration officers called.

      4. The hearing before the FTTJ was  decided  on  the  papers,  at  the
         appellant's  request.  The  appellant   forwarded   a   bundle   of
         documentary evidence in support of her appeal. The  FTTJ  concluded
         that the appellant had entered into a marriage of  convenience  and
         dismissed her appeal.

    Error of law

      5. The grounds of application argue that the  FTTJ  wrongly  dismissed
         the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  opposed   to   the
         Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.  Complaint
         was also made of the  FTTJ's  reference  to  the  16-year  age  gap
         between  the  parties,  a  matter,  which  had  not  concerned  the
         respondent. It was implied that the FTTJ made  irrational  findings
         that the appellant  and  EEA  sponsor  were  not  living  together,
         despite documentary evidence of the payment  of  rent  and  Council
         Tax.

      6. FTTJ PJM Hollingworth granted permission on the basis that the FTTJ
         arguably erred in making references to  the  Immigration  Rules  at
         [22] of the decision. Permission was not refused on  the  remaining
         grounds.

      7. The Secretary of State lodged a Rule 24  response  on  27  November
         2015. In opposing the appeal, the respondent  said  that  the  FTTJ
         directed himself appropriately; that there were no material  errors
         of law which were capable  of  having  a  material  impact  on  the
         outcome of the appeal; it was unclear to what extent  consideration
         of the  Rules  may  have  affected  the  FTTJ's  analysis  and  the
         reference to the Rules was nothing more than a "slip of the pen."

      8. At the hearing before me, Mr Melvin submitted an expanded  Rule  24
         reply, to which Mr Corben did not object.

      9. In addressing ground one  of  the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal, Mr Corben drew my attention to the fact that the FTTJ  made
         three erroneous references to the Immigration Rules. He argued that
         the FTTJ had begun by considering the issue of whether this  was  a
         marriage of convenience before veering off to consider whether  the
         relationship was subsisting. That the relationship  was  no  longer
         subsisting was not  relevant  to  whether  it  was  a  marriage  of
         convenience and he argued that the FTTJ was clearly considering the
         Rules.

     10. With regard to the second ground, Mr Corben argued  that  the  FTTJ
         took into consideration an immaterial matter, that being  that  the
         appellant was 16 years older than her 30-year old EEA  husband.  He
         argued that there was no real difference in age and what there  was
         indicative of nothing. The  FTTJ  had  also  made  reference  to  a
         matter, which was not supported by any material in the respondent's
         bundle, that  being  a  previous  unsuccessful  application  for  a
         residence card.

     11. As far as ground 3 was concerned, Mr Corben asked me to  note  that
         documentary evidence before the FTTJ  linked  the  sponsor  to  the
         claimed matrimonial home; the FTTJ found  that  the  appellant  was
         living at the address but  concluded  that  they  were  not  living
         together. While  the  appellant's  son  had  told  the  immigration
         officers that he did not know where the EEA  sponsor  lived,  there
         was no need for a couple to permanently live together.

     12. In reply, Mr Melvin argued that the respondent had  discharged  the
         burden of showing that the marriage was one of convenience and  the
         burden was on the appellant to show that it was not. There  was  no
         material error of law. The appeal was considered on the  papers  at
         the appellant's request and she had been aware of  the  issue.  The
         FTTJ had made a number of clear findings, which were open to her on
         the evidence. Mr Melvin was unaware  of  the  earlier  unsuccessful
         decision and argued that the FTTJ's reference to it did not  amount
         to a material error of law.

     13. Mr Corben responded by  focusing  on  the  issue  of  the  previous
         refusal of a residence card, about which there was nothing on file.
         He argued that the FTTJ used it as a factor in  her  assessment  in
         the appeal and without knowing why it was difficult to see how this
         can be justified.

     14. At the end of the hearing,  I  announced  that  the  FTTJ  made  no
         material error of law and that I would be upholding  her  decision.
         My reasons are as follows.

     15. The FTTJ made three, erroneous, references to the Immigration Rules
         in her decision. These appeared at [21], [22] and under the  Notice
         of Decision heading. The first reference at [21] is in the  context
         of a standard paragraph and I consider it  to  be  a  typographical
         error possibly owing to copying and pasting. The  second  reference
         at [22] occurs where the FTTJ is explaining why she is not going to
         consider the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the  Rules.  While
         her reasons for not doing so are, incidentally, erroneous, the  end
         result was not. Similarly, I consider the reference to the Rules in
         the notice of decision to also  be  a  typographical  error.  I  am
         fortified in my conclusions by the fact that the FTTJ  referred  to
         the 2006 Regulations in detail at [3] and [4] of the  decision  and
         reasons. Furthermore, the entirety of her  reasons,  from  [13]  to
         [20] are focused on  whether  or  not  the  appellant  and  sponsor
         entered into a marriage of convenience (a concept  which  does  not
         form part of the Immigration  Rules)  and  with  reference  to  the
         relevant case law, that of Papajorgi  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
         convenience)(Greece) [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC).  The  FTTJ  did  not
         materially err in this regard.

     16. Mr Corben argued that the FTTJ had relied on immaterial matters  in
         concluding that this was a marriage of convenience. I conclude that
         this is not the case. The FTTJ took into consideration many matters
         including that the appellant's son was capable of  giving  reliable
         information to the immigration officers; that the residence was a 1
         bedroom flat; that the bills were solely in the name of the sponsor
         including Council Tax showing  single  occupancy  yet  he  was  not
         living there; that the appellant was living there evidenced by  the
         outcome of the immigration officers' visit; that the appellant  had
         twice avoided a marriage interview and had avoided giving  evidence
         at her appeal hearing.

     17. I find there to be no basis for disturbing the findings of the FTTJ
         that this was a marriage of convenience.

     18. I do not find the age difference to be of no materiality and it was
         open to the FTTJ to take into consideration  any  matters  apparent
         from the evidence before her.   Indeed  there  is  EU  guidance  to
         decision-makers on marriages of convenience,  which  mentions  just
         this issue. While there appears to be no reason  for  the  FTTJ  to
         take an adverse view of the previous unsuccessful application for a
         residence card, I find that the outcome of the  appellant's  appeal
         would have been the same without consideration of this matter.

     19. Lastly, I find there to be no ambiguity in the FTTJ's  findings  as
         to the evidence of residence of  the  purported  matrimonial  home.
         While at [17] she notes that there is evidence linking the  sponsor
         to the address in question,  it  is  clear  that  she  rejects  the
         implication that he was in fact living at the address. She does not
         find  the  evidence  before  her  suggesting  cohabitation  to   be
         "satisfactory" and concludes that the appellant is  not  living  at
         that address "with the sponsor." Given the information provided  by
         the appellant's adult son to the immigration officers to the effect
         that the appellant and her son lived alone  and  that  he  made  no
         mention of the EEA  sponsor  at  all  until  prompted,  the  FTTJ's
         conclusions cannot be faulted in this regard.

     20. There is no material error of law in the FTTJ's decision.

     21. There is no justification for making an anonymity direction in this
         matter.

    Conclusions

      1) The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      2) I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.




    Signed:  Date: 17 January 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
