
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18505/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2014                        |On 19th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            lawrence george powell
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant Secretary of State:   Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office
                                 Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed, instructed by Britannia Law Practice LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Powell is a citizen of Jamaica,  whose  appeal  against  refusal  to
    grant him further leave to  remain  as  the  husband  of  the  Sponsor,
    Claudette Kerr, was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bell  in  a
    determination promulgated on 28th August 2014.   In  the  interests  of
    clarity and continuity I will refer to Mr Powell as the Appellant,  the
    title by which he was known before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The judge allowed the appeal under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of the Appellant's relationship with his
    wife.  She found that the wife would face very significant difficulties
    in continuing family life with the appellant in his  home  state  which
    would entail very serious hardship.  She also allowed it on  the  basis
    of the appellant's relationship with his son who was aged  10  and  had
    been born in this country.  In doing so she relied upon Section 117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended.   She
    found that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    UK to continue family life with the appellant in his home state and she
    gave reasons for that view.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal.   In  summary  the
    Grounds  of  Appeal  were  that  the  judge  had  treated  EX.1  as   a
    freestanding provision contrary to the guidance in the reported case of
    Sabir (Appendix FM EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063  (IAC)  and
    that she had not paid proper regard to other provisions of Section 117B
    of the 2002 Act.  It was said that she had erred in her  assessment  of
    the difficulties that would be faced by the spouse  in  relocating  and
    also as to whether it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    relocate.  Permission was granted on all grounds by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt on 6th October 2014.

 4. My provisional view, prior to the hearing, was that the judge had erred
    in considering that paragraph EX.1 could not apply to the child, as  he
    had only discretionary leave, but that could have no  material  bearing
    on the  outcome.   In  other  respects  the  decision  appeared  to  be
    adequately reasoned and sustainable.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Mills, who had clearly given  the
    matter a great deal of thought, said that the  whilst  there  might  be
    some merit in the appeal on the basis of reasoning, he  did  not  think
    that he could maintain the challenge generally.  The child  did  appear
    to come within the provisions of EX.1 and also Section 117B of the 2002
    Act, as amended.  EX.1 was applicable and the guidance in Sabir on this
    occasion did not take the provision out of the equation.  He added that
    he had recently ascertained that the child had now been registered as a
    British citizen, having lived in this country for over ten  years.   He
    accepted that the challenge could not be maintained.

 6. I was grateful to Mr Mills for his  practical  approach  with  which  I
    wholly agreed.  Whilst some  might  regard  the  judge's  view  of  the
    difficulties potentially faced by the spouse in travelling to the  home
    country as being generous,  the  reasons  she  gave  were  in  my  view
    sustainable and the decision she reached open to her on  the  evidence.
    In addition EX.1 did in my  view  apply  to  the  child.   The  judge's
    approach to  paragraph  117B  in  respect  of  the  child  was  I  felt
    unassailable.   There  was  therefore  no   material   error   in   the
    determination.

 7. No anonymity order was sought and I could see no reason why  one  might
    be required.

Decision

The making of the original decision did not involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law.  The  decision  that  the  appeal  be  allowed  therefore
stands.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date 19th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

