
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18018/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                               Wipharat Lamont
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision  and  reasons  statement  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J S Pacey promulgated on 2  October  2014  on
    the grounds that the judge failed to take proper consideration  of  the
    transitional provisions relating to the English language test  criteria
    listed in appendix O to the immigration rules.

 2. Mr Mills conceded that the judge erred in law by failing to accept  the
    appellant's  English  language  certificate  from  Trinity  College  as
    meeting the relevant requirements.  Mr  Mills  advised  me  that  as  a
    result the judge's decision should be set aside and remade to allow the
    appeal under paragraph 284 of the immigration rules  because  the  only
    issue to be decided was whether the appellant met the English  language
    requirements.

 3. Of course I accept the concession and allow the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and remake the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  against  the
    immigration decisions of 15 April 2014 to refuse to grant further leave
    to remain and to remove the appellant.  However, it is  appropriate  to
    set out in more detail my reasons for proceeding with the appeal in the
    absence of the appellant and to give reasons for the decision.

 4. With regard to proceeding in the absence of the appellant, I made  that
    decision before being addressed by Mr Mills.  I noted that the Tribunal
    gave notice of hearing  to  the  parties  on  26  November  2015.   The
    appellant requested that this hearing should be adjourned to await  the
    outcome of a settlement application the  appellant  sent  to  the  Home
    Office on 2 November 2015.  That application was refused.  The fact  an
    application for an adjournment was made is a clear indication that  the
    appellant was aware of the hearing.  No explanation  was  provided  for
    the non-attendance of the appellant or her  legal  representative.   It
    was on these facts that I decided to proceed.

 5. With regard to the substantive issues, I noted that the Tribunal's file
    lacked the appellant's  bundle.   Mr  Mills  provided  his  copy  which
    contained the English language  certificate  issued  in  July  2015  by
    Trinity College and the reasons for refusal letter.   At  the  date  of
    application the appellant indicated that she required further leave  to
    remain in order to obtain the KoLL qualification.  Her application  was
    refused because she had not provided an English language  qualification
    but  by  the  date  of  hearing  she  provided  the   Trinity   College
    certificate.

 6. Mr Mills  confirmed  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the
    certificate even though it  was  not  submitted  with  the  application
    because Home Office policy permitted a judge to  review  an  in-country
    case based on up to date evidence unless  appendix  FM-SE  specifically
    linked evidence to the date of application.  Paragraph 27  of  appendix
    FM-SE did not impose such a restriction.  Although I had no copy of the
    relevant policy I have no reason to think Mr Mills was not providing  a
    reasonable summary.  As a result, I accept that the judge did  not  err
    in law by considering the certificate supplied for the appeal.  In  any
    event, as this appeal relates to issues arising under  part  8  of  the
    immigration rules, it is not entirely clear that appendix  FM-SE  would
    have any relevance although it might because of paragraph A277A.

 7. There is a question about what law the judge  should  have  considered.
    As per Odelola the applicable immigration rules would be those in force
    at the date of decision subject to any transitional provisions.  At the
    date of decision certificates issued by Trinity College  were  approved
    in appendix O.

 8. Alternatively, in YM (Uganda) the immigration  rules  at  the  date  of
    hearing should be considered.  If that were to  be  applied,  then  the
    transitional provisions in the Statements  of  Changes  to  Immigration
    Rules in July 2014 (HC 198 and HC  532)  would  apply  to  the  amended
    appendix  O.   Each  made  provisions  for  applications  made   before
    specified dates being considered under the previous  version.   As  the
    application was made prior  to  those  specified  dates  the  appellant
    benefited from the transitional provisions  and  her  English  language
    certificate was adequate proof.

 9. So either way the appeal should have  been  allowed  in  light  of  the
    Trinity College certificate.

10. In allowing the appeal, I should specify that this means the  appellant
    should have been granted further leave to remain as the requirements of
    paragraph 284 were met at the date of hearing.  It will be for the Home
    Office to decide whether in light of the application made on 2 November
    2015 indefinite leave should be granted.  That will depend on a  number
    of factors but they are not ones on which I can comment as I  have  not
    seen that application.

Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey contains an error on  a
point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision and allow the appeal against  the  decisions  refusing
further leave to remain and to remove the appellant.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee award

Even though a fee was paid and I have allowed the  appeal,  I  make  no  fee
award because the reasons for allowing the  appeal  are  based  on  evidence
that was not before the Home Office.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

