
IAC-AH-DP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18631/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 27th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mr tarek saddik
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Lebanon born on 22nd February 1984.   The
    Appellant's immigration history goes back to 2008 but on  13th  October
    2013 he applied for  a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  a  German
    national.  That application was refused by the Secretary of State in  a
    Notice of Refusal dated 3rd April 2014.  The Appellant appealed and the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shanahan sitting at
    Stoke on 29th August 2014.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on  24th
    September  2014  the  Appellant's  application  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 was dismissed.

 2. On 30th September 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 11th November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Saffer granted permission to appeal on the basis that it  was  arguable
    that the judge had erred in his application of Saint Prix [2013]  EUECJ
    C-507/12 and its possible lack  of  relevance  to  students  exercising
    treaty rights.  On 24th November 2014 the Secretary of State  responded
    to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  That response does not  assist
    the Tribunal to any great extent merely stating that  on  the  evidence
    before him it appears that the judge had come to  sustainable  findings
    and submitting that the grounds did not disclose a  material  error  of
    law and were an attempt to re-litigate the matter.

 3. It is on this basis that the appeal comes before me.  The Appellant  is
    represented by his instructed solicitor Mr Ahmed.  Mr Ahmed is familiar
    with this matter having appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    McVeety.

Submissions/Discussions

 4. Mr McVeety considerably shortens this matter by narrowing the issue  in
    question that I am  required  to  decide  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's wife is going to undertake a college course  and  providing
    that she proves that she is then the Appellant will be entitled to  his
    residence card.  He equally acknowledges that documentary evidence  had
    been provided proving that the Appellant's Sponsor Mrs Rima Ali Issa is
    attending college.

 5. Mr Ahmed takes me to paragraph 23 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination and points out that on the day of hearing the Sponsor had
    been issued with an enrolment sheet and that  it  is  not  possible  to
    force the college to reissue an enrolment sheet.   He  emphasised  that
    the Sponsor has not taken time off the course and that she has  private
    medical insurance. He asked me to allow the appeal.

The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 8. In order to be exercising treaty rights it is  not  necessary  to  look
    into the future as to whether an enrolment would take place but only on
    the day in question does it need to be considered.  As such  the  judge
    has materially erred in  his  assessment.   He  acknowledged  that  the
    Sponsor and the Appellant were in  a  genuine  marriage  and  that  the
    Sponsor was in the early stages of pregnancy.  All the Appellant  needs
    to do in order to satisfy the Regulations  is  to  show  that  she  was
    enrolled at the date of hearing.  She has shown clearly  that  she  was
    and the issue of private medical insurance is not challenged  Mr  Ahmed
    having advised  that  that  issue  was  raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the satisfaction of the judge.  In such  circumstances  the
    Appellant was exercising treaty rights and I set aside the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  the   decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is remade allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 27th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made



Signed        Date 27th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
