
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/18700/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th  March 2016                           |On 12th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                 WAQAR AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant: Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Rainbow Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  12  April  1982,  appeals
   against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  Judge   White,
   promulgated  on  7  September  2015,  whereby  his  appeal  against   the
   respondent's decision to refuse him a residence card as a  spouse  of  an
   EEA national was dismissed.


2. The appellant entered the UK as a student in March 2008.  His  leave  was
   subsequently extended as a Tier 1  (Post  Study  Work)  Migrant  until  1
   November 2013.

3. On 23 September 2013 he married a Hungarian citizen.

4. On 23 October 2013 he applied for a  residence  card  as  a  spouse.  The
   application was refused on 8 April 2014 on the basis  that  his  marriage
   was one of convenience.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by FtT Judge  White.  The
   FtT accepted that the appellant was married to an EEA  national  who  was
   exercising Treaty Rights and identified that the issue in  the  case  was
   whether the relationship was genuine or a marriage of convenience.


6. At paragraph [12] the FtT referred to  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
   Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]  UKUT  38
   (IAC) and directed itself that  "the  legal  burden  of  proving  that  a
   marriage is one of convenience will lie ultimately on the respondent."

7. The FtT then considered in detail the answers the appellant and his  wife
   gave in interviews that took place on 20  March  2014  and  identified  a
   number of what it considered to be inconsistencies and discrepancies.  It
   also noted the absence of supporting evidence from friends or family.



8. In respect of documentary evidence provided  by  the  appellant  to  show
   that he and his wife were cohabiting, the FtT found  that  the  documents
   indicated they were living at the same address but noted that no evidence
   was before it regarding the size and overall occupation of the  property.
   The FtT also found that the appellant and his wife had a bank account  in
   their joint names dating from 22 August 2013 but noted that  the  account
   did not show there to be regular payments to cover the rent.




   9. The FtT concluded that "on the balance of probabilities the respondent
      has proved that this is a marriage of convenience".



Grounds of appeal and submissions



  10. The grounds of appeal submit that the FtT  erred  in  respect  of  the
      burden of proof and misapplied Papajorgji. They also  argue  that  the
      credibility findings were not properly  reasoned  and  clear  findings
      were  not  made  in  respect  of  the  documentary  evidence   showing
      cohabitation.




  11. Before me, Mr Balroop focused almost entirely on the  FtT's  treatment
      of the documentary evidence. He drew my attention to paragraphs [27] -
      [29] of the decision, arguing that before drawing adverse  conclusions
      from the documentary evidence the FtT should have put its concerns  to
      the appellant. At paragraph [27] the FtT stated that evidence was  not
      put before it as to the size and overall occupation of the appellant's
      property. At paragraph [28] the  FtT  stated  that  it  did  not  have
      evidence about the status of the appellant and his wife's  joint  bank
      account prior to it becoming a joint account. At  paragraph  [29]  the
      FtT found that the joint bank account did not show how  the  rent  was
      paid. Mr Balroop contended that the FtT should have put these concerns
      to the appellant and that it was unfair for it not to have done so.




  12. Mr Wilding argued, firstly, that the FtT properly applied  the  burden
      of proof. In respect of the appellant's other  grounds,  he  contended
      that the decision  was  based  on  significant  discrepancies  in  the
      interviews  and  that  this  would  support  the  FtT  's   conclusion
      irrespective of concerns about the documentary evidence. In any event,
      in respect of the documentary evidence, he argued that  the  appellant
      was represented and it was for him (and his representative) - not  the
      judge - to make his case and provide evidence in support of it.




Consideration



  13. Where, as in this case, an allegation is made that a marriage  is  one
      of convenience, the ultimate legal burden of proof lies with the party
      making the allegation; ie the respondent.




  14. The FtT stated at paragraph [12], after summarising  the  findings  by
      the Upper Tribunal in Papajorgi, that:




         "the legal burden of proving that a marriage is one of  convenience
         will lie ultimately with the respondent"(emphasis added)




  15. At paragraph [31] the FtT stated again that the burden of proof was on
      the respondent. The FtT found that it was:




          "satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the respondent has
         proved that this is a marriage of convenience" (emphasis added).




  16. It is clear from the decision that the FtT  has  correctly  identified
      the relevant burden of proof and then has proceeded to apply it. There
      is no merit to the appellant's argument to the contrary.




  17. Nor do I consider there to be  any  merit  to  the  appellant's  other
      grounds of appeal. This is a comprehensive and  cogent  FtT  decision.
      For a number of reasons, which are clearly explained,  the  FtT  found
      there to be inconsistencies and discrepancies in the evidence given by
      the appellant and his wife  which  undermined  their  credibility  and
      enabled  the  respondent   to   demonstrate,   on   the   balance   of
      probabilities, that this was a marriage of convenience. These include,
      by way of example, that:


     a. The appellant's  and  his   wife's  name  are  both  on  a  tenancy
        agreement dated 1 May 2013 even though they only met in  mid  April
        2013 and they had not, by their own accounts, moved in together  by
        that date.


     b. The appellant and his wife gave different  answers  as  to  whether
        they met inside or outside at their first meeting.


     c. The appellant and his wife gave different answers as to  where  the
        appellant's wife was  living,  and  whether  she  was  studying  at
        college, when they met.


     d. The appellant was unable to correctly identify days  his  wife  had
        worked in the week of the interview.




  18. I also do not accept  Mr  Balroop's  argument  that  the  judge  acted
      unfairly when considering the documentary evidence about  cohabitation
      and the joint bank account. It was not for the judge to  highlight  or
      identify matters that the appellant  might  wish  to  expand  upon  or
      address to support his case. Rather, the judge's role was to  evaluate
      and consider the evidence before him, which in my  view  is  what  the
      judge has done.




  19. In any event, even if (which I do not accept) there was  an  error  in
      the approach taken by the FtT in respect of the documentary  evidence,
      such an error would not have been material as it is clear that the FtT
      was entitled, based on the evidence before it, to  conclude  that  the
      respondent had shown to the  requisite  standard  of  proof  that  the
      marriage between the appellant and his wife was one of convenience.


    Decision

20. The appeal is dismissed.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of  a
   material error of law and shall stand.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 4 April 2016                  |

