
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 January 2017                |On 13 January 2017                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS MEMORY KWADA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  on  24
           November 2016 against the decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Wilsher who had allowed the  Respondent's  appeal
           against the Appellant's decision dated 29 April 2015  to  refuse
           to grant the Respondent indefinite leave to remain on Article  8
           ECHR  private  life  grounds  The  decision  and   reasons   was
           promulgated on 24 June 2015 following a hearing on 17 May 2015.


      2.    The Respondent is  a  national  of  Malawi,  born  there  on  30
           September 1996.  She was brought to the United  Kingdom  by  her
           parents, unlawfully, when she was 11, and was later  taken  into
           social services care. Her mother died in  2012  and  her  father
           returned to Malawi.  Two of her brothers were removed to  Malawi
           and another is serving a term  of  imprisonment  in  the  United
           Kingdom.   On 25 April 2014 she was granted  4  years  leave  to
           remain in accordance with Home Office policy concerning children
           in care: IDIs, Chapter 8, Chapter  8,  Section  3.2.   Thus  the
           Appellant had leave to  remain  until  2018  and  there  was  no
           suggestion of any  revocation  of  that  leave  to  remain.  The
           Appellant's decision under appeal was reached on the basis  that
           nothing had changed since the grant of leave to remain in  2014.
           The fact  that  a  grant  of  ILR  would  assist  the  Appellant
           financially with regard to her plans to  attend  university  was
           not a reason to grant her ILR,  in  effect  prematurely.   There
           were no exceptional circumstances justifying  a  departure  from
           the Immigration Rules.


      3.    The facts were not contested.  The Appellant has been in  foster
           care and has started an art foundation  course  after  finishing
           secondary school.  There is a "stay  put"  arrangement  for  her
           care from the local authority which covers the  Appellant  until
           her 21st birthday. The Appellant said that she wanted to  attend
           university but could not afford the fees.


      4.    Judge Wilsher found that the Respondent's  private  life  claims
           succeeded under  Article  8  ECHR.   He  referred  to  Tigere  v
           Secretary of State for Business, Innovation  and  Skills  [2015]
           UKSC 57 and the revised policy for student loans issued  by  the
           Business  Secretary  following  the  Supreme  Court's   decision
           against the department.  Noting that that the Appellant had  not
           completed three years' ordinary residence so as to  be  eligible
           for a student loan under the new policy, nor had spent more than
           half her life in the United Kingdom to achieve settlement  under
           the Immigration Rules, the  judge  found  that  it  was  in  the
           Appellant's best interests for  her  to  be  granted  settlement
           before  September  2017,  which  would  provide  her  with   the
           requisite eligibility.  The Appellant  would  then  be  able  to
           start the university course for which she  had  been  offered  a
           place.  The  alternatives  were  destabilising  for  her.    She
           remained vulnerable according to her  social  worker's  evidence
           and her education had been her lifeline.  The judge  found  that
           the decision to refuse the Appellant ILR ahead of the time  when
           she would  ordinarily  become  entitled  to  such  leave  was  a
           disproportionate  interference  with  the  respect  due  to  her
           private life.  There was no reason to believe that the Appellant
           would be able to go to Malawi in 2018.


      5.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant (the Secretary of State)  was  granted  by  Judge  PJM
           Hollingworth  because he considered that it  was  arguable  that
           the judge had failed to provide a  sufficient  analysis  of  the
           compelling  circumstances  which  justified   consideration   of
           Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.  Nor  had  section
           117B of Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 been applied.


      6.    Standard directions were made by the Upper  Tribunal  indicating
           that the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error
           of law were found. No rule 24 notice was filed on behalf of  the
           Respondent.


      7.    Shortly before the hearing  the  solicitors  on  the  record  as
           acting on the Respondent's behalf withdrew as they had  received
           no further instructions.  The Respondent failed to appear at the
           hearing and there was no means of contacting her.  The  tribunal
           decided to proceed in the Respondent's absence as the  essential
           facts  were  not  in  dispute  and  it  was  unlikely  that   an
           unrepresented appellant could assist the tribunal  when  all  of
           the issues was of law only.




      Submissions - error of law


      8.    Mr Avery for the Secretary of State relied on  the  grounds  and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  In summary he submitted that
           the  judge's  errors  were  manifest.    There   had   been   no
           consideration of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The
           appeal was about the Appellant's higher education, not her leave
           to remain which remained in place to 25 April 2018.   The  judge
           had simply engaged in free  wheeling  Article  8  ECHR  decision
           making.  There was simply no  interference  in  the  Appellant's
           private life at all.  There was no justification for the judge's
           decision.  Section 117B(5) had been ignored: the  Appellant  was
           not financially independent and  indeed  was  a  burden  on  tax
           payers. The decision and reasons could not stand and  should  be
           set aside, remade and dismissed.




      The error of law finding


      9.    At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
           accepted Mr Avery's submissions and found  that  the  judge  had
           fallen into all of the material  errors  of  law  of  which  the
           Secretary of State complained and in respect of which permission
           to appeal had been granted.  The principles  of  important  case
           law had not been applied, such as AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT
           0260 (IAC) and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.   There  had  not
           been a structured and balanced analysis, beginning with the fact
           the Appellant was not facing removal and all of the arrangements
           currently in place for her care  and  well-being  remain.    The
           judge failed to  pause  and  ask  whether  Article  8  ECHR  was
           engaged.  The tribunal finds that it was not engaged because the
           Appellant's leave to remain remained in place and there  was  no
           suggestion of removal.


      10.   Indeed, with every respect to the capable and learned judge,  it
           seems to this tribunal that (doubtless for the best of  motives)
           he was led down the proverbial garden path.  The  Appellant  has
           no right to free or  subsidised  university  education  and  her
           eligibility for  a  student  loan  or  other  funding  (e.g.,  a
           charitable grant) is entirely outside the remit and  control  of
           the Secretary of State for the Home Department.  The decision to
           refuse the Appellant ILR prematurely,  outside  the  Immigration
           Rules, in other words by applying the declared policy set out in
           those rules, had no effect on her private life as such  at  all.
           The Appellant was seeking an advantage for which, as  the  judge
           acknowledged, she was not entitled.  Nor was any other person in
           her position.  The judge had engaged in a quasi judicial review,
           entirely outside his statutory powers, and substituted his views
           for those of the Secretary of State for the Home Department.


      11.   There had been no challenge to the judge's essential findings of
           fact, which were as noted above not disputed and so would stand.
            The decision and reasons would otherwise be set aside  and  the
           appeal reheard immediately.




      Submissions - fresh decision


      12.   For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
           original designations in the First-tier Tribunal.


      13.   What can be said on the Appellant's behalf had she been present?
            It was clear that she  speaks  English  but  she  is  far  from
           financially  independent.   Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 cannot be said to  benefit  her.
           Moreover and in any event, the Appellant is not  facing  removal
           and her current leave to remain continues.


      14.   Mr Avery relied on the reasons for refusal letter.   Forman  (ss
           117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT  412  (IAC)  and  Deelah  and
           others (section 117B - ambit) [2015]  UKUT  515  (IAC)  provided
           further guidance on section  117B.   The  appeal  was  in  short
           misconceived and hopeless.


      15.   At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that its
           determination was reserved.  The  tribunal's  reserved  decision
           now follows.




      The fresh decision


      16.   The burden of proof in this appeal lies on the Appellant.  It is
           necessary for the tribunal to decide the issues in  this  appeal
           under the Immigration Rules and in relation to non-risk assessed
           human rights matters on the standard of proof of the balance  of
           probabilities.  The tribunal may consider all  relevant  matters
           as at the date of the hearing as section 85 of the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides.  Sections 117A-117D of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 must  be  taken
           into account by the tribunal in assessing  the  Article  8  ECHR
           claim.


      17.   The findings of fact made by Judge Wilsher were  not  challenged
           and stand, so far as they fell within his jurisdiction.


      18.   The tribunal finds that the Respondent's decision not  to  grant
           the Appellant ILR  ahead  of  the  date  on  which  she  by  the
           Immigration Rules will become eligible is  not  an  interference
           with the respect due to her private life under Article  8  ECHR.
           The terms under which she would be eligible for a  student  loan
           in order to pursue her higher  education  have  been  set  in  a
           revised form following the guidance of the Supreme  Court.   The
           Appellant will become eligible in due course and she will either
           have to defer her higher education, seek funding from elsewhere,
           or work and study part time as many have always done.


      19.   There was nothing of substance to suggest that the  consequences
           the decision for the Appellant would be  so  unduly  harsh  that
           they could be regarded as so  out  of  the  ordinary  as  to  be
           compelling or exceptional.  It is not as  though  the  Appellant
           will never be able to study further and she, like everyone else,
           will have to learn that sometimes it is necessary to wait.   The
           social worker's  reports  are  in  the  tribunal's  view  unduly
           pessimistic and fail to consider the various options open to the
           Appellant,  and  that  she  will  remain  in  the  same   caring
           environment as  before.   Thus  there  was  no  reason  for  the
           Secretary of State to consider the exercise  of  her  discretion
           outside the Immigration Rules.  The  appeal  must  fail  and  is
           dismissed.


      20.   There was no need identified for an anonymity direction in  this
           appeal and no submission to  any  such  effect.   The  anonymity
           direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is revoked.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.   The  tribunal  allows  the  onwards  appeal  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department, sets  aside  the  original
      decision and remakes the original decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      as follows:

      The appeal is DISMISSED


      Signed                                 Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      There is no fee award




      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
