
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18563/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 October 2017                       |On 06 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                       Immaculata Chimkasimma Amaefule
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M A Hodgson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by  the  appellant  in  respect  of  a  Decision  and
    Reasons by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid  (FtJ)  promulgated  on  27
    September 2016, in which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain as
    a Tier 1 (General) migrant  was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    relying on paragraph 322 (2) and paragraph 245CD Immigration rules.

2.   The grounds of appeal argue that the decision contained errors of law.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  as
    follows:

         "1.  It is arguable  that  the  judge  has  fallen  into  error  in
             considering whether the Immigration Rules have been fulfilled,
             in referring at paragraph 14 to everyone  in  the  immigration
             field being conscious of the fact that 'jobs'  are  needed  by
             the local people.  The judge referred  to  the  fiscal  crisis
             which was being undergone.  Everyone, the  judge  stated,  was
             expected to make a contribution to alleviate it.


         2.   The judge has dismissed  the  appeal.   It  appears  that  the
             appeal has been dismissed  purely  on  the  footing  that  the
             Immigration Rules were not fulfilled.  At paragraph 15 of  the
             decision the judge has referred to not being  able  to  ignore
             the 'legal requirements' stipulated by immigration law.


         3.   It is arguable that the judge should have  set  out  a  fuller
             analysis of the reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  the
             Immigration Rules were not fulfilled.  It is arguable that  at
             paragraph 12 of the  decision,  the  judge  has  not  set  out
             sufficiently clearly how the conclusion has been reached  that
             the appeal should be dismissed as is stated at the  conclusion
             of paragraph 12, in the light of the judge's references to the
             ambit and nature of the evidence adduced in  relation  to  the
             income of the appellant.


         4.   The judge has referred to not being able to ignore  all  other
             evidence including the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant  in
             reaching a decision.  It  is  unclear  what  weight  has  been
             attached by the judge if any to each element  referred  to  in
             the  context  of  the  overall  evidence   in   reaching   the
             conclusions set out.


         5.   It is arguable that the judge's conclusion at paragraph 12  of
             the decision, that the appeal should be dismissed has not been
             based  on  factors  bearing  upon  that  decision,  given  the
             subsequent reference by the judge to the fiscal  crisis  which
             was being gone through and consciousness of the fact that jobs
             were needed by local people."


4.   Both representatives conceded that the determination  could  not  stand
    as there were material errors of law as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, some of which  were  errors  that  were  raised  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision of MM v SSHD and Others, heard on 27 June 2017.

5.   In particular, I am satisfied that the Tribunal Judge  failed  to  make
    proper findings in respect of the evidence before him, in particular by
    referring to evidence from HMRC  which  in  fact  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

6.   I conclude that there are material errors of law in the decision.   All
    the grounds of appeal relied on by the appellant  are  made  out.   The
    decision is set aside  and  remitted  for  rehearing  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding Judge Majid).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3.11.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 3.11.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

