
IAC-BFD- MD


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18165/2014
     IA/18170/2014
     IA/18177/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                            |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 22nd October 2014                         |On 10th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                      mrs farzana bi - first appellant
                      miss faiza ali - second Appellant
                     master uzain ali - third appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan born 20th  January  1982,  10th
    May 2009 and  27th  March  2010  respectively.  Farzana  Bi  the  first
    Appellant is the mother of the second and third Appellants.  The  first
    Appellant is the spouse of Shoqut Ali a British citizen. The second and
    third Appellants are the minor dependent children  of  Farzana  Bi  and
    Shoqut Ali. The second and third Appellants, however, are  not  British
    citizens. Their appeals stand or fall with that of their mother.

 2. The Appellants entered the United Kingdom on 28th September  2011.  The
    first Appellant had been issued with a  spouse  visa  valid  until  5th
    December 2013. On 22nd November 2013 she made application  for  further
    leave to remain. The Respondent refused that application on 25th  March
    2014 and it is  against  that  refusal  that  the  Appellant  appealed,
    together with her  two  children  as  dependents,  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.

 3.  The  Respondent  refused  the  first  Appellant's  application   under
    paragraph 284 of HC 395 - the Immigration Rules in force  at  the  time
    the decision was made. The basis for the refusal is found in  paragraph
    284(ix)(a) - the English Language Test requirement was not met.

 4.  The  Appellants'  appeals  came  before  FtT  Judge  Grimshaw.  In   a
    determination promulgated on 13th August 2014 the Judge  took  evidence
    from the first Appellant and from her husband Mr Shoqut Ali. The  Judge
    also had before her documentary evidence which included  a  copy  of  a
    certificate awarded to the Appellant by City and Guilds on 30th January
    2014. It was claimed that this certificate was  proof  that  the  first
    Appellant met the English language test requirement.  Having considered
    the evidence the Judge found that the first Appellant  could  not  meet
    the English Language Test requirement and  therefore  her  application,
    and those of her children, failed under that part  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The Judge then went  on  to  consider  whether  the  Appellants'
    applications  could  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Having found that the Appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements of  Appendix  FM,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'
    appeals under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Appellants sought and were granted permission to appeal. The  grant
    of permission is set out here:

         "By a determination  promulgated  on  13  August  2014,  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Grimshaw dismissed the appellants'  appeals  against
         decisions of the respondent.  Having  assessed  the  evidence,  the
         judge concluded that the appeals did not succeed  pursuant  to  the
         immigration rules, HC395 (primarily paragraph 284 was in issue); or
         through the application of article 8 of the European Convention  on
         Human Rights (paragraphs 19 to 22 of the determination).

         The grounds on which  the  appellants  seek  permission  to  appeal
         complain, in summary, that the judge was wrong when she  said  that
         the English-language certificate provided by  the  first  appellant
         had not been issued by a Home Office approved test  centre;  failed
         to assess whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the  sponsor  to
         relocate to Pakistan with the appellants;  and  wrongly  took  into
         account the  possibility  that  the  appellant  might  be  able  to
         successfully apply for entry clearance as a  spouse  from  Pakistan
         (reference is made to Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, 25 June 2008).

         The grounds are arguable."

 6. Thus the matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to decide in the  first
    instance whether the determination of FtT Grimshaw discloses  an  error
    of law requiring it to be set aside and the decision remade.

UT Hearing

 7. Miss Khan on behalf of the  Appellants  made  brief  submissions  which
    essentially amounted to her relying on the grounds seeking  permission.
    She did expand her submissions a little saying that the FtT  Judge  had
    failed to fully consider the Appellants' private and family life  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 8. Mr Diwnycz equally briefly defended the determination. He  referred  to
    the Rule 24 response and in particular to paragraph 3 set out below.

         "It is clear that  the  main  appellant  cannot  meet  the  English
         Language requirement of the Rules. The judge applied the  ratio  of
         Gulshan and ad (sic) arrived at conclusion which were open  to  him
         (sic) as there were no exceptional circumstances in this  case.  It
         is further submitted that the principle  set  out  Chikwamba  (sic)
         cannot survive the change in Immigration Rules on 9 July 2012."

Consideration

 9. In view of the submissions made I take my starting point by asking what
    is it the grounds seeking permission rely upon?

10. Ground 1 claims that  the  FtT  erred  in  not  accepting  the  English
    Language Certificate as satisfying the English Language requirement.  I
    find no merit in this claim. Judge Grimshaw made  a  clear  finding  at
    [16] in her determination where she said,

         "I have seen a copy of the certificate awarded to the Appellant  by
         City & Guilds on 30 January 2014. I accept her  evidence  that  her
         failure to submit it to the Respondent earlier was as a result of a
         simple misunderstanding on her part. The  document  produced  is  a
         Certificate of Unit Credit towards (my  emphasis)  an  Entry  Level
         Certificate in ESOL Skills for life (Entry 2). It  shows  that  the
         Appellant was successful in the speaking and listening module Entry
         2."

11. It is clear that Judge Grimshaw found that a Certificate of Unit Credit
    towards an Entry Level Certificate is not the end result and  does  not
    constitute sufficient evidence to show the first Appellant has met  the
    requirements of paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules which  were   in
    force.

12. There was nothing further put before me by  Miss  Khan,  to  show  that
    Judge Grimshaw's conclusion was  incorrect.  The  first  ground  itself
    simply asserts that the certificate was issued by City and Guilds which
    is listed on the Home Office  website  as  one  of  the  approved  test
    centres. I have no doubt that it is correct to say that City and Guilds
    is one of the approved test centres. That was not the basis  for  Judge
    Grimshaw's finding against the first Appellant on this point.

13. It follows that since the second and  third  Appellants  are  dependent
    upon the appeal of their mother, they too cannot meet  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. The second and third grounds can conveniently be dealt  with  together.
    It is asserted that the Judge failed to  assess  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the Sponsor to relocate to Pakistan with the Appellants;
    and wrongly took into account the possibility that the first  Appellant
    might be able to successfully apply for entry  clearance  as  a  spouse
    from Pakistan with reference made to Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

15. I find no merit in either of those assertions. Judge Grimshaw  said  at
    [11],

         "As  the  Appellant  had  not  shown  that  she  could   meet   the
         requirements of paragraph 284 the Respondent went on to consider if
         the  application  met  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules. It was noted that the Appellant's  children  are
         not British citizen and do not have settled  status.   Although  it
         was acknowledged that the Appellant's  partner  has  lived  in  the
         United Kingdom since 2003 and is in work  it  was  considered  that
         there were no insurmountable obstacles preventing family life  from
         continuing in Pakistan."

16. Following on from that at [19] goes on to say the following,

         "Where  an  applicant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
         Immigration Rules a refusal will normally follow. However, if there
         are any exceptional circumstances  consistent  with  the  right  to
         respect for  private  and  family  life  contained  in  Article  8,
         consideration by the Respondent of a grant of leave  to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom outside  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules may be warranted."

17. It is clear that the Appellants have failed to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules as set out. It is equally clear  that  there  was
    nothing exceptional or out of the norm put before  the  Judge.  Nothing
    further has been put before me to show that the Judge in some way  mis-
    apprehended the evidence set before her.

18. It is of further note that the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  first
    Appellant had given discrepant evidence  about  her  circumstances.  In
    [21] the Judge said,

         "...There is no persuasive evidence before me to suggest  that  the
         Appellant has severed her social,  cultural  or  family  ties  with
         Pakistan. Although the Appellant would have  me  believe  from  her
         witness statement that she has no family in Pakistan she told me at
         the hearing that her mother currently  resides  there.  Although  I
         accept that it may be her mother's intention to settle in Hong Kong
         permanently I consider it reasonable to suppose  that  those  plans
         can be delayed should the Appellant require accommodation or  other
         assistance from her mother on her return.  I bear in mind that  the
         application signed by the Appellant confirms that she has "parents,
         brother and sisters" in Pakistan (paragraph 10.12). Furthermore,  I
         can find no good reason why the Appellant should not continue to be
         supported emotionally and practically by her husband if he  decides
         to remain in the United Kingdom."



Decision

19. For the foregoing reasons the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses no  material  error  of  law.  The  decision  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeals stands.



No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                           10th November 2014

Fee Award

The appeals are dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                           10th November 2014

