
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2015                              |On 19th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

      Mrs Gimhani Lavanya Kumari Jayasundera Jayasundera Mudiyanselage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an extemporary decision  and  is  therefore  expressed  in  the
    present tense.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge White, who decided  to  allow  the  appeal  of  Mrs
    Mudiyanselage against the refusal to  grant  her  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and also to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 3. By way of background, the application had originally been  for  further
    leave to remain as a work permit holder under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    It is unnecessary to explain the reasons why Judge White found that she
    did not meet the particular requirements for leave to  remain  in  that
    category. This is because Mrs Mudiyanselage (to whom I shall  hereafter
    refer to as "the Appellant" in accordance with her status in the First-
    tier Tribunal) has not cross-appealed the finding that she did not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 134 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Having found that she did not meet the  paragraph  of  the  Immigration
    Rules under which she had originally applied, Judge White  went  on  to
    consider,  in  the  alternative,  whether   the   appellant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.   The  reason
    that he did so is because the Secretary of State served  the  Appellant
    with a notice under Section 120 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, requiring her to state any additional basis  that  she
    may have for remaining in the  United  Kingdom;  that  is  to  say,  in
    addition to any reason why she said that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    wrong in the decision made  under  paragraph  134  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  So it was that the Appellant  took  the  opportunity  to  raise
    paragraph 276B in her Notice of Appeal.

 5. The threshold criteria for indefinite leave to remain  under  paragraph
    276B(i) is residence for a continuous period of ten years which, by the
    time the matter came before Judge White, the Appellant had completed.

 6. I now set out, because I regard it as  instructive,  what  Judge  White
    said about this alternative basis for remaining in the United Kingdom:-

         "18. It is clear from the decision in MU that  where  an  Appellant
             accrues ten  years'  lawful  leave  while  an  appeal  against
             another decision  is  pending,  certainly  where  the  initial
             decision has included, as this did, a Section 120 notice,  the
             Appellant may seek to rely  on  the  ten  year  Rule  and  the
             Tribunal may be asked to decide whether or not  the  Appellant
             qualifies.  In such circumstances the Tribunal may become  the
             primary decision maker but that is clearly an outcome which is
             contemplated and in appropriate cases it is acceptable.

         19.  It is also clear, as a result of the provisions of Section  3C
             of the Immigration Act  1971,  that  a  person  who  makes  an
             application for further leave before  the  expiry  of  current
             leave will obtain a statutory extension of leave,  and  during
             that statutory extension may  seek  to  vary  the  application
             made, at any time prior to a decision.  Once  a  decision  has
             been made the applicant may obtain an extension  of  leave  by
             appealing that decision  but  may  not,  while  an  appeal  is
             pending, make any new application for leave to remain.  It  is
             in fact not unknown for those who accrue ten years'  residence
             pending an appeal to seek to lodge an  application,  but  such
             applications are invalid, and  the  Respondent's  practice  is
             simply to add them to the file on the basis  that  this  is  a
             matter that will be raised at the appeal.

         20.  In the light of those considerations I am satisfied  that  the
             Appellant has properly raised, prior to  the  hearing  and  in
             response to a Section 120 notice, her potential right to  rely
             on paragraph 276B, and I am further satisfied that the failure
             to lodge a valid application form under that Rule pending  her
             appeal is of no significance and that the Tribunal is entitled
             to and should consider the matter.

         21.  In order to succeed under paragraph 276B the  Appellant  needs
             to show five things.  The first is that she has had  at  least
             ten years' continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.
             The Respondent set out her immigration history in the  refusal
             letter and it is clear that she has had ten years'  continuous
             leave, and the suggestion  that  she  has  had  the  necessary
             continuous residence  is  not  challenged.   Since  continuous
             residence will only be broken  by  quite  lengthy  periods  of
             absence from the United Kingdom and the Appellant has retained
             her employment as a solicitor throughout that period, I see no
             reason to doubt that she has  accrued  ten  years'  continuous
             lawful residence.

         22.  The second matter is that there are no reasons in  the  public
             interest which would make it undesirable for her to  be  given
             indefinite leave to remain.  There is certainly no  suggestion
             of any such grounds and it seems to me that the Respondent has
             had some time to consider the matter, the Appellant's  bundle,
             which included her witness statement and her 'Life in the  UK'
             pass notification having been lodged with a letter dated  23rd
             October 2014.  It is also of some significance in this respect
             that she is  employed  as  a  solicitor,  because  that  is  a
             profession  which  itself  requires  good  character  for  the
             continued renewal of practising certificates  and  members  of
             the profession are subject to disciplinary requirements for  a
             wide variety of  misbehaviours.   I  am  satisfied  that  this
             requirement is also met.

         23.  The third requirement is that the applicant  should  not  fall
             for refusal under the general Grounds for Refusal in Part 9 of
             the Immigration  Rules.   If  the  Appellant  were  guilty  of
             conduct bringing her within any of the  general  grounds  that
             would  have  been  raised  as  a  ground  for   refusing   the
             application she in fact made and I am satisfied that she  does
             not fall for such refusal.

         24.  The  fourth  matter  is  that  she  should  have  demonstrated
             sufficient knowledge of the English language and life  in  the
             United Kingdom.  She has produced an appropriate test pass and
             I have no doubt that this requirement is satisfied.

         25.  The final requirement is that she must not be  in  the  United
             Kingdom in breach of immigration law, subject to a  period  of
             28 days which may be disregarded.  Since she clearly currently
             has statutorily extended leave by virtue of  Section  3C  this
             requirement is also met.

         26.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
             entitled to succeed by reference to paragraph 276B."

 7. The judge then went  on  to  explain  that  in  view  of  his  decision
    concerning paragraph 276B, it was unnecessary  to  consider  the  third
    ground of appeal,  which  was  based  on  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,  and  he  made  it
    clear in his notice of decision that the appeal was allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules with reference to paragraph 276B.

 8. The challenge that is raised by the Secretary of State to that decision
    is that the judge erred  in  law  by  deciding  to  exercise  what  she
    characterises as 'a discretion' under paragraph 276B(ii).  It  is  said
    that this was a discretion that should in the first instance have  been
    exercised by the Secretary of State, rather than by the Tribunal  as  a
    primary decision maker.  It is further argued that, at most, the  judge
    should have held that the decision was 'not in accordance with the law'
    by reason of a failure to exercise discretion under paragraph 276B(ii),
    thereby giving the Secretary of State the first opportunity to exercise
    that discretion.

 9. It is accepted by Ms Brocklesby-Weller, on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State, that if  that  discretion  were  subsequently  to  be  exercised
    against the Appellant - that is to say, by refusing the  application  -
    then the exercise of that discretion would be fully reviewable  by  the
    Tribunal on appeal  on  the  ground  that  a  discretion  conferred  by
    immigration rules ought to have been exercised differently.

10. In support of this argument, the  Secretary  of  State  relies  upon  a
    decision of this Tribunal in Ukus (discretion: when reviewable)  [2012]
    UKUT 00307 (IAC), the headnote of which reads as follows:-

         "1.  If a decision maker in the purported exercise of a  discretion
             vested in him noted his function and what was required  to  be
             done when  fulfilling  it,  and  then  proceeded  to  reach  a
             decision on that basis, the decision is a lawful one  and  the
             Tribunal cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory  power
             to decide that  the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
             differently  (see  Section  86(3)(b)   of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

         2.   Where the decision maker has failed to exercise  a  discretion
             vested in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  is
             limited to a decision that the failure  renders  the  decision
             'not in accordance  with  the  law'  (Section  86(3)(a))."  [I
             interpose at this point in order to mention that this  is  the
             ground upon which the Secretary  of  State  argues  that  this
             appeal should have been allowed]. Because  the  discretion  is
             vested in the Executive, the appropriate course  will  be  for
             the Tribunal to require the decision  maker  to  complete  his
             task  by  reaching  a  lawful  decision  on  the   outstanding
             application, along the lines set out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm
             AR 148.  In such a case, it makes no difference whether  there
             is such a statutory power  as  is  mentioned  in  paragraph  1
             above.

         3.   If the decision maker has lawfully  exercised  his  discretion
             and the Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal must
             either (i)  uphold  the  decision  maker's  decision  (if  the
             Tribunal is unpersuaded that the decision  maker's  discretion
             should have been  exercised  differently);  or  (ii)  reach  a
             different decision in the exercise of its own discretion."

11. By way of reply, Mr Jafar  argues  that  Judge  White  was  correct  in
    holding that MU is authority for the proposition that the Tribunal  may
    act as a primary decision maker in deciding whether or not it is in the
    public interest to grant indefinite leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
    276B. He points out that the assumption that underlies a long  line  of
    cases, including those at a Court of Appeal level, has  been  that  the
    Tribunal may act as a primary decision maker  in  those  circumstances.
    He cites, by way of example only, the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in ZH (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 8, as well as the decision in this Tribunal in MU  ('Statement
    of Additional Grounds'; long residence; discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]
    UKUT 442 (IAC).

12. I agree that the assumption made in those cases, and  others,  is  that
    the Tribunal may act as primary  decision  maker  in  situations  where
    (amongst others) a Section 120 notice has been served and the Appellant
    thereafter - and for the first time - raises the question of whether he
    or she qualifies for leave to remain under paragraph 276B.  What  I  do
    not accept is  that  this  assumption  has  thus  far  been  judicially
    analysed or explained.  The mere fact that a  party  did  not  seek  to
    challenge a legal assumption that  was  made  in  a  previous  reported
    decision, at whatever level, does not mean that that  the  decision  is
    authority for the proposition in question, the correctness of which was
    assumed rather than judicially determined. At best, the fact that  this
    assumption has been  made  may  be  a  pointer  to  the  correct  legal
    position. The Secretary of State having now  raised  this  argument,  I
    have to decide what appears to me to be a novel point of law.

13. The problem with the Secretary of States's argument, however,  is  that
    it is predicated upon an analysis that assumes that what is called  for
    by paragraph 276B(ii) is the exercise of 'discretion'.  In my  judgment
    it is no such thing.  It is right to say that Judge McKee in MU does at
    one point appear to have referred to it  as  such.   Nevertheless,  the
    requirement for there to be no countervailing public  interest  against
    the grant of indefinite leave to remain is one that  I  consider  calls
    for an exercise of judgement rather than discretion. This may be a fine
    distinction, but it is  in  my  judgement  an  important  one  for  the
    following reasons.

14. The Immigration Rules contain  many  provisions  for  the  exercise  of
    discretion, properly so-called.  Examples can be  found  in  paragraphs
    320 to 322 of the Immigration Rules, in which it  is  made  very  clear
    that what is called for is an exercise of discretion.  This is  because
    the various circumstances that are predicated by these  paragraphs  are
    preceded by words such as "grounds upon which  leave  to  enter  and/or
    leave to remain should normally be refused", in which case there  is  a
    discretion  to  grant  or  refuse  the  application.   Otherwise,   the
    circumstances are preceded by the words such  as  "grounds  upon  which
    leave to enter and/or leave to remain shall be refused", in which  case
    there is no discretion to grant the application.  There is  however  no
    such rubric  in  paragraph  276B(ii).   Rather,  the  sub-paragraph  is
    expressed in the following way:-

         "Having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why  it
         would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain
         on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

         (a)  age; and

         (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

         (c)  personal history, including character,  conduct,  associations
             and employment record; and

         (d)  domestic circumstances; and

         (e)  compassionate circumstances; and

         (f)  any representations received on the person's behalf."

         [Emphasis added]

15. The question of whether it would be "undesirable" for a  person  to  be
    granted leave to remain is plainly a matter calling for an exercise  of
    judgement rather  than  discretion.   It  is  right  to  say  that  the
    requirements of an immigration rule usually contain a  requirement  for
    an applicant to prove the existence of a  particular  hard-edged  fact.
    Paragraph 276B(ii) is thus unusual in  that  it  calls  for  neither  a
    finding of  fact  nor  an  exercise  of  discretion.   An  exercise  of
    judgement has this much in common an exercise of discretion:  they  may
    each result in  conclusions  about  which  two  people  can  reasonably
    disagree. On the other hand, the exercise of judgement under  paragraph
    275B(ii) is more akin to a finding of fact in that the granting  of  an
    application  for  leave  to  remain  will  either  be  'desirable'   or
    'undesirable' by reference to  the  public  interest.  The  distinction
    between an exercise of discretion and an exercise of judgement  can  be
    seen within the context of the Immigration Rules in other ways. Thus  a
    discretion to refuse an application is generally  conferred  where  the
    applicant is found to be guilty of some particular and individual  form
    of misconduct, whereas paragraph 276B(ii)  calls  for  a  more  rounded
    assessment of the desirability of granting the application by reference
    to a number of public policy considerations.

16. I therefore hold that the Grounds of Appeal  are  misconceived  because
    paragraph 276B(ii) does not provide the Secretary  of  State  with  any
    discretion at all.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

