
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/18002/2014
                                                               IA/18006/2014
                                                               IA/18009/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                          |
|On 9 December 2014                |                On 12 January 2015   |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                              MR MD WARIS UDDIN
                              MRS SHIRIN AHMED
                          MASTER AHNAF WARIS FARABI
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellants: Mr C Yeo of counsel
           instructed by Zahra & Co Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr M Shilliday a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's are citizens of Bangladesh and  respectively  husband-
      and-wife and the parents of the third appellant (I will refer to  them
      as the father, the mother and the son). Both they and  the  respondent
      have been given permission to appeal the determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Russell ("the FTTJ") who allowed the appeal of the  son
      against the respondent's decision  of  9  April  2014  to  refuse  the
      appellants' applications for further leave to remain in the UK on  the
      basis of private and family life and the decision to remove them  from
      the UK. The FTTJ neither allowed nor  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the
      father or the mother against the same decisions.


   2. The respondent has appealed against the decision to  allow  the  son's
      appeal and the father and mother  have  appealed  against  the  FTTJ's
      failure to make decisions in their appeals. In the circumstances where
      there are cross appeals I will continue to  refer  to  the  appellants
      either as such or as I have described above and the Secretary of State
      as the respondent.


   3. The father arrived in the UK or 4 April 2005 and was granted leave  to
      enter as a student. The mother and son entered the UK 8 May 2006.  The
      father applied for further leave to remain as a post study migrant but
      this was refused in April 2009.  There  was  no  appeal  against  this
      decision and the appellants have remained unlawfully in the  UK  since
      then.


   4.  12  December  2012  the  father  applied  for  leave  to  remain   on
      compassionate grounds but the respondent rejected this application  on
      4 September 2013. On  16  October  2013  the  father  made  a  further
      application for leave to remain on the basis  of  private  and  family
      life. This was rejected on 20 November 2013.  On  28  March  2014  the
      father made further representations to remain on the basis of  private
      and family life. This led to the refusal of 9 April 2014 by  reference
      to Appendix FM and Paragraph 276 ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      respondent was not persuaded that the appellants met the  requirements
      of the Rules nor was it unreasonable to expect the son to leave the UK
      taking into  account  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009. There was also a  decision  to  remove  them  as
      illegal entrants under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      1999. The appellants appealed under the provisions of section 82(1) of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the  grounds  that
      the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,
      interfered with their human  rights  and  did  not  respect  the  best
      interests of the son.


   5.  The  FTTJ  heard  the  appeal  8  October  2014.  Both  parties  were
      represented, the appellants by Mr Yeo who  appeared  before  me.  Oral
      evidence  was  given  by  the  father  and  the  son.  After   hearing
      submissions the FTTJ reserved his determination. He concluded that the
      appellants could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM. The  father
      and mother did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE  of  the
      Rules. The FTTJ went on to consider whether the  son  could  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv). In relation to his private
      life in the UK he would need to show that he was under 18,  had  lived
      continuously in the UK for  at  least  seven  years  (discounting  any
      period of imprisonment) and that it would not be reasonable to  expect
      him to leave the UK. As the other requirements were  clearly  met  the
      question turned on whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  him  to
      leave the UK.


   6. After reviewing the evidence relating to the family and in  particular
      the son the FTTJ found that it would be in the best interests  of  the
      son to remain in the UK.  He  considered  the  countervailing  factors
      which might outweigh this before  concluding  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to remove the  son  to  Bangladesh  in  the  light  of  the
      provisions of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) of the Rules.


   7. The FTTJ allowed the son's appeal and then said;  "Having  found  that
      the third appellant meets the requirements of the immigration rules  I
      do not need to go on to  consider  whether  his  removal  engages  the
      operation of Article 8 ECHR.  The  Home  Secretary  may  now  wish  to
      consider the position of the first and second appellants in  light  of
      my findings in relation to their son." Whilst the final conclusion was
      "The appeals are allowed (sic)" it is common ground and  I  find  that
      the FTTJ allowed the appeal of the son but did not decide the  appeals
      of the father and the mother.


   8. It is also common ground that the FTTJ should have decided the appeals
      of the father and the mother and that the failure  to  do  so  was  an
      error of law. What needs to be done as a result is a question to which
      I will return.


   9. The respondent submits one composite ground of appeal in which  it  is
      alleged that the FTTJ erred in law by making a  material  misdirection
      in his approach to when it was reasonable for a child  to  be  removed
      having spent over seven years in the UK. The FTTJ failed to apply  the
      principles set out in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State  for
      the home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874. There was  no  obligation  on
      the UK to provide education for the world and the appellants would  be
      a burden on public resources. Bearing in mind paragraph  117B  of  the
      Immigration Act 2014 there was no evidence that  the  appellants  were
      financially independent and would not be a burden on taxpayers.  There
      was nothing exceptional about the circumstances of the son's case.


  10. Mr Shilliday relied on the grounds of appeal and took me  through  the
      authorities relied on by the FTTJ in the  determination.  He  accepted
      that these were relevant  authorities  but  submitted  that  the  FTTJ
      misapplied them. There was a significant similarity between the  facts
      of this case and those in EV Philippines where the children  concerned
      were within six months of the same age. The FTTJ had failed to make  a
      "real world" assessment. His parents had no independent claim or right
      to remain in the UK. Although they had been  mentioned  the  FTTJ  had
      failed properly to take  into  account  the  factors  which  militated
      against the father and mother and affected the son.


  11. Mr Yeo submitted that there  was  only  one  ground  of  appeal  which
      amounted to no more than  a  disagreement  with  conclusions  properly
      reached on the evidence  and  did  not  disclose  any  error  of  law.
      Paragraph 117 of the Immigration Act 2014 was not relevant because the
      son succeeded under the main  Immigration  Rules.  The  FTTJ  properly
      assessed the factors  both  for  and  against  the  appellant  and  in
      particular the son in great detail. No material factor had  been  left
      out of account.


  12. Mr Yeo argued not only that the son's appeal should succeed  but  that
      in the light of this the appeals of the mother and father should  also
      succeed on Article 8 human rights grounds outside the Rules even after
      taking into account the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014.


  13. I was asked to uphold the decision allowing the son's  appeal  on  the
      basis that there was no error of law and to remake  the  decisions  in
      relation to the  father  and  mother  for  which  purpose  no  further
      evidence or submissions were required.


  14. I asked Mr Shilliday what action he submitted I should take if I found
      that there was no error of law and upheld the decision  to  allow  the
      son's appeal. On behalf the  respondent  he  conceded  that  in  these
      circumstances the appeals of the father and mother should  be  allowed
      on Article 8 human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules.


  15. I reserved my determination.


  16.  The  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  slightly  misquote  from  the
      judgement of Jackson LJ in EV Philippines. The correct extract states;




         "60. That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world.


         61. In fact the immigration judge weighed the best interests of the
         children as  a  primary  consideration,  and  set  against  it  the
         economic well-being of the country. As Maurice Kay LJ  pointed  out
         in AE (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
         EWCA Civ 653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have been
         appropriate to consider the cost to the public purse  in  providing
         education to these children. In fact that was  not  something  that
         the  immigration  judge   explicitly   considered.   If   anything,
         therefore, the immigration judge adopted an approach too favourable
         to the appellant."


  17. I also take into account what was said by  Christopher  Clarke  LJ  in
      paragraphs 33 to 37;


         "33. More important for present purposes is to know how the
         tribunal should approach the proportionality exercise if it has
         determined that the best interests of the child or children are
         that they should continue with their education in England. Whether
         or not it is in the interests of a child to continue his or her
         education in England may depend on what assumptions one makes as to
         what happens to the parents. There can be cases where it is in the
         child's best interests to remain in education in the UK, even
         though one or both parents did not remain here. In the present
         case, however, I take the FTT's finding to be that it was in the
         best interests of the children to continue their education in
         England with both parents living here. That assumes that both
         parents are here. But the best interests of the child are to be
         determined by reference to the child alone without reference to the
         immigration history or status of either parent.
         34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present,
         the need for immigration control outweighs the best interests of
         the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength of
         the factors which make it in their best interests to remain here;
         and also to take account of any factors that point the other way.
         35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they have been in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which it is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the course proposed will interfere with their
         family life or their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.
         36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an
         answer falls to be given to the question: is it in the best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer the child has been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of his education,
         the looser his ties with the country in question, and the more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the need to
         maintain immigration control may well not tip the balance. By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way), the result
         may be the opposite.
         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into
         account the strong weight to be given to the need to maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the parents may
         also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
         deceitfully."
  33. Whilst the FTTJ was  not  referred  to  EV  Philippines  and  made  no
      reference to it I find that he did properly reflect these  principles.
      Whilst the grounds of appeal set out a number of factors which  it  is
      argued the FTT should have taken into account or to  which  he  should
      have given greater emphasis I can find no material  factor  which  was
      left out of account or given inappropriate weight. The  factors  which
      militate  against  the  appellants  are  assessed  with  equal  indeed
      arguably greater care than those which work in their favour.  After  a
      careful examination of the grounds and the determination I  find  that
      the grounds  of  are  no  more  than  disagreements  with  conclusions
      properly reached by the FTTJ on all the evidence.


  34. I find that the FTTJ not err in law in relation to allowing the  son's
      appeal.


  35. I find that the FTTJ did err  in  law  by  failing  to  determine  the
      appeals of the father and the mother. As there is no decision there is
      no decision to set aside. I must make the decisions in their  appeals.
      However, through Mr Shilliday the respondent  has  conceded  that  the
      appeals of the father and the mother should be allowed  on  Article  8
      private and family life grounds outside the Immigration Rules.


  36. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  37. I dismiss the respondent's appeal against the decision  to  allow  the
      son's appeal.


  38. I allow the appeals of the father and the mother on  Article  8  human
      rights grounds.














      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 10 December 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

