
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18116/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 October 2014                        |On 31 October 2014               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Phillip Gladstone Valentine
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Cheng, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
                 DECISION AND REASONS FOR NOT EXTENDING TIME

 1. This is an application for permission to appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order.

 2. The respondent, hereinafter "the  claimant"  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2001.  In 2003 he committed serious criminal offences and
    he was sentenced to three years'  imprisonment  in  June  2004  on  two
    counts on an indictment concerned with the supply of class A controlled
    drugs.  Persons who commit offences of that kind are  prime  candidates
    for being deported and it is rather surprising that  the  claimant  was
    not deported at an earlier stage.  In  fact  there  were  a  series  of
    errors which led to the delay and the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to revoke a deportation order did not come  before
    the First-tier Tribunal until January 2014.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  impressed  with  the  age  of  the
    offence, the claimant's current  attitude  and  his  relationship  with
    people in the United Kingdom.  She was clearly of  the  view  that  the
    claimant was no longer involved in drug-taking and was  remorseful  and
    wanted to support his partner and their two young children.  As is very
    often the case when appeals involving deportation matters  are  decided
    in the favour of the claimant the judge was  concerned  more  with  the
    effect of removal on those close to the claimant than on  the  claimant
    himself and she allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal and  permission  was
    refused by a Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 5. Deportation has become a contentious area  and  there  have  been  many
    developments in the law.  It is  therefore  not  entirely  unsurprising
    that when the Secretary of State sought further  permission  to  appeal
    and the case came before the Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  she  gave
    permission because she was concerned that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    not had proper regard to the decisions in the cases of Gulshan (Article
    8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and  MF
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192.  This does not mean that the First-tier Tribunal  got  the  wrong
    answer.  It meant that the Upper Tribunal Judge found it arguable  that
    the legal underpinning of the decision was wrong.  It may be  that  the
    judge was more concerned with the method of getting to  the  conclusion
    than the conclusion itself, I do not know.

 6. The Upper Tribunal Judge considering the permission application  failed
    to deal with an application to extend  time.   This  is  a  regrettable
    mistake.  The Secretary of State made it clear that her application was
    late. It should have been made no later than 18 March 2014 but  it  was
    in fact made on 6 June 2014.  This was simply overlooked by  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge.

 7. Mr Wilding suggested  that  the  wording  of  the  grounds  meant  that
    extending time had  been  considered  because  it  is  headed  "Reasons
    (Including Any Decision On Extending Time)".  However, the one sentence
    explanation for giving permission plainly only relates to  the  reasons
    for giving permission to appeal and the Upper Tribunal Judge has  given
    no consideration at all to the reasons for extending time. I  am  quite
    satisfied that the grant was provisional on time being extended.

 8. Mr Wilding properly drew to my attention in outline submissions to  the
    inherent merits of the appeal.  Without in  any  way  deciding  on  the
    appeal I have commented on these above.  I have reminded myself of  the
    decision of this  Tribunal  in  Mohammed  (late  application-First-tier
    Tribunal) [2013] UKUT 00467 (IAC) which reviewed the procedures  to  be
    adopted when an application is made late.   The  Tribunal  particularly
    drew attention to observations  of  the  President,  Blake  J,  in  the
    decision of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60
    (IAC). At paragraph 12 of its determination the  Tribunal  referred  to
    paragraphs 16 and 20 in Ogundimu where it was made plain that:-

         "There must always be a reason shown why time limits have not  been
         complied with and the longer the period of non-compliance the  more
         powerful those  reasons  should  be.   Whilst  each  case  must  be
         determined on its own  facts,  given  the  strict  time  limits  in
         immigration appeals generally and  the  reason  behind  those  time
         limits, the expectation is that it  will  be  an  exceptional  case
         where permission to the appeal should be granted  where  there  has
         been a significant delay in filing an application;  by  significant
         delay we would certainly include any period more than 28  days  out
         of time."

 9. This application is rather more than 28 days late.

10. Strict time limits exist in part to ensure that  mischievous  claimants
    do not prolong  their  stay  unmeritoriously.  They  also  ensure  that
    successful claimants are  not  left  in  a  state  of  uncertainty  and
    particularly that a person who believes that  he  has  won  his  appeal
    should not be left for a prolonged period at risk of the decision being
    overturned on appeal.

11. Mr Wilding submits that this delay is the result of a  mistake  by  one
    officer who was coming to the end of  her  time  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's  employment  and  simply  made  a  mistake.   I   accept   that
    explanation to the extent that I accept that this  is  an  individual's
    error rather than systemic failure although I do think it is  a  matter
    of surprise, given the importance attached to  time  limits,  that  the
    Secretary of State does not have a system of ensuring that officers are
    reminded of time limits.  I am told that solicitors have a diary system
    which constantly reminds them of important  time  limits  and  that  is
    something the Secretary of State might want to think about but that  is
    entirely a matter for her.

12. I have here an application made very late for no good reason.  I  weigh
    against that the fact that the appeal was allowed for the sake  of  the
    appellant's family, and particularly his two small children, by a judge
    who took into account that the  offences giving rise to the deportation
    order were committed more than ten years ago.  Regrettably the claimant
    has not  been  absolutely  out  of  trouble  since  then  but  his  two
    subsequent convictions were dealt with by way of fines.

13. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has not shown proper reasons
    for extending time.  I  do  not  extend  time.   It  follows  that  the
    Secretary of State does not have permission to appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 October 2014                |








