
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18829/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 June 2013                            |On 18 June 2013            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                          MR BOLAJI LUKEMAN AJIBOWO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:
          For the Appellant: Ms Ofei Kwatia of counsel instructed by
Harrison Morgan solicitors
          For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 17 July 1972. He
      claims that his wife and sponsor is a citizen of the  Netherlands.  He
      has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge T R P Hollingworth who dismissed his appeal against the
      respondent's decision of 7 August 2012 to refuse to issue him  with  a
      residence card confirming his right of residence as the spouse  of  an
      EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  pursuant
      to the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
      2006 Regulations").


   2. The respondent refused the  application  made  on  8  March  2012.  In
      summary the respondent did not accept that the claimant's marriage was
      valid or subsisting. The  marriage  certificate  was  not  a  reliable
      document. The appellant's and the sponsor's claimed proxy marriage did
      not satisfy Ghanaian law. The appellant was Nigerian and  his  claimed
      spouse Dutch. They had failed to establish how any  of  their  parents
      were of Ghanaian descent. Registration of the marriage  had  not  been
      completed in time.


   3.  The  appellant  submitted  an  appeal  to  the  First-Tier   Tribunal
      accompanied by grounds of appeal couched in  the  broadest  of  terms.
      These also raised Article 8 human rights  grounds.  Inexplicably,  the
      appellant asked for the appeal to be decided on the  papers.  This  is
      what the judge did, on 19 October 2012. He found  that  the  appellant
      had not entered into a valid customary  marriage  in  accordance  with
      Ghanaian law and had not established that  he  was  in  a  genuine  or
      subsisting  marriage  with  his  sponsor.  He   concluded   that   the
      appellant's application did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  2006
      Regulations and that it was  hard  to  see  how  the  appellant  could
      succeed on Article  8  human  rights  grounds  in  the  light  of  the
      conclusion that he was not in a genuine and  subsisting  marriage.  On
      the way to  reaching  these  conclusions  the  judge  found  that  the
      appellant had been in the UK for approximately 10 years unlawfully and
      had no valid basis for remaining,  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      appellant and the sponsor had children, no evidence that they had been
      cohabiting, had visited each other's countries  of  nationality,  that
      the sponsor had met the appellant's family or  what  arrangements  had
      been  made  in  relation  to  the  marriage  ceremony.  The   marriage
      certificate was flawed by obvious inexplicable factors.


   4. In paragraph 17 of the determination the  judge  said;  "There  are  a
      large number of questions I would have wanted to have put, not only to
      the appellant, but his sponsor also in the event that an oral  hearing
      had been requested. Settlement applications such as these  are  almost
      always best disposed of by oral hearing." I agree. However,  this  was
      the appellant's choice.


   5. The judge dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and on human
      rights grounds. The appellant sought permission to appeal,  which  was
      refused by a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. On renewal to the Upper
      Tribunal permission was granted without any reference to any  arguable
      error of law on the basis that "the Tribunal is about  to  hear  cases
      involving customary marriage by proxy, the formalities which  have  to
      be complied with, their subsequent registration and their validity  in
      the United Kingdom." I am aware, as  were  the  representatives,  that
      such cases are part heard. It is not clear when the determination  and
      guidance will be available. I was not asked  to  adjourn  this  appeal
      pending such a determination and I see no need to do so.


   6. The appellant attended the hearing before me accompanied  by  a  woman
      who, I am  told,  is  his  wife  and  sponsor.  On  7  June  2013  the
      appellant's solicitors submitted a bundle of documents running  to  57
      pages. I am told that most of this  is  new  material  which  was  not
      before the judge. I am also told that the judge had a 22 page  bundle.
      These accords with what the judge said in paragraph  9.  I  have  this
      bundle which was on the Tribunal file. I was also  provided  with  the
      determination in NA (customary marriage and divorce - evidence)  Ghana
      [2009] UKAIT  00009  and  the  UKBA  paper  "customary  marriages  and
      divorce/proxy marriages contracted in Ghana"  dated  17  January  2012
      which I will refer  to  as  the  Ralon  report.  Both  representatives
      accepted that neither NA nor the Ralon report were before  the  judge,
      although the Ralon report is referred to in the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter. Counsel also tendered a document which she said  was  part  of
      the Immigration Directorate Instructions  (IDIs).  However  there  was
      nothing on the face of this to indicate  what  it  was,  when  it  was
      dated, where it came from, when any  provisions  came  into  force  or
      whether they were still in force. I decline to accept such an  unclear
      document which, in any event, was not before the judge.


   7. I am unable to accept counsel's  submission  that  the  judge  strayed
      outside the ambit of the reasons for refusal. Whilst the  main  thrust
      of the refusal letter dated 17 July 1972 was directed to the  validity
      of the Ghanaian marriage the respondent also called into question  the
      existence of the marriage or any relationship  between  the  appellant
      and the  sponsor.  The  respondent  also  brought  into  question  the
      appellant's immigration status by the  reference  to  his  having  "no
      alternative basis of stay in the United Kingdom".


   8. It is common ground that the judge was not  provided  with  the  Ralon
      report. In the circumstances and in the absence of any submissions  to
      the contrary, he was entitled to accept that its  content  and  effect
      was as the respondent claimed.


   9. It is easy with hindsight  and  in  the  light  of  the  material  now
      submitted which was not before the judge to say that  he  should  have
      adjourned of his own motion in order to  obtain  further  evidence  or
      information. I find that in the light of what was before him  and  the
      appellant's decision to ask for the appeal to  be  determined  on  the
      papers there was no good reason to him to do so.


  10. I can find no-fault with the judge's reference to regulation 2 of  the
      2006 Regulations. Regulation 2 provides the definitions referred to in
      regulation 7 and they need to  be  read  together.  Whilst  the  judge
      should have referred to  a  marriage  of  convenience  rather  than  a
      genuine and subsisting marital relationship in  the  context  of  this
      appeal this is not a  material  error  of  law.  The  judge's  primary
      conclusion was that the appellant and the sponsor had not  established
      that they were married. Furthermore he did not accept  that  they  had
      established the existence any relationship between them.


  11. I find that on the evidence before him the judge was entitled to reach
      his  conclusions  and  there  is  no  error  of  law.  I  uphold   the
      determination.




      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 14 June
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
