
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/18253/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 3rd November 2017                         | On 7th December 2017         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR. ADRIAN ALEXIA SMITH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hodson, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before me,  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for ease of  reference,  in  the  course  of  this
    decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer to  Mr.  Smith  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The appellant is a Jamaican national who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision of the respondent dated 29th  April
    2015 refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK
    on  the  basis  of  his  family  and  private  life.   The  appellant's
    immigration history is set  out  at  paragraphs  [4]  and  [5]  of  the
    decision of the FtT Judge Greasley and I do not  repeat  it  here.   At
    paragraphs [6]  to  [9]  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  sets  out  the
    respondent's reasons for refusing the application.  At paragraphs  [11]
    to [28] of the decision, the Judge sets out the evidence.  His findings
    and conclusions are to be found at  paragraphs  [31]  to  [34]  of  the
    decision.  At paragraphs [31] and [32], the Judge states:


         "31.  ...I  find  that  the  appeal  must  be  allowed  under   the
         immigration rules and specifically Appendix FM in relation  to  the
         partner route.  I  am  satisfied  that  both  the  suitability  and
         eligibility criteria  within  Appendix  FM  are  both  engaged  and
         satisfied.  I do accept, on balance, that  there  is  credible  and
         consistent evidence that both the appellant and his partner  Alicia
         are in a genuine and subsisting relationship akin to marriage, even
         though they have had their problems from time to  time.   I  accept
         that Alicia is a British Citizen, having  considered  her  original
         British passport.


         32.   I accept that the parties are living together and  intend  to
         do so permanently in the United Kingdom. I also accept  that  there
         is  credible  evidence,  emanating  both  from  the  appellant  and
         Alicia's mother, explaining [sic] the circumstances as to  why  the
         partner is unable to attend the appeal hearing and give [sic]  oral
         evidence. She has, nonetheless, provided the details which  I  find
         remains consistent  with  [sic]  the  oral  evidence  that  I  have
         received from both the appellant and Alicia's mother."


 3. The Judge concluded, at [33],  that  the  appeal  must  be  allowed  in
    relation to the provisions of Appendix FM in relation  to  the  partner
    route.  The Judge also accepted that there is  credible  evidence  that
    the appellant is the biological father of the two children.


 4. The respondent contends that in reaching his decision, the Judge failed
    to make any findings in respect of the exceptions set out  at  E.X.1(b)
    and EX.2 of Appendix FM.  That is, the Judge failed to consider whether
    there would be any insurmountable obstacles to family life between  the
    appellant and his partner continuing outside the UK, and if  there  are
    any such insurmountable obstacles, what they are.  The Judge  therefore
    erred in failing to consider a material issue.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  Judge  Kelly  on  22nd  August
    2017.  The matter comes before  me  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a  material  error  of
    law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.  At the
    conclusion of the hearing before me, I  informed  the  parties  that  I
    allow the appeal and that I shall remit the matter for  hearing  before
    the FtT. I informed the parties that I would give my full  decision  in
    writing. This I now do.


 6. At the hearing before me, Miss Ahmad relied upon the grounds of appeal.
     She submits that put simply, in order to succeed in  the  claim  under
    the  immigration  rules,  the  Judge  had  to  be  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of the exception set out at  EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM,  was
    met.  That is, the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, and there are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.  She submits that although the  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner  who
    is a British Citizen, the Judge failed to  address  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK


 7. In reply, Mr. Hodson relied upon the appellant's rule 24 response dated
    1st November 2017.  He submits that while the FtT Judge  may  not  have
    made an express finding, it is nevertheless Robinson  obvious  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect either child to leave the UK and live
    in Jamaica, on the findings made by the Judge.  The children were  both
    born in the UK, and have lived here continuously.  The  eldest  was  11
    years old at the time of the hearing and the youngest, 6 years old.


 8. It is common ground between the parties that in order to succeed in  an
    application under the immigration rules, the appellant would  have  had
    to have satisfied the FtT Judge  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  It is  right  to  say  that  the  Judge
    refers to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  made  findings  in
    favour of the appellant particularly with regard  to  his  relationship
    with  his  partner,  and  the  two  children.   The   Judge's   overall
    conclusions are to be found at paragraphs [31] to [34] of the decision,
    but nowhere in those paragraphs does the Judge deal with the additional
    requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM. It is useful to set  out
    the requirements of paragraph EX.1


         EX.1. This paragraph applies if


         (a)


             (i) the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a child who-


                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                  18 years when the applicant was first granted leave on the
                  basis that this paragraph applied;


                  (bb) is in the UK;


                  (cc)  is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                  continuously  for  at  least  the  7   years   immediately
                  preceding the date of application; and


             (ii) taking into account their best  interests  as  a  primary
             consideration, it would not be reasonable to expect the  child
             to leave the UK; or


         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.


         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner.


 9. Whether or not the requirements of the exception to certain eligibility
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner or parent were  met,  was
    crucial to the decision.  The FtT Judge states, at [31] and [33],  that
    the appeal must be allowed in relation to the partner route.  The Judge
    found that the appellant and his wife are in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship akin to marriage and that the  appellant's  partner  is  a
    British Citizen.  The Judge  also  found  that  the  appellant  is  the
    biological father of the two children.  Insofar as  the  Judge  allowed
    the appeal under the partner route, the  Judge  fails  to  address  the
    additional requirement of paragraph E.X.1(b). That  is,  whether  there
    are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that   partner
    continuing outside the UK.  Insofar as the appellant's claim  is  based
    upon his right to a family and private  life  with  his  children,  the
    Judge fails to address the requirement of paragraph E.X.1(a)(ii).  That
    is,  taking  into  account  their   best   interests   as   a   primary
    consideration, it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
    leave the UK.  I reject the submission by Mr Hodson that  I  can  infer
    from the decision and the other findings made, that the  Judge  of  the
    FtT resolved those matters by inference, in favour of the appellant.


10. It would be open to the Judge to allow the appeal on the basis that the
    applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner  who
    is a British citizen, but that is subject to the additional requirement
    that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that
    partner continuing outside the UK.  In my judgment, that  is  a  matter
    that is not either  expressly  or  by  inference,  dealt  with  by  the
    decision of the FtT Judge.  There is  therefore,  as  Mr  Hodson  quite
    rightly in my judgment accepts, a gap in the findings that are made  by
    the FtT Judge.  I do  not  accept  that  that  gap  can  be  filled  by
    inferences to be drawn from the decision.


11. In my judgement, the decision of the FtT  is  infected  by  a  material
    error of law. It seems to me that the most appropriate course in  those
    circumstances is for the matter to be remitted  back  to  the  FtT  for
    those matters to be properly considered.  There is no  reason  why  the
    findings  that  were  made  by  the  FtT  Judge  in  relation  to   the
    relationship both with  the  appellant's  partner,  and  his  children,
    should not be preserved.  Miss Ahmad did not seek to persuade me to the
    contrary.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT  Judge  Greasley  is  set
    aside.


19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    of the appeal.


20. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date          28th November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal before me has been allowed and the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
FtT.  In the circumstances, I set aside the fee  award  made  by  FtT  Judge
Greasley.


Signed                                  Date          28th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

