
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18542/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly                |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 26 January 2015                            |On 02 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between
                      JAKISHNANKUMAR DEVJIBHAI CHAUHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Aspinall counsel instructed by HSK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J D L Edwards promulgated on 4 July 2014 which dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 24 May 1965 and is a national of  India.  The
    Appellant came to the United Kingdom on 12 August 2003  with  leave  to
    enter as a work permit holder with leave valid until 27 July  2008.  He
    returned to India and sought re entry on 12  August  2009  on  a  basis
    which is unclear. He was served with  a  notice  of  his  liability  to
    detention and removal as an overstayer. He made an invalid  application
    for  leave  under  Article  8  on  15  September  2009  and  a  renewed
    application on 29 September 2009 which was refused on 26  January  2010
    with no right of appeal.  He  made  a  further  application  for  leave
    outside the Rules on 9 February 2011 which was refused on 10 March 2011
    with no right of appeal. On 5 January 2012  a  reconsideration  of  the
    Appellant's application was requested and a number of letters dated  13
    November 2013, 9 December 2013 and 27  January  2014  provided  medical
    evidence in support of his claim that removal would  breach  his  human
    rights. The application was refused in a letter dated 3 April 2014  and
    removal directions dated 3 April 2014 were issued.

 4. The reasons given in the refusal letter can be summarised as follows:

 5. The medical conditions suffered by the Appellant did not reach the high
    threshold required to engage Article 3 as set out in N v the  Secretary
    of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  UKHL  31.   India  has  a
    functioning medical system which although not comparable to that in the
    United  Kingdom  was  adequate  for  the  nature  of  the   Appellant's
    conditions especially given that he has a number of family  members  in
    addition to two sons and a daughter  who  are  well  qualified  medical
    professionals who could support  him  on  his  return.  Medication  for
    diabetes, tinnitus, and dermatitis are also available in  India.  There
    is limited evidence to  support  the  claimed  mental  health  problems
    beyond a GPs letter suffered by the Appellant but even  if  he  suffers
    from depression there are mental health services available in India.

 6. The Appellant does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

 7. There is nothing about the Appellants circumstances that would  warrant
    a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 8. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. He heard submissions
    from the Appellant's representatives about which Rules to apply relying
    on Edgehill & Another  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  40  given  that  the
    application in issue was made prior to 9 July 2012 and  he  found  that
    the decision in that  case  irreconcilable  with  Haleemuddeen  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 558 and  therefore  out  of  an  abundance  of  caution
    decided to deal with the case both under the old and  new  versions  of
    the Rules. The Judge found  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE. He then turned to Article 8 applying
    the questions set out in Razgar and found that  the  Appellant  had  no
    family life in the United Kingdom. In relation to his private  life  he
    found  that  illegal  work  and  being  treated  by  the  NHS  was   an
    insufficient basis  to  engage  the  protection  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention. He nevertheless went onto assess the proportionality of the
    decision in the event that he was wrong. Taking into account the extent
    and nature of the Appellant's illnesses he found  the  decision  to  be
    proportionate.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Edwards   ("the   Judge")
    dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision.

 9. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  the  application  was  refused.  The
    application was renewed before the Upper Tribunal  and  on  13  October
    2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley gave permission  to  appeal  stating
    that while the Appellant  had  not  dealt  with  Article  3  given  the
    availability of medical care in India it was difficult to see how  that
    ground could succeed; that the Judge had not dealt with Edgehill or the
    medical aspects of the Appellant's claim adequately.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Aspinall on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that in essence:

      a) The Judge had failed to deal with Article 3 as there was no mention
         of it in the determination.

      b) The Judge had failed to  address  the  issues  raised  in  Edgehill
         adequately. The Rules that should  have  applied  were  those  that
         prevailed at the date of the decision.

      c) The approach to Article 8 was inadequate. The medical evidence  had
         not been properly dealt with or the limited access and  quality  of
         health care nor had he addressed the issues of reintegration  given
         the length of his stay in the United Kingdom.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

      a) The grounds had no merit.

      b) The Appellant had come to the United Kingdom  and  overstayed  then
         made use of the NHS and asked to remain on that basis.

      c) This was an application that could only ever  succeed  outside  the
         Rules either before or after 9 July 2012.

      d) He accepted that the Judge had  not  dealt  with  the  claim  under
         Article 3 but submitted the error was not material as the Appellant
         had no life threatening conditions.

      e) In relation to the assessment made under  Article  8  he  submitted
         that the Appellant had access to medical care in India and was able
         to travel to obtain it.

      f) He submitted that in the balancing exercise the  Appellant  had  no
         family  life,  no  evidence  of  a  private  life  other  than  his
         engagement with the NHS, could not speak English and had  therefore
         integrated to only a limited  degree,  contributed  little  to  the
         United Kingdom. The only thing on the other side of the balance was
         the length of his stay in the United Kingdom.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. I have considered Ms Aspinall's submissions in relation  to  the  first
    ground that the Judge had failed to engage with the argument  that  the
    Respondent acted unlawfully by refusing the claimants leave  to  remain
    by reference to the new Immigration Rules incorporated by HC  194  (the
    "new Rules") which came into effect on 9 July 2012 when the  claimants'
    application for leave was made  prior  to  that  date  relying  on  the
    authority of Edgehill and the old Rules should have been applied.

14. The Judge in this case noted that the Appellant's argument as  advanced
    by counsel was that 'the Appellant should have had the benefit  of  the
    more liberal transitional  provisions  allowing  a  full  consideration
    under Razgar.' He also noted that counsel failed to refer to the  later
    Court of Appeal decision taken  in  Haleemuddeen  where  a  differently
    constituted court had arrived at a different conclusion in relation  to
    the same issue. He therefore concluded that out  of  an  'abundance  of
    caution' he would carry out such an Article 8 assessment guided by  the
    case of Razgar.

15. I am therefore satisfied that any failure in the  Judge's  decision  to
    adequately engage with the Edgehill argument was not  material  to  his
    decision as the Appellant's case at its highest was only on  the  basis
    of leave outside the Rules under Article 8, this was the basis  of  his
    application to the Respondent and this is what  the  Judge  considered.
    This Appellant accepted that he was unable to meet the requirements  of
    the Rules either before or after 9 July 2012 and thus it was always  an
    application  for  leave  outside  the  Rules  based  on   his   medical
    circumstances. This was assessed in depth in the refusal  notice  under
    the heading of 'exceptional circumstances' in accordance with  the  two
    stage process of considering  Article  8  claims  carried  out  by  the
    Respondent after 9 July 2012 but also by  the  Judge  as  part  of  his
    assessment under Article 8 on the basis of the guidance in Razgar.

16. The second ground is that the  Judge  failed  to  make  findings  under
    Article 3 which had been part of counsel's submissions at  the  hearing
    and in  her  skeleton  argument.  The  decision  does  not  record  any
    submissions or findings in relation to Article 3  and  the  failure  to
    engage with that submission is an error of law. However I am  satisfied
    that the error was not material to the outcome of the decision as  this
    was an argument that was doomed to fail. The Judge set out the list  of
    the Appellant's ailments at paragraph 16 and  these  were  in  essence:
    tinnitus, frequency of micturation caused  by  TB,  osteoarthritis,  an
    umbilical hernia, diabetes, dermatitis and conjunctivitis, jaundice and
    mental instability. Any Article 3 claim would have to take  account  of
    the guidance in N [2005] UKHL 31 where the House of  Lords  upheld  the
    Court of Appeal's decision and effectively shared and in some ways went
    further than the views expressed by the majority.  The House of  Lord's
    said that the test in this sort of  case  was  whether  the  claimant's
    medical condition had reached such a critical stage  (ie  the  claimant
    was dying) that there were  compelling  humanitarian  grounds  for  not
    removing him to a place which lacked the medical  and  social  services
    which he would need to prevent acute suffering while he was dying.  The
    fact that he  would  be  deprived  of  medical  treatment  which  would
    otherwise prolong his life is not the main  consideration.  Lord  Brown
    pointed out that the additional factor which set D v UK [1997] 24  ECHR
    in contrast to more recent cases was that D had no prospect of  medical
    and family support on return. Reference was made by the grounds  to  GS
    and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT 00397(IAC) but this
    does not support the Appellant's  case  as  it  makes  clear  that  any
    extension of the principles set out in N will be for the higher courts.



17. There was nothing in the evidence before the Judge to suggest that  the
    Appellant while suffering from a number  of  conditions  was  suffering
    from anything untreatable or was dying. I do not consider that  any  of
    the ailments suffered by the Appellant either  singly  or  cumulatively
    reached the high threshold set in Article 3 caselaw particularly  given
    the availability of medical treatment in India.

18. The final ground of appeal suggests that the Judges assessment  of  his
    Article 8 claim given the background material about  the  availability,
    accessibility and quality of health care in  India  was  inadequate.  I
    remind myself what was said in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

19. In this case the Judge had set and the undisputed  immigration  history
    of the Appellant  and  took  this  into  account  as  underpinning  his
    assessment under Article 8 when applying  the  guidelines  set  out  in
    Razgar: he was a 49 year old man who had lived the vast majority of his
    life in India until he came to the United Kingdom in  2003  as  a  work
    permit holder. Between 2003 and 2008 he had returned to  India  on  two
    occasions for medical treatment. From  August  2009  his  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom had been illegal. He was found working in 2013 illegally
    in a restaurant. He has no close family in  the  United  Kingdom  other
    than a brother who he has fallen out with and does not apparently speak
    English. He has close family in India with whom he  maintains  contact.
    The Appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules prior to 2012
    for leave nor did he meet the Rules after 2012 for leave based  on  his
    Article 8 claim. His claim was based on the fact that he has a list  of
    illnesses for which he has received free treatment by the NHS.

20. The Judge succinctly set  out  these  factors  in  the  proportionality
    exercise at paragraphs 21-23 of his decision. He  stated  that  medical
    facilities were available in India for although the grounds suggest  he
    failed to take into account the COIS at paragraph 23  this  is  exactly
    what the COIS records: the facilities may not be free as  they  are  in
    the United Kingdom, they may not be of equivalent efficacy but they are
    available. Although he made no reference to relevant caselaw  he  could
    have gone further and relied on Akhalu (health claim: ECHR  Article  8)
    [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) where the court said in paragraphs 44-45 :

         "44.The correct approach is for the judge to have regard  to  every
         aspect of  the  claimant's  private  life  here,  as  well  as  the
         consequences for her health of removal, but to have  in  mind  when
         striking the balance of proportionality that a comparison of levels
         of medical treatment available is something that will not in itself
         have any real impact on the outcome of the exercise. The judge must
         recognise, as did Judge Saffer, that it will be a  rare  case  that
         succeeds where this is an important aspect of the claimant's case.

         45. Put another way, the consequences of removal for the health  of
         a claimant who would not be able to access equivalent  health  care
         in their country of nationality as was available in  this  country,
         are plainly relevant to the question of proportionality.  But  when
         weighed against the public interest in ensuring  that  the  limited
         resources of this country's health service are  used  to  the  best
         effect for the benefit of those for whom they are  intended,  those
         consequences do not weigh heavily  in  the  claimant's  favour  but
         speak cogently in support of the public interests in removal."

21. As indicated above the Appellant's argument in this case had less force
    given the availability of treatment in India and the  finding  that  he
    had close family members there who could support him.

22. Taking all of the evidence into  account  that  was  before  him  I  am
    satisfied that while  the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge  may  not  be
    extensive the decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to  the
    material accepted by the Judge. It was open to the  Judge  to  conclude
    that removal was in this case proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of
    ensuring that the limited resources of the  United  Kingdom's  National
    Health Service were used for the benefit  of  those  for  whom  it  was
    intended.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 2.2.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

