
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18001/2013
                                                               IA/18004/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 October 2013                            | On 4th November 2013        |
|Extempore                                     |                             |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                     sivaramkumar murugan arunagiri (1)
                              Uthara Rajan (2)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by Berkleys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox promulgated on 8 August  2013  dismissing
    their appeals against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse  in  the
    case of the first appellant his application for leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur, and in the case of the second appellant permission
    to remain as his dependent.  For the reasons  which  we  will  set  out
    below it is unnecessary to go into detail on the facts  of  this  case,
    suffice it to say that  the  appellants'  immigration  history  is  not
    disputed.  It is set out in the refusal letter.

 2. The first-named appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with  leave  to
    remain as a student.  He was then granted leave to remain as a  Tier  1
    Post-Study Worker until 30 November 2012.  Prior to his leave to remain
    in that capacity expiring he applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur, an application which was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on the basis of his failure to  supply  sufficient  documents  to
    show that he was entitled to claim 25 points for the access to funds as
    required.  On  the  basis  of  that  finding  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that he was not entitled to any of  the  other  points  which
    were claimed under Appendix A, although he  was  awarded  points  under
    Appendices B and C. The second appellant's application as the dependant
    of the first appellant was refused in line.

 3. The appellants appealed against these decisions, requesting the appeals
    be dealt with on the papers without a hearing.  For reasons  which  are
    not entirely clear, it appears that owing to  an  administrative  error
    the bundle of papers  which  the  appellants  sent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at the main office in Leicester were not forwarded in time  to
    Judge Cox, and that through no fault of the judge he reached a decision
    which did not take into account those documents.  It is accepted by the
    Secretary of State that that is what occurred.

 4. Accordingly we are satisfied that there was a procedural error in  this
    case which resulted in the judge, through no fault of  his,  dismissing
    the appeal on the basis of the evidence before him.  We hasten  to  add
    that it is accepted that the judge came to a decision which was open to
    him on the material that was before him, but clearly  that  was  not  a
    decision which he ought to have reached even if there was material that
    should have been taken into account.

 5. In the circumstances we consider it appropriate  to  set  the  decision
    aside.  We heard submissions from Ms Allen and from Mr Allan  regarding
    how the decision should be remade.  It appears that a substantial  part
    of the material not taken into account by Judge Cox had  in  fact  been
    submitted to the Secretary of State under cover of a letter  of  7  May
    2013.  Mr Allan fairly accepted that that  had  been  received  by  the
    Secretary of State.

 6. Given that as a result it  will  now  require  a  further  fact-finding
    exercise to determine what  material  was  in  fact  in  front  of  the
    Secretary of State, we consider that it  is  not  clear  that  had  the
    material been taken into account it would have resulted in  the  appeal
    either being dismissed or allowed. Thus, it is appropriate in  all  the
    circumstances to remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision on all issues to be taken into account.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

     1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
        of an error of law and we set it aside.


     2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade by a
        First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Cox.

     3. The respondent is directed to serve on the appellants  and  on  the
        First-tier Tribunal a copy of the letter dated 7 May 2013,  and  to
        specify in writing which  of  the  documents  listed  therein  were
        received, and which it is said were not received.


Signed                                  Date 4th November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
