
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/18115/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 6 October 2014                         |14 October 2014             |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                RUIZ MIRABEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hussain of Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on 11 February 2014 which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background
3. The Appellant was born on 10 August 1985 and is a citizen of Cuba.

4. On 28 March 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the  United
   Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that  removal  would
   breach his right to family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.

5. The background to the case was that the Appellant  met  his  now  wife  a
   British citizen Lucy Radcliffe in September 2010 when she was on  holiday
   in Cuba. She returned to Cuba on two further occasions and  they  married
   on 9 December 2011 in  Cuba.  Mrs  Mirabel  stayed  for  two  weeks  then
   returned to the United Kingdom. In June 2012 Mrs  Mirabel  went  to  Cuba
   again and stayed for 5  months  and  discovered  she  was  pregnant.  The
   Appellant then came to the United Kingdom as a visitor on 19 October 2012
   and lived with his wife and her family. He returned to  Cuba  in  January
   2013. He then decided to apply for  permanent  residence  in  the  United
   Kingdom but stated that as he was told this would take 3 months he  would
   miss his first child's birth he therefore applied  for  a  further  visit
   visa but this was refused. He then returned to the United Kingdom  on  22
   February 2013 in the knowledge that his current leave expired on 3  April
   2013.

6. On 7 May 2013 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  application
   and at the same time issued directions for his removal under s 47 of  the
   Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The  refusal   letter
   considered the application by reference  to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
   276ADE of the Rules and found that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of either. The letter also found that  the  Appellant  could
   not meet the requirements of EX.1.

The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  case  came
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis (hereinafter called  "the  Judge").
   At the  hearing  the  Respondent  withdrew  the  removal  directions  and
   although the Judge expressed concerns as to the basis of the argument  as
   to how Article 8 was engaged in those circumstances nevertheless heard Mr
   Hussain's argument in  relation  to  why  the  Appellant's  circumstances
   warranted a grant of leave outside  the  Rules.  He  concluded  that  the
   Appellant's circumstances were not such as to warrant a  grant  of  leave
   outside the Rules and dismissed the appeal.

8.  Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 31 March 2014 Upper Tribunal  Judge
   Macleman gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Hussain  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant  that  in  essence  the  Appellant's  wife's  difficult   first
   pregnancy, her current pregnancy and her mother's heart  attack  has  not
   been properly taken into account in determining whether a grant of  leave
   outside the Rules was warranted.; he accepted that  the  Appellant  could
   not meet Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  but  the  matters
   that were put forward were compelling factors; the Judge placed too  much
   weight on the fact that there were no removal directions  in  making  his
   decision.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison relied on the Rule  24  response
   which submitted that the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  all  relevant
   factors.

The Law

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those submissions I/we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. In this case it was properly conceded that the Appellant could not  meet
   the requirements of the Rules that address Article 8, that is Appendix FM
   or paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  Rules.  The  Judge  in  his  determination
   recognised that application of the Rules  and  guidance  ordinarily  mean
   that Article 8 considerations have been catered for taking  into  account
   Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
   (IAC)  which makes  clear  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  Article  8
   compliant and as such if a  claimant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
   Article 8 under the rules there have to be circumstances in the  case  to
   warrant consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

14. The Appellant's representative properly acknowledged  before  the  Judge
   that his only hope of success  was  in  persuading  the  Judge  that  the
   particular circumstances of this Appellant's case were such that  refusal
   of leave would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant
   and his family in the United Kingdom such that refusal of the application
   would not be proportionate.


15. The Judge set out the background to  the  case  as  set  out  above  and
   additionally noted that at the date of hearing the child referred to  had
   been born after an emergency  caesarean.  Mrs  Mirabel  had  suffered  an
   infection and pneumonia which led to  her  spending  a  short  period  in
   intensive care. Mrs Mirabel was at the time of hearing 5 months  pregnant
   with her second child and was anticipating a  caesarean  again.  Although
   she had worked she had lost her job when she stayed in Cuba for 5  months
   so was in receipt of benefits. Her parents did not work  and  her  mother
   had a heart attack in January 2012 but had recovered with no evidence  of
   any lasting issues.

16. The Judge found that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
   Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and  indeed  this  was  conceded  by  Mr
   Hussain. Although the Judge had indicated that he 'struggled to  see  how
   Article 8 would be engaged in the light of the fact  that  there  was  no
   removal decision' he nevertheless went  on  to  hear  arguments  and  did
   indeed consider whether the case should be  looked  at  under  Article  8
   outside the Rules.

17.  I am satisfied that  it  cannot  be  argued  that  the  Judge  did  not
   consider all of the information that was determinative of  that  decision
   even when the  argument  was  supported  by  little  objective  evidence.
   Although there was no  medical  evidence  provided  in  relation  to  Mrs
   Mirabel he was prepared to accept that she had suffered complications  in
   her first pregnancy. In relation to her latest pregnancy he was  entitled
   to note that there was no medical evidence to suggest that she was in any
   way considered a higher risk pregnancy or required any  kind  of  special
   treatment to ensure a safe birth or there were any special issues arising
   in relation to the care of her as yet unborn child. He accepted that  Mrs
   Mirabel's mother had had a heart attack but she  was  no  longer  at  any
   risk.

18.  He also took into account that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  child  are
   British citizens. He noted as part of the factual matrix underpinning the
   case that there were no longer removal directions in place in relation to
   the Appellant. While it was argued that he place too much weight on  this
   fact I am satisfied that  on  any  reading  of  the  decision  the  facts
   relating to the Appellant's wife's health and that of her mother were the
   determinative issues in the case and the Judge was entitled  to  conclude
   as he did that this did not entitle the Appellant to  leave  outside  the
   Rules.

19. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
12.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





