
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18707/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 December 2016                    |On 20 January 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                       MRS HALA ABDALLA DAFALA MUHAMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M Ndubuisi, Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Handley dismissing an appeal against refusal of  a  residence
      card under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
      ("the EEA Regulations").


   2. The appellant was born on 3 May 1976 and is a national of  Sudan.  Her
      husband, who is the sponsor in this  appeal,  is  a  national  of  the
      Netherlands.  The application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State
      because the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the sponsor  was
      a qualified person.  The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
      that the sponsor was temporarily unable to  work  after  suffering  an
      injury.  The judge nevertheless considered that the  sponsor  did  not
      satisfy the requirements of regulation 6(2)(a) of the EEA  Regulations
      as a worker temporarily unable to work because of illness or  accident
      because he had not been employed in the UK for a year or  more  before
      becoming unemployed.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
      that it was arguable that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      conflated  the  requirements  of  regulation  6(2)(a)  with  those  of
      regulation 6(2)(b).  The judge appeared to accept that the sponsor had
      had to cease work after suffering  an  injury  and  that  he  was  not
      permanently unfit for work.  If these requirements were met it was  at
      least arguable that the judge was bound to find that the  sponsor  met
      regulation 6(2)(a).  Instead of  allowing  the  appeal,  however,  the
      judge appeared to have imposed a requirement that the  sponsor  should
      have worked in the UK for one year before  becoming  unable  to  work.
      This was a requirement of regulation 6(2)(b)  and  not  of  6(2)(a)  -
      these sub-paragraphs being in the alternative.

   4. A rule 24 notice dated 12 August 2016 was  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
      respondent.  This contended that on the factual matrix the judge could
      have only dismissed the appeal.  The evidence was that the sponsor had
      stopped working in May 2009 having worked for less than  a  year.   He
      had not looked for work since.  He claimed to  be  incapacitated  from
      further employment.  It was clear that his condition was permanent and
      the judge was wrong to conclude it was temporary.  The  appeal  should
      have been considered under regulation 5, relating to workers or  self-
      employed persons who have ceased activity, the requirements  of  which
      could not be satisfied.

   5. At the hearing before us it was pointed out that the  judge's  finding
      was that the incapacity  was  temporary  rather  than  permanent.   Mr
      Ndubuisi pointed out that as this temporary incapacity  had  continued
      for five years the appellant was entitled  to  a  permanent  residence
      card.

   6. We note that the judge's findings at paragraph 17 included  a  finding
      that since his injury the sponsor had been seeking employment  in  the
      United Kingdom and that he had a genuine chance of being  employed  in
      the future.  He was not permanently unfit for work.  The  sponsor  was
      in receipt of Employment and Support Allowance (ESA) and  as  such  he
      was required to take part in work-focused interviews. He would have  a
      personal adviser who would assist him to take reasonable steps to move
      towards work.  Medical evidence from December  2013  showed  that  the
      sponsor was on an orthopaedics waiting list and was due to attend  for
      day care submission in January 2014.  The sponsor had appointments  to
      meet with a consultant in orthopaedics in March  2014  and  May  2015.
      The judge observed that those who  applied  for  ESA  undergo  a  work
      capability assessment, after which the applicant  for  ESA  is  either
      placed in a "work-related activity group" or a "support  group".   The
      evidence showed that the sponsor was in a work-related activity  group
      and was therefore considered to be capable of returning to work.   The
      judge inferred from this that there was a realistic prospect that  the
      sponsor would be able to return to work in the  future.   It  was  not
      argued before us directly that the judge was wrong to  find  that  the
      sponsor  was  temporarily  unable  to  work  rather  than  permanently
      incapacitated.  It was not disputed that the judge had  misinterpreted
      regulation 6 to impose  an  additional  requirement  under  regulation
      6(2)(a) that the sponsor should have been employed  for  one  year  or
      more before becoming unemployed.  This requirement did  not  apply  to
      regulation 6 (2)(a).  Accordingly the basis on  which  the  judge  had
      dismissed the appeal was erroneous.


   7. We are satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
      law by imposing a condition under regulation  6(2)(a)  which  did  not
      apply to this provision.  Accordingly the decision of the judge is set
      aside and re-made.

   8. We are satisfied that for the reasons  given  by  him  the  judge  was
      entitled to find that the sponsor was temporarily unable to work.   On
      the basis of the judge's findings the sponsor met the requirements  of
      a qualified person under regulation 6(2)(a).  As the  appellant  is  a
      family member of a qualified person, the appeal should be allowed.

Conclusions

   9. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  10. The decision is set aside.

  11. We re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.

Anonymity

  12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  We  have
      not been asked to make such an order and we see no reason of substance
      for so doing.

Fee Award              Note: This is not part of the decision

As no fee was paid or payable no fee award is made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
