
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/18088/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 December 2016                      |On 04 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                        Karishma Rameshchandra Parekh
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  decision
    to refuse her  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur).   The
    appellant appealed with two other  individuals,  whose  appeals  should
    have been linked to hers, but were not:  Rana Ahmed (IA/18054/2014) and
    Misbah Talib (IA/18067/2014).

 2. The grant of permission in this appeal was on the basis that there  had
    been an  administrative  error  by  the  Tribunal,  causing  all  three
    appellants not to attend the hearing and the present  appellant's  case
    not to be linked with that of the other two appellants.

 3. On 8 August 2016, the Upper Tribunal received a letter indicating  that
    Rana Ahmed and Misbah Talib wished to withdraw their appeals and make a
    fresh visa application.  The consent of the Upper Tribunal is  required
    for the withdrawal of an appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  On 9 August
    2014 the Upper Tribunal accepted the withdrawal pursuant to Rule 17.

 4. That left only the present appellant's appeal outstanding. This  appeal
    was to have been heard before the Upper Tribunal on 13 October 2016 but
    was adjourned, not reached, to the first available date  with  standard
    directions and a specific direction that any allegation  of  misconduct
    against the previous solicitors should be  proved  if  it  were  to  be
    relied upon.

 5.  At  the  hearing  this  morning  there  was  no   appearance   by   or
    representation on behalf of the appellant, nor any indication as to why
    that is the case.  No evidence has been filed to support the allegation
    of misconduct against the previous solicitors.

 6. I conclude therefore that this appellant has no continuing interest  in
    the appeal and that it should be dismissed.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing the Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  appeal  therefore
    stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date: 3 January 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

