
IA 18192 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 June 2013                               |On 24th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             RAJA JAHANZAH NASIR
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 24 October  1983  entered
      the United Kingdom on 22 September  2008  and  was  granted  leave  to
      remain as a student until 29 October  2012.  He  applied  for  further
      leave to remain but this application was refused on 13 March  2013  as
      the appellant had no valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  and
      the respondent refused the application under  paragraph  245ZX(c)  and
      (d) of HC 395.

   2. The appellant appealed and his appeal  came  before  First-tier  Judge
      Glossop as a paper case on 22nd August 2013.  The  judge  records  the
      appellant's submissions in  paragraph  5  of  the  determination.  The
      appellant had submitted an application without a CAS as his  visa  was
      running out. The respondent had written to say that if a  problem  was
      discovered with  his  application,  such  as  a  missing  document,  a
      caseworker would be in touch. It was his intention to send a CAS  when
      he was told to do so. His college  delayed  giving  him  the  CAS.  He
      wanted his case considered and referred to  human  rights  issues.  He
      would be unable  to  complete  his  studies.  Discontinuation  of  his
      studies and removal from the UK  would  involve  irreparable  loss  in
      terms of time, money and energy invested.

   3. Judge Glossop having summarised the evidence found as follows:

           "The appellant admits that he failed to supply his CAS. He  says
           he did not have it to hand and was waiting for the respondent to
           ask for it, and he had some difficulty  obtaining  it  from  his
           college. The first ground is entirely without  merit  since  the
           respondent's procedure for dealing with applications which  have
           missing documents ought not to be exploited. It appears that the
           appellant has been unable to obtain a CAS from his  college.  He
           has not informed the tribunal the reason  for  this  but  it  is
           evident that had the tribunal written to the appellant  for  the
           missing CAS he would have been unable to supply  it.  Acceptance
           for studies is fundamental for the issue  of  further  leave  to
           remain in this category and it is plain that  the  appellant  is
           unable to qualify for the leave sought. He  cannot  satisfy  the
           immigration rules."

   4. The judge  then  turned  to  consider  article  8.  He  concluded  his
      determination as follows:

           "The appellant also appeals under article 8 of the ECHR claiming
           that his investment of time, energy and money in  his  education
           will be wasted if he is compelled to  return  to  Pakistan.  The
           appellant however has wholly failed to forward any  evidence  of
           his achievement so far or to explain what brought his studies to
           an end. In short, he has not set out the  essential  detail  for
           establishing a private life in relation to his education in  the
           UK. He has not attended the hearing to  explain  or  assist  the
           tribunal. I am therefore not able to find that his private  life
           is engaged."

   5. There was an application for permission to appeal  and  on  24  April,
      2014 permission was granted by First-tier Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  in
      the following terms:

           "The letter to the appellant from  the  respondent  declined  to
           vary leave and set out the decision pursuant to  section  47  of
           the Immigration and Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.  Although
           the position has now changed in respect of  the  timing  of  the
           making of the section 47 decision the  effect  and  sequence  of
           events in this case has been to deprive the appellant of putting
           forward arguments pursuant to article 8. An  arguable  error  of
           law has thereby arisen."

   6. The appellant lodged a witness statement and  other  documents  on  13
      June, 2014. It confirms that he paid a considerable amount of money to
      his college and claims his college license was suspended. He wished to
      enrol in a different college and wanted time to find a new sponsor and
      submit a new application.

   7. It is plain that the appellant had notice of the proceedings since  he
      refers to the date of hearing in his representations of which  he  was
      clearly aware. It is appropriate in all circumstances  to  proceed  to
      deal with his appeal in his absence.

   8. Ms Everett commented that the appellant appeared  to  be  putting  his
      case differntly to the way the case had been presented previously.  It
      was puzzling that permission to  appeal  had  been  granted  as  Judge
      Glossop had clearly dealt with article 8. Ms  Everett  confirmed  that
      the section 47 decision would be withdrawn as was the practice at  the
      relevant time.

   9. In relation to Article 8 the case of Patel v Secretary of State [2013]
      UKSC 72 presented significant obstacles for the appellant. The  First-
      tier Judge had made no error of law in dealing with the matter  as  he
      did on the evidence presented to him. She  noted  that  the  appellant
      claimed to have been in correspondence with the Home  Office  but  she
      had checked the database and no correspondence was recorded. She noted
      that the appellant appeared to have left matters to  the  last  minute
      when making his application and the Home Office could  not  be  blamed
      for that.

  10. I reserved my decision. As Judge Glossop commented, the appellant  has
      chosen not to attend an oral hearing before the tribunal. That  is  of
      course his right. However it means the tribunal is constrained to deal
      with the matter upon the limited material before it.

  11. In this case permission to appeal was granted on the article  8  point
      only. It is rather a surprising grant  since  the  judge  plainly  did
      consider article 8. Since the determination judgement has  been  given
      in Patel v Secretary of State and Ms  Everett  drew  my  attention  to
      paragraph 57 where Lord Carnwath observed that it  was  important  "to
      remember that Article  8  is  not  a  general  dispensing  power."  He
      concluded "The opportunity for a promising  student  to  complete  his
      course in this country, however desirable in general terms, is not  in
      itself a right protected under  article  8."  The  decision  of  Judge
      Glossop in relation to article 8 was plainly open to him

  12. As the s 47 decision will have to be revisited by the  respondent  the
      appellant will have a  further  opportunity  to  put  matters  to  the
      Secretary of State should he wish. The appellant should note that  the
      invalid s 47 decision does not affect the variation  decision  or  the
      Tribunal's duty to deal with  the  variation  decision:  Adamally  and
      Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT
      00414.

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not  materially  flawed  in
      law and  in  those  circumstances  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  is
      dismissed.

      Appeal dismissed



Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               21 June 2014

