
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18412/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 October 2017                     |On 9 October 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     OHT
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 12 July 1966 whose
    application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his family
    and private life was refused by the respondent.  His subsequent appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal was heard by Judge Adio.  In a decision
    promulgated on 23 January 2017 the appeal was dismissed.  The appellant
    is now appealing against that decision.

    Background

 2. The appellant came to the UK as a visitor in 1999 and was subsequently
    granted leave to remain until June 2004.  Thereafter he has been in the
    UK without leave to remain.  Since around 2005 the appellant has been
    living with his partner and her two children, born in 2003 and 2004,
    who are British citizens.

 3. The appellant has committed several crimes.  In April 2003 he was
    convicted of possessing a bladed article and driving without insurance.
     In 2014 he was convicted of assault and actual bodily harm resulting
    in a ten month prison sentence.

 4. Moreover, in the 1990s he was convicted and sentenced to four years'
    imprisonment in the USA for robbery.  The information about his
    conviction in the USA only came to light at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing.

 5. The appellant claims that removing him from the UK would breach his
    right to private and family life under Article 8 ECHR because of his
    relationship with his partner and her children, all of whom are British
    nationals.

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Pursuant to S-LTR.1.6 of the Immigration Rules, the judge found that
    the appellant was unable to succeed under the Immigration Rules because
    his criminal conduct means that his presence in the UK is not conducive
    to the public good.

 7. The judge then considered the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. At paragraph 25 he stated:

         "The issue is whether the respondent's decision is a proportionate
         one.  In that regard I have considered Section 117B(6) of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This refers to the
         case of a person who is not liable to deportation and states that
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where the
         appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
         qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child
         to leave the UK.  I have already found that the appellant has a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child, i.e.
         the two children of AC.  It would not be reasonable to expect the
         children to leave the UK as they are British citizens.  They have
         never lived in Jamaica.  The real issue is whether it is in the
         public interest that the appellant be removed."

 9. The judge undertook a balancing exercise in assessing the
    proportionality of removing the appellant.  In favour of the appellant
    he found that he plays a positive role in the life of his partner's
    children, who consider him their father and cannot envisage life
    without him. The judge noted that the children are in a critical
    juncture in their lives.

10. Weighing against the appellant, the judge found that he has been in the
    UK unlawfully since 2004, had no immigration status when he entered his
    relationship with his partner and her children, has committed several
    crimes, and deliberately lied about his conviction in America.

11. At paragraph 28 the judge considered the respondent's Immigration
    Directorate Instruction Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b
    ("the IDI") and noted that it recognises that it may be appropriate to
    refuse leave in certain circumstances even though an appellant has a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child who is a
    British citizen. He stated:

         "The instructions go on to state that it may, however, be
         appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct of the
         parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of such weight
         as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay with
         another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in the
         EU."

12. The judge concluded at paragraph 32:

         "This is a finely balanced case because I recognise that there is a
         very strong family life between the appellant and the two children
         and [his partner] however the public interest also has to be taken
         into account when dealing with maintenance of effective immigration
         control and prevention of commission of further offences.  It is
         not in the public interest to have an untruthful character who
         continues to commit offences and also denies his past in order to
         conceal it from the respondent even when such matters were put to
         him in court.  Though it would be detrimental to the appellant's
         partner and stepchildren for him to be removed from the UK the fact
         remains that albeit with a struggle the appellant's partner and
         children still got on with their lives in his absence."

    Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

13. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge failed to properly apply
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    ("the 2002 Act").  The appellant's argument, in sum, is that the legal
    consequence of finding (as the judge did at paragraph 25) that it is
    not reasonable to expect his partner's children to leave the UK is that
    the public interest does not require his removal.

14. Before me, Mr Neale reiterated the arguments in the grounds.  He noted
    that Section 117B(6) stipulates three discrete criteria and that if all
    three are met removal will not be in the public interest.  As the judge
    found all three were in fact met it follows that removal is not in this
    case in the public interest.  He argued that this appeal is
    distinguishable from AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180 and MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 as it concerns British children where it
    could not reasonably be argued that it would be reasonable to expect
    them to leave the UK.

15. In respect of the IDI, Mr Neale noted that this contemplates refusing a
    grant of leave to the parent of a British citizen where the child will
    be able to remain in the UK and the parent's conduct is particularly
    poor. Mr Neale submitted that this cannot take precedence over primary
    legislation, as set out in Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, where the
    only question is whether it is reasonable for the child to leave the
    UK.

16. Mr Duffy's response was, firstly, to clarify that he is not arguing it
    would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  He
    submitted that there must in principle be a route to argue that
    separation of the appellant from his partner's children is
    proportionate given the strong public interest in his removal arising
    from his criminal conduct.  He argued that Section 117B(6) of the 2002
    Act should be read as not applying where there is no expectation the
    child will leave the UK.  He derived this construction of the
    legislation from the word "expect" in Section 117B(6)(b).  I asked Mr
    Duffy if there is any authority to support this argument and he
    accepted there was not.

    Consideration

17. This appeal concerns the interpretation of Section 117B(6) of the 2002
    Act.  This provision provides as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child [a concept which includes British
             citizens, such as the children relevant to this appeal], and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom."

18. In MA (Pakistan) Elias LJ explained at paragraph 19 that subsection (6)
    of Section 117B(6) is a self-contained provision to be read
    independently of other matters identified in that Section and other
    public interest considerations.  He stated:

         19.  In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
         Tribunals need to ask when applying Section 117B(6) are the
         following:

         (1)  Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, Section 117B is
         inapplicable and instead the relevant code will usually be found in
         Section 117C.

         (2)  Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with the child?

         (3)  Is the child a qualifying child as defined in Section 117D?

         (4)  Is it unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United
         Kingdom?"

         20.  If the answer to the first question is no, and to the other
         three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that Article 8 is
         infringed."

19. This interpretation of Section 117B(6) was confirmed in AM (Pakistan).

20. Elias LJ also explained in both the aforementioned cases that the
    concept of reasonableness is a broad one which encompasses wider public
    interest considerations including the conduct of the parent or carer.

21. Following MA (Pakistan) and AM (Pakistan), and giving the words in
    Section 117B(6) their plain and ordinary meaning, in my view the proper
    interpretation of the provision is that:

 a)  if a person is not liable to deportation (which the appellant is not);
    and

 b) if a person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child  (which the appellant does); then

 c) the public interest does not require the person's removal if it would
    not be reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the UK.

22. The qualifying children in this case are British citizens aged 12 and
    13 who have never been outside the UK and whose mother has never been
    to Jamaica. However egregious the appellant's conduct may have been, it
    is not reasonable to expect these children to leave the UK and move to
    Jamaica.

23. Were it not for the existence of Section 117B(6) I have no doubt that a
    judge evaluating the appellant's case under Article 8 ECHR could
    reasonably conclude that removing him to Jamaica would be both
    reasonable and proportionate. Whilst it is manifestly not reasonable to
    expect the appellant's partner's children to leave the UK, it would, in
    my view, be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK even
    though this would result in separation from the children.

24. However, Tribunals are required to apply Section 117B(6) of the 2002
    Act and the wording of this provision is unambiguous: if it would be
    unreasonable to expect the appellant's stepchildren to leave the UK
    (which it clearly would be) then the public interest does not require
    his removal regardless of how egregious his conduct has been and the
    strength of other factor which would make his removal appropriate.

25. The IDI may envisage circumstances in which it would be appropriate for
    the parent of a British citizen to be removed from the UK even where it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK, but the
    test the courts must apply is not that in the IDI but that set out in
    the legislation.

26. Mr Duffy's argument that Section 117B(6) does not apply where a child
    is not expected to leave the UK (as is the case here, where the
    children could clearly remain with their mother in the UK) does not
    find support in either the plain language of Section 117B(6) or in any
    case law and therefore cannot prevail. Once the judge found that the
    appellant satisfied the three criteria of Section 117B(6) it
    inextricably followed that Article 8 would be infringed by his removal
    from the UK as the legislation stipulates that there is no public
    interest in his removal.

27. By finding that it is in the public interest for the appellant to be
    removed notwithstanding also finding that the three criteria of Section
    117B(6) were satisfied the judge made a material error of law. And
    because the appellant satisfies the three criteria in Section 117B(6)
    his appeal must be allowed. I remake the decision accordingly.

    Decision

 A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.

 B.  I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal under Article
    8 ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  6 October 2017               |

