
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18001/2013
                                                               IA/18004/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th March 2014                              |On 28th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                UTHARA RAJAN
                       SIVARAMKUMAR MURUGAN ARUNAGIRI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Berkleys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a husband and his dependent  wife.   They  are  both
    citizens of India.  On 2nd November 2012 the second  Appellant  applied
    for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant with his wife as
    his dependant.  Those applications were refused for the  reasons  given
    in a Notice of Decision dated 23rd May 2013.  The Appellants  appealed,
    and their appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 29th January 2014.  He decided  to
    dismiss the appeals for the reasons given in  his  Determination  dated
    13th February  2014.   The  Appellants  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 6th March 2014 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. It is not in dispute that the second Appellant had  set  up  a  company
    called Shoora Limited of which he was a director.  His application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant was refused  because
    he had failed to score sufficient points under Appendix  A:  Attributes
    because he had not satisfied the requirements of paragraph 245DD of  HC
    395 in that he had not submitted the documents required  by  paragraphs
    41-SD(c)(iii) and (iv) of Appendix  A  of  HC  395  to  show  that  his
    business was actively trading.  It was said that the  contract  between
    Shoora  Limited  and  Raenu  Limited  submitted  in  support   of   the
    application did not meet those requirements.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeals for the same reasons.

 5. At the hearing before me, it was  agreed  between  the  representatives
    that the Judge had erred in law in reaching this  conclusion.   He  had
    applied an Immigration Rule that was not in force when  the  Appellants
    had made their applications.  I find an error of law accordingly.

Remade Decision

 6. I then proceeded to remake the decision of the Judge.  It  was  further
    agreed between the representatives that another contract submitted with
    the application, that with Permtemps Limited, met the  requirements  of
    the relevant Immigration Rule in all respects except that  it  did  not
    give a landline telephone number for that company.  It was also  agreed
    that the decision of the Respondent was not in accordance with the  law
    in that she had failed to apply her own Evidential  Flexibility  Policy
    in force when the decision was made  in  an  attempt  to  rectify  this
    defect.  I so find.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the  appeal  by  allowing  it  to  the  extent  of
finding that the Respondent's decision to refuse the application  for  leave
to remain was not in accordance with the law.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
