
IAC-FH-CK
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18344/2014
                                                               IA/18357/2014
                                                               IA/18349/2014
                                                               IA/18341/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 March 2015                              |On 8 May 2015                 |
|Prepared on 26 March 2015                     |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                             Miss Shaheen Razzaq
                             Miss Mehwish Razzaq
                             Miss Beenish Razzaq
                            Mr Shah Fahad Razzaq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by Direct Access,
                    Milestone Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first and second Appellants are nationals  of  Pakistan,  dates  of
    birth 24 February 1987, 19 December 1989, the third Appellant's date of
    birth is disputed as between 1993 and 1995 and the  fourth  Appellant's
    date of birth is 14 January  1996.   The  Appellants  appealed  against
    decisions made by the Respondent dated 3 April  2014  to  make  removal
    directions, forms IS.151A having been served.

2.   Their appeals against the Respondent's decisions appeared to have  been
    made, if the grounds which I have been provided with are representative
    of each of the Appellants, with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   It does not appear that there was a dispute from  the  grounds  against
    the Respondent's decisions under the  Immigration  Rules  (the  Rules),
    particularly paragraph 276ADE.

4.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana (the  judge),
    who on 4 December 2014 dismissed them.  Before the First-tier  Tribunal
    the Appellants were represented by Mr O'Callaghan although the  judge's
    decision misstates the appearances.

5.   Mr Nasim settled the grounds upon which permission was given by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 29 January 2015.  It is sufficient to say
    that the permission given was certainly less than clear given the wide-
    ranging six grounds of appeal.  Be that  as  it  may,  at  the  hearing
    before me on 26 March 2015 all the points raised in Mr Nasim's  grounds
    were argued.  I considered that it was appropriate that  those  matters
    should be raised and addressed so that there was in this sense finality
    within the appeal process.

6.   Ground 1 raised the consideration of  whether  or  not  the  first  and
    second Appellants fell to be considered on private  life  issues  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  It is said by the judge that there  was
    no issue as to whether or not either of them  met  those  requirements.
    However, the judge  giving  permission  concluded  that  there  was  no
    sustainable error of law dealing with the first Appellant under  276ADE
    but it appeared that the judge  had  erroneously  excluded  the  second
    Appellant from consideration with  particular  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Rules.

7.   I do not need to recite  those  provisions  because  it  seemed  to  me
    reading the determination as a whole that the first Appellant could not
    succeed under  276ADE  and  even  if  the  second  Appellant  had  been
    considered, with reference to her private life in the  United  Kingdom,
    she too did not meet the requirements  in  relation  to  her  age,  the
    reasonableness of return, the period of time she had been in the United
    Kingdom, and the loss  of  social  and  cultural  ties  with  the  home
    country.

8.   In those circumstances, whilst it  was  an  error  to  have  failed  to
    address the matter, from the evidence helpfully recited  to  me  by  Mr
    Nasim, who was the sole person in possession of the Appellants'  bundle
    at the hearing, it was not apparent to me that there  was  evidence  to
    support the claim that either that the first or  second  Appellant  had
    lost those ties to the home country even though they had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2004.

9.   The second ground of attack concerned the third and  fourth  Appellants
    and whether or not the judge had elided the issue of their family  life
    with their other siblings, and the issue of their private  lives  under
    the Rules and by doing so had failed to consider relevant  material  to
    their private  lives  which  might  have  given  rise  to  a  different
    decision.

10.  In this respect again Mr Nasim helpfully took me to relevant  evidence,
    before the judge, contained within the Appellants' bundle.   It  seemed
    to me that none of that material was of sufficient weight to give  rise
    to the possibility that a different decision might  have  been  reached
    for the third and fourth Appellants in respect of their  private  life.
    I agree with Mr Nasim that the way the judge  presented  those  matters
    did appear to confuse, in the sense  of  combine  considerations,  that
    could discretely fall within their private life issues and those within
    the family life between the four Appellants as siblings.

11.  Nevertheless, despite what I regard as infelicitous use of language  by
    the judge, I do not conclude, on the evidence that I  have  been  taken
    to, that there was any real likelihood of a different decision  arising
    under 276ADE(iv) in respect of their private lives.  It seemed  to  me,
    as a fact, the judge did make at least some references to private  life
    in the context of the second Appellant in her  consideration  of  those
    issues.

12.  The third ground of the attack upon the judge's decision  was  that  it
    was fundamentally flawed because it was unclear whether the  judge  was
    considering the appeals under the Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  questions  or
    whether or not the judge was creating some  thresholds  for  succeeding
    under Article 8  by  reference  to  there  needing  to  be  exceptional
    circumstances.  It is clear as the law has evolved since Gulshan [2013]
    UKUT 640, Nagre [2013] EWHC Civ 720, MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192
    through to MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985, Singh  and  Khalid  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 and SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 as to what  extent
    expressions of 'exceptional circumstances' or 'exceptional cases'  were
    adding a threshold rather than simply being different manifestations of
    the likelihood of cases arising where, if the Rules do not provide,  it
    would be likely that the decision was not ECHR compliant.

13.  I am satisfied again  that  the  decision  of  the  judge,  whilst  not
    entirely clear, did at paragraphs 32 to 55 properly consider Article  8
    as a second stage: The Appellants having failed under  the  Rules.   It
    could be difficult drafting grounds of appeal  faced  with  a  somewhat
    confused decision in terms of the way legal thresholds or  tests  being
    applied to be sure as to what the judge meant: To that extent  I  would
    agree with Mr Nasim.   It  is  unfortunate  that  the  judge  expressed
    herself in quite the way she did but ultimately address  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

14.  The fourth ground of attack related to the third  Appellant's  date  of
    birth.  Mr Nasim said that the Respondent had raised the issue of birth
    being in 1993 as opposed to that claimed in 1995 but the Respondent had
    failed to disclose documentation or indeed  evidence  to  support  that
    conclusion.

15.  It seemed to me that this is in one sense a  perfectly  fair  point  to
    take but it is qualified by the extent to which reasoning given  either
    on a freestanding basis or by  reference  to  other  known  points  was
    pertinent to the assessment of age or at least to the likelihood of one
    date of birth being closer than another.  I concluded that  looking  at
    the evidence in the round the judge's  findings  in  this  matter  were
    partly driven by the fact that the Appellants relied  upon  sources  of
    confirmation of which they were, or the particular Appellant  was,  the
    origin.  Apparently documents in their possession did not establish the
    date of birth.  It seemed to me on the other hand it should  have  been
    for the Respondent, if it was going to be a  material  issue,  to  have
    produced the evidence.

16.  I find that the judge erred  in  moving  forward  with  an  assessment,
    without reasoning, into consideration of the matter what view she  took
    of the  absence  of  evidence  from  the  Respondent.   Ultimately  the
    question posed was what difference does the error make to the case.  It
    seemingly does not make a material  significant  difference  under  the
    Immigration Rules and it was part  and  parcel  of  the  whole  of  the
    evidence for  the  judge  to  look  at  in  the  round  when  assessing
    proportionality.  In this respect in looking at them  as  a  group  the
    judge plainly took the view that none of them had,  on  a  freestanding
    basis, a right to remain in the United Kingdom.  Accordingly they could
    return "as a family" and be able to make a  life  together  insofar  as
    they wished to remain together on return but more importantly that  the
    age of the third Appellant was not ultimately material to  the  outcome
    under the Immigration Rules nor was it determinative of the outcome  of
    the Article 8 claim.

17.  In these circumstances I concluded that the third Appellant's  date  of
    birth, even  if  the  judge  got  that  matter  wrong,  does  not  make
    ultimately any difference to the outcome of her appeal either under the
    Rules or outside of the Rules under Article 8.

18.  The fifth ground of attack  related  to  the  'suitability  provisions'
    under the Immigration Rules in relation to the fourth  Appellant.   The
    fourth Appellant, it should not be  forgotten,  had  been  involved  in
    crime, but I make no findings whatsoever about it, save to say that the
    judge recorded at paragraphs 30 and 31 of the decision that the  fourth
    Appellant had not shown that  his  continued  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom was a matter which should be given weight when considering  the
    Article 8 issue.

19.  I considered Mr Nasim's fifth ground is essentially seeking to  reargue
    the  merits  and  that  a  discretion  should   have   been   exercised
    differently.  Ultimately the judge did  have  regard  to  the  relevant
    considerations arising in respect of the public interest and also those
    under Sections 117A and 117B of the Immigration Act 2014  amending  the
    2002 NIAA.

20.  The final ground of attack related  to  adverse  credibility  findings.
    On the one  hand  Mr  Nasim  argued  that  those  findings  are  really
    irrelevant to the issue  because  it  was  self-evident,  that  is  the
    Appellants were overstayers after 2006 and it must  follow  that  their
    circumstances thereafter were precarious and unresolved.  Plainly there
    was a significant measure of delay by the Respondent.  Be  that  as  it
    may the fact was  that  the  judge's  decision  from  paragraph  37  in
    particular through to paragraph 45 of the decision  made  a  number  of
    trenchant criticisms of the Appellants' truthfulness  and  reliability.
    It is unnecessary for me to repeat them but whilst they have no  direct
    bearing whatsoever on paragraph 276ADE issues the  fact  is  that  they
    were pertinent to the assessment of  proportionality,  particularly  in
    the context of the public interest, and bearing in mind in relation  to
    the fourth Appellant what I understand to have been a conviction, as  a
    youth, for carrying a knife.

21.  Therefore, whilst I have some sympathy with  Mr  Nasim's  grounds,  the
    fact of the matter is that this was one of those cases where the  judge
    has done enough to substantiate the reasoning provided  so  that  as  a
    matter of law there are  sufficient  reasons  to  justify  the  judge's
    decision.  The appeals of each Appellant failed  under  the  Rules  and
    under the Human Rights Act.

22.  The original Tribunal's decision stands  and  the  Appellants'  appeals
    are dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 6 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
