
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal   Appeal Number: IA/18044/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |        Decision and Reasons          |
|On 11 June 2015                     |Promulgated                           |
|                                    |On 16 June 2015                       |
|                                    |                                      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                    MS TM
                          (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant: Mr Joseph of Counsel
For the respondent: Mr D Clerk Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department.  The
   respondent is a citizen of Tanzania born on 8 June 1989. However for  the
   sake of convenience, I shall refer to Miss TM as the  appellant  and  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent which are the designations they  had
   before the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  decision
   of the respondent dated June 2013 which was  refused  with  no  right  of
   appeal. The appellant then requested that a new decision to be issued and
   on 10 April 2014 her application was refused with an in country right  of
   appeal. First Tier Tribunal Judge Widdup allowed the  appellant's  appeal
   in a determination dated 19 February 2015.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta  on
   24 April 2015 stating that it is arguable that the Judge materially erred
   in law by making his decision by reference to a version of paragraph  276
   ADE which was not in force at the date of decision and  failed  to  apply
   the relevant case law guidance under Bossadi (276 ADE) [2015]  UK  UT  42
   (IAC). He further found that Judge did not apply the correct criteria  by
   section 117B implicitly or explicitly.  The  Judge  only  considered  the
   appellant's ability to speak English  and  economic  viability  no  other
   public interest factors were taken into account.


    First-tier Tribunal's findings


4. The Judge made the following  findings  in  his  determination  which  in
   summary are the following.


I. [Paragraph 26] "I found both the appellant and her mother to be  credible
   witnesses. Their accounts were largely consistent and they did not appear
   to be embellishing their evidence.


II. [Paragraph 27] "I will start by  considering  the  submission  that  the
   appeal can succeed under paragraph 276 ADE (vi)".


III. [Paragraph 29] "the  question  therefore  is  whether  there  are  very
   significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  if  returned  to
   Tanzania".


IV. [Paragraph 30] "I accept the evidence that the appellant has lived  with
   her mother since 2005 and that there would be real difficulties  for  her
   if she had to return to live in Tanzania. Although she has cultural links
   to that country she has never lived  there  as  an  adult.  There  is  no
   evidence that she has close relatives in Tanzania and  her  own  evidence
   and that of her mother is that she has no close  personal  ties  to  that
   country. I take into account that it is  now  10  years  since  she  left
   Tanzania and I find on the evidence before  me  that  the  appellant,  if
   returned there, would be faced with very considerable difficulty  of  re-
   establishing herself there".


V. [Paragraph 32] "this is a highly fact sensitive issue and I find that  in
   this appellant's case the difficulties she would  have  on  returning  to
   Tanzania  do  indeed  reach  the  threshold  of  being  very  significant
   obstacles and the appeal therefore succeeds under the Immigration Rules."


VI. [Paragraph 33] "However, lest I  am  considered  to  be  wrong  in  that
   analysis, (allowing the appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules) I  find
   that the appellant and her mother continue  to  enjoy  family  life  even
   though the appellant is now 25. I have already referred to the  sheltered
   nature of her life with her mother. There  is  I  find  a  financial  and
   emotional dependency of the appellant on her mother and also a clear  and
   strong dependency of the mother on the appellant".


VII. [Paragraph 34] This dependency  "rises  to  a  large  extent  from  the
   mother's illness although I have not been given recent medical reports  I
   find that the mother was diagnosed with cancer in  2012/13.  The  medical
   reports referred to there being some delay in diagnosis.  Thus  treatment
   started later than it should. The cancer is rare and the chemotherapy may
   not be effective. There appeared to be  some  inconsistency  between  the
   mother and the appellant about the progress of her treatment.  I  do  not
   regard that as being a material inconsistency because the mother may have
   been told things about her illness of which the appellant  is  not  fully
   aware. Suffice it to say that this is a serious illness and there  is  no
   evidence that the mother is in remission and no longer  in  need  of  the
   appellant's practical and emotional support".


VIII. [Paragraph 36] "I must decide whether  or  not  there  are  compelling
   factors which would mean that this was an exceptional case where it would
   be appropriate to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds  even  though
   the appellant cannot succeed under the rules".


IX. [Paragraph 39] "I find that the  appellant  has  family  life  with  her
   mother. The family unit consists of the mother and daughter and  possibly
   A (the appellant's sister). I am mainly concerned with the mother and the
   appellant. I have no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the  return  of  the
   appellant to Tanzania will have consequences of sufficient gravity as  to
   engage Article 8. I must take into account the impact on the family as  a
   whole and I find  that  the  departure  of  the  appellant  will  have  a
   considerable impact on the mother in  her  present  vulnerable  state  of
   health".


X. [Paragraph 42] "I take into account section 117B  of  the  2014  Act.  In
   this case there are two factors which are of relevance but  neither  have
   any adverse impact on  the  appellant.  Firstly,  English  is  her  first
   language. Secondly, although she is not working  she  has  good  academic
   qualifications and has completed an IT course. I accept her evidence that
   she would like to work and there would appear to be  no  reason  why  she
   should not be able to get employment".


XI. [Paragraph 43] "I have already considered relating to  the  difficulties
   she would have returning to Tanzania are of  relevance  when  considering
   the proportionality."


XII. [Paragraph 44] "I find that there are compelling circumstances in  this
   case which makes this decision disproportionate. Those circumstances  are
   not merely the  difficulties  the  appellant  would  have  on  return  to
   Tanzania, but also the relationship between the mother and the appellant,
   and the important assistance the appellant is providing  for  her  mother
   during her illness"


XIII. "The  appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  and  under  the
   Immigration Rules".




    Grounds of appeal


5. The respondent in her two grounds of appeal states the following which  I
   summarise. In respect of the first ground of appeal, the Judge refers  to
   a version of rule 276 ADE (1) that was not in force at the  time  of  the
   respondent's decision of 10 April 2014.


6. The second ground of appeal is that  the  Judge  failed  to  conduct  the
   proportionality assessment correctly for the purposes of Article  8  (2).
   The Judge failed to adequately consider section 117B either implicitly or
   explicitly. He only considered the appellant's ability to  speak  English
   but failed to consider any other public interest  factors  particularised
   within section 117B most notably 117B (i), (3)& (4).  Failure  to  do  so
   constitutes a material error of  law.  The  judge  failed  to  take  into
   account the case of Hummayun v Secretary of State for the home Department
   [2014] EWHC, 2901 (admin) (4 July 2014) where it is stated that the  mere
   fact that the claimant may have explained  exceptional  circumstances  is
   merely one side of the  proportionality  equation.  The  public  interest
   consideration on the other side of the equation need also  to  be  placed
   into the balance there with. The upper Tribunal case McLarty (deportation-
   proportionality balance) [2014 UKUT 315 (IAC) at paragraph 29, 42 and 43.


7. In DM (Zambia) v SS HD (2009) EWCA Civ, Sedley LJ said  that  "the  court
   has  said  many  times  that  you  cannot  dispose  of   an   Article   8
   proportionality issue in a perfunctory of formalistic way. It requires  a
   structured decision, however economically expressed".


8. The Judge failed to take into account Appendix FM  when  considering  the
   case for the appellant remaining in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
   her family life. In the case of PG (USA) v the Secretary of State for the
   home Department [2015] EW CA C IV 118, at paragraph 27 it is  stated  "in
   considering proportionality in this context, the case  for  remaining  in
   the United Kingdom on the basis of private and family life  needs  to  be
   considered against the relevant policy of  the  Secretary  of  State.  As
   BeastonLJ observed in Meera Haleemudeen v SS HD [2014] EW  CA  C  IV  558
   "these new provisions in the immigration rules (in  force  since  9  July
   2012) are a central part of the legislative and policy context  in  which
   the interests of immigration control a balanced against the interests and
   right of people who have come to this country and wish to settle  in  it.
   Overall the Secretary of State's policy is when an interference  with  an
   Article  8  right  will  be  regarded   as   disproportionate   is   more
   particularised in the new rules then it  had  previously  been.  The  new
   rules require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before leave will be
   given  under  them.  By  failing  to  consider   Appendix   FM   in   the
   proportionality assessment constitutes a material error in law.


    The Rule 24 response


9. The Rule 24 response stated the following which I  summarise.  The  Judge
   considered the appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  then
   went on to consider the appeal pursuant to  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on human rights.  She  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
   grounds and under the immigration rules. "The  reasons  for  decision  of
   granting permission only dealt with allowing the appeal under  the  rules
   and not allowing under HR grounds. Hence  it  is  respectfully  submitted
   that no permission has been given to hear the human rights  part  of  the
   appeal".


    The hearing


10. At the hearing and heard submissions from both parties as to whether
   there is an error of law in the determination.


Decision on error of law

11. The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
   Rules and said that if he is wrong in his  analysis  in  respect  of  the
   immigration rules, he allows the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8
   of the European Convention on Human Rights.


12. It is argued by Mr Joseph at the hearing and in the appellant's Rule  24
   response that decision which granted permission to appeal only dealt with
   the Judges error in respect of the Immigration Rules and  not  under  the
   Human Rights grounds. Therefore it is submitted that  no  permission  has
   been given to hear the human rights part of the appeal.


13. I do not accept this argument. The permission Judge after he  considered
   the error of law in respect of the Immigration Rules  stated  that  Judge
   did not  apply  the  correct  criteria  by  section  117B  implicitly  or
   explicitly in his determination of proportionality. This  refers  to  the
   proportionality exercise pursuant to Article 8.


14. The Judge made a material error in law in respect of  his  consideration
   of the Immigration Rules as he referred  to  paragraph  276  ADE  as  the
   relevant rule which however was not in force at the date of decision. The
   determination therefore cannot stand as the wrong test was applied by the
   Judge. Mr Joseph argued that it is the respondent in her  refusal  letter
   who made the mistake in the first place and  the  Judge  merely  followed
   suit. This does not however correct the error of law.


15. I therefore set aside the  determination  in  respect  of  the  findings
   pursuant to the Immigration Rules.


16. The Judge also fell into material error when he allowed the  appellant's
   appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
   because he did not address and  resolve  all  the  criteria  set  out  in
   paragraph 117B of the Immigration Rules in his proportionality  exercise.
   The Judge did not consider that  a  case  for  remaining  in  the  United
   Kingdom on the basis of private and family life needs  to  be  considered
   against the relevant policy of the Secretary  of  State  as  set  out  in
   paragraph 117B.


17. The Judge merely considered one aspect of that paragraph 117B which  was
   that the appellant speaks English and will be  able  to  be  economically
   independent and therefore not a burden on the State. In the  case  of  AM
   (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) it is stated in the  headnote  that
   an appellant can obtain no possible right to a grant of leave  to  remain
   from either section 117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of  his  fluency
   in English, or the strength of his financial resources".


18. Whatever the merits of the appeal, the Judge was  nevertheless  required
   to take this important consideration into account in his  proportionality
   assessment of the appellant's family and private life  in  this  country.
   The Judge's failure to take into account in his proportionality  exercise
   the respondent's policy brought him into material error.


  19. The upshot is that the determination of the Judge is affected by a
      material error by his failure to conduct a proper assessment of the
      appellant's Article 8 rights even if his conclusion might ultimately
      have been that she is entitled for further leave to remain.


20. I find that there is a material error of law  in  the  determination  of
   First-tier Tribunal and I set it aside in its entirety.


21. Mr Joseph made an application for the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal for findings of fact to be made. I was  of  the  view
   that it would be appropriate in the circumstances and in accordance  with
   the Presidents Practice Directions for it to be remitted for findings  of
   fact to be made and that the first-tier Tribunal is a better forum.


22. I direct that the appeal be placed before any Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal other than Judge Widdup on the first available date.


23. I also note that there  has  been  a  previous  determination  for  this
   appellant which had not been brought to the  attention  of  the  previous
   Judge. This determination should be taken into account by the  First-tier
   Tribunal according to the principles set out in the  case  of  Devasaleen
   that  the  findings  therein  should  be  the  starting  point  for   any
   redetermination.

DECISION

The Secretary of State appeal is allowed

Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana                                               Dated 12th day  of
    June 2015





