
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18164/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 5th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                        Mr Floyd Adegboyega Babayemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against the dismissal of  his  appeal  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chohan ("the judge") against decisions made by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to vary his leave and to remove him.

2.   Salient features of the appellant's case are that  he  claims  to  have
    arrived here in 1984, with only two brief  absences  from  the  country
    since then, that he has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with two British children, who live with his former wife  and  that  he
    has genuine and subsisting relationships with his current wife, who has
    indefinite leave to remain and who  has  applied  to  naturalise  as  a
    British citizen, and their young child.  The appellant's first marriage
    took place in 1990, the year in which he was arrested as an  overstayer
    and then bailed.  He was given leave by the Secretary of  State,  valid
    between February 2011 to February 2014, in the light  of  his  parental
    relationships with British citizen children.

3.   The judge concluded that EX.1, contained in Appendix FM to  the  rules,
    did not assist the appellant.  He found that the best interests of  the
    older children were to remain with their mother and that the  appellant
    could continue to maintain contact with them, following his  return  to
    Nigeria.  His current wife and young child could accompany  him  there,
    although the appellant's wife has not returned there  since  she  first
    came to the United Kingdom some seven years ago.  The judge  took  into
    account section 117B of the 2014 Act and found that the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control was in the public interest and  that  any
    interference with the appellant's and his family members' private  life
    ties was justified.  At the end of the determination, he  concluded  in
    the light of guidance given in Gulshan that there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances in the case and so  it  was  not  necessary  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the rules.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  may  have
    erred in failing to take into account the years the appellant has  been
    present in the United Kingdom and in relation to the private  life  and
    family life he enjoys with the two older children  and  may  also  have
    erred in failing to make an assessment outside the rules.  In  a  brief
    rule 24 response, the Secretary of State  opposed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the  judge  explained  his  findings  and  applied  the  law
    correctly.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Malhotra said that the judge accepted that the  appellant  had  been
    present in the United Kingdom since at least 1990 but failed to  engage
    with paragraph 276ADE of the rules.  The appellant had a strong private
    life case.  Although the judge did consider relationships  between  the
    appellant and his children, he did not assess the  position  under  the
    rules in this context.  So far as EX.1 was concerned, the Secretary  of
    State appeared not to accept that a genuine and subsisting relationship
    existed between the appellant and his older children.  The judge made a
    favourable finding  here.   The  critical  issue  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom, the test
    identified at EX.1(a)(ii).  The judge also failed  to  properly  engage
    with EX.1(b), in relation to the  relationship  the  appellant  enjoyed
    with his partner, who was settled here.  The  test  was  whether  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing abroad.

6.   The  determination  showed  that  the  judge  had  made  no  Article  8
    assessment outside the rules, ending the decision rather abruptly  with
    Gulshan.  Guidance from the Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) was in  the
    public domain by October 2014.  Similarly, the  judge  did  not  engage
    with section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

7.   Ms Isherwood said that the Secretary of  State  had  not  accepted  the
    appellant's claim to have  arrived  in  1984  or  to  have  lived  here
    continuously since then.  The judge found at paragraph  14  that  there
    was no evidence showing that the appellant had been here since 1984 and
    he was  correct  to  observe  that  the  appellant  had  no  legitimate
    expectation that he would get more leave, following  the  three  years'
    discretionary leave granted to him.  The  appellant's  wife  was  given
    indefinite leave in June or August 2014.  The finding made by the judge
    in paragraph 16 of the determination, regarding the appellant's ties to
    Nigeria, was unaffected by any error.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant, his wife and young child would  face  some  difficulties  on
    return but  concluded  that  they  did  not  amount  to  insurmountable
    obstacles.   He  took  into  account  the  relationship  with  all  the
    children.  The photographic evidence appeared to show  that  the  older
    children saw the appellant  during  school  holidays.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that such  contact  or  communication  could  continue
    although there would be an absence of physical contact.  On  the  other
    hand, the older children had made a visit to  Nigeria.   It  was  clear
    from paragraph 20 that the judge did take into account section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act and, in that context, his finding that the older  children
    had a stronger relationship with their mother was  open  to  him.   The
    judge balanced the competing interests appropriately.

8.   In a  brief  response,  Ms  Malhotra  said  that  the  judge  had  been
    perfectly entitled to  consider  the  relationships  but  there  was  a
    primary obligation to apply the relevant law and paragraph 19 suggested
    that he accepted that the older children could not reasonably return to
    Nigeria.

Decision on Error of Law

9.   With very great respect to  the  experienced  judge  who  prepared  the
    determination, I conclude that the decision contains material errors of
    law.  The Secretary of State's case, contained  in  the  letter  giving
    reasons  for  the  adverse  immigration  decisions,  shows   that   she
    considered paragraph 276ADE of the rules, concluding that the  evidence
    did not show continuous residence for at least twenty years.  The judge
    does not appear to have engaged with this aspect of the  case  and  the
    determination contains no assessment at all in this context.

10.  Similarly, EX.1 formed a major part of the Secretary  of  State's  case
    in  refusing  the  appellant's  application  for   more   leave.    The
    determination does not show that the  judge  fully  engaged  with  this
    aspect and the decision  contains  no  express  finding  regarding  the
    reasonableness of expecting any of the children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is a  suggestion,  in  paragraph  19,  that  the  judge
    accepts that the older children could not reasonably return to  Nigeria
    but there is no clear finding to this effect.  Finally, section 117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act was required to be taken into account in assessing  the
    weight to be given to the public interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control.  The proper focus here  was  on  the  parental  relationships.
    Although the judge did weigh the evidence in  this  context,  the  only
    mention of section 117B occurs at the  end  of  the  determination,  in
    paragraph  20  but  more  reasons  were  required  in  support  of  the
    conclusion that the maintenance of immigration control  outweighed  the
    appellant's interests and  justified  interference  with  his  and  his
    family members'  Article  8  rights,  in  the  light  of  that  express
    statutory provision.

11.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  must  be
    remade.

Remaking the Decision

12.  Ms Malhotra said that the appellant's case  could  be  largely  put  by
    means of submissions  although  there  was  a  need  for  some  further
    evidence.   The  appellant's  current  wife  had  been   approved   for
    naturalisation and would attend a ceremony on 21st February 2015.

13.  Ms Folake Florence Olumi gave evidence.  She  said  that  she  had  the
    paperwork showing approval for naturalisation and she  would  attend  a
    ceremony to formally become a British citizen on 21st February 2015.

14.  The appellant then gave evidence.  He  adopted  the  witness  statement
    which was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  said  that  he  first
    entered the United Kingdom in  1984  as  a  visitor.   He  returned  to
    Nigeria in 2005 to attend his father's burial, for about  a  month  and
    made a second visit in January 2014, spending about  four  days  there.
    These were the only visits to Nigeria since his arrival.

15.  So far as his first marriage was concerned, the divorce  papers  showed
    that this was entered into in Slough in June 1990.  When the  appellant
    first made an application for leave,  he  gave  his  solicitors  school
    documents  and  papers  regarding  his  attendance  at   North   London
    Polytechnic.  They were sent to the Home Office.  He was not  sure  why
    they did not appear in the current bundle.  So far  as  employment  was
    concerned, the appellant worked as a cook but now owned a  business,  a
    barbecue company.  He had done so since 2007.  He obtained  a  national
    insurance number about four years ago and has  paid  tax  and  national
    insurance contributions since.  He was paid cash in  hand  before  that
    and did not pay tax on his earnings.

16.  In answer to questions from Ms Isherwood, the appellant said  that  his
    last grant of  leave  in  2011  was  based  on  his  children  and  the
    relationships he had with them.  There  was  no  consideration  of  his
    years spent in the United Kingdom.  The evidence he provided  regarding
    entry in 1984 included bank statements, voter  registration  forms  and
    payslips.  These were given to his  solicitor  and  went  in  with  the
    application he made for further leave.  They were not  in  his  current
    bundle.  The appellant accepted  that  he  had  overstayed  and  worked
    illegally here.  Ms Isherwood asked why the Tribunal should believe the
    appellant, as he had broken the law in the past.  He  replied  that  he
    was given the right to remain and had complied with  due  process  ever
    since.  He was a good father and had  genuine  relationships  with  his
    children.  He accepted that he made a  decision  to  stay  but  he  was
    afraid of being sent back and losing his relationship  with  his  first
    wife, at the time.  She was a British citizen.  The two older  children
    had dual British and American citizenship.  They were born in  America.
    The appellant had never been there.  Their mother  went  when  she  was
    pregnant, spending about three months there.  The two  oldest  children
    were with him every holiday but he did not go to see them  in  Scotland
    very often.  They spent the whole of the summer and Christmas  holidays
    with him.  Last year they were with him from mid-July to September  and
    at Christmas they spent time with him in December and January, and this
    had been the arrangement ever since he divorced his first  wife.   They
    would not be able to see him in Nigeria because the  family  could  not
    afford it.

17.  There was no re-examination.

18.  Ms Isherwood said that the evidence did not show  continuous  residence
    since the appellant's claimed entry in  1984.   The  documents  in  his
    bundle focussed on events from 2012.  As the appellant was  willing  to
    deceive the authorities by choosing not  to  regularise  his  stay,  he
    might not be willing to tell the truth.   His  first  wife's  statement
    concentrated on his role as a father, rather than the years spent here.
     There was insufficient evidence to show twenty years'  residence,  for
    the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE.   There  was  evidence  that  the
    appellant and his first wife were able to travel  abroad.   The  First-
    tier Judge had made unchallenged findings that the appellant maintained
    ties to Nigeria.  He and his partner could return.

19.  So far as EX.1 was concerned, the  appellant's  current  wife  had  not
    naturalised yet and there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    family's return to Nigeria.  The two oldest children were resident with
    their mother and  the  appellant's  relationship  with  them  was  less
    strong.  He could return to Nigeria and run his business there.   There
    was little evidence of integration.

20.  Ms Malhotra said that the evidence did, in fact, show at  least  twenty
    years' residence here.  So far as EX.1 was  concerned,  the  two  older
    children were British citizens aged 16 and 11 and it was not reasonable
    to expect them to return to Nigeria.  The appellant could show that  he
    met the requirements of EX.1(a).  Similarly, he  could  show  that  the
    requirement of subparagraph (b) was met as  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  with  his  current  wife  and  child  being
    continued in Nigeria.  Finally, section 117B(6) was of  application  as
    the appellant was a parent of a British child and it was not reasonable
    for the children, the older ones at least, to return.

21.  Ms Malhotra said that an Article 8 assessment outside the  rules  would
    show that removal of the appellant would be disproportionate.   He  was
    now a taxpayer and had fully integrated.  He had three children, two of
    whom were already British.  His family life would be interfered with by
    his removal.  Taking into account the length  of  his  time  here,  his
    involvement with his children and all the evidence, and the absence  of
    any aggravating features,  it  was  clear  that  there  was  no  public
    interest in his removal.

Findings and Conclusions

22.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellant to prove  the  facts
    and matters he relies upon and the standard  of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.

23.  I gave brief reasons for allowing the appeal, at the conclusion of  the
    hearing.  Having heard the appellant give  evidence,  and  taking  into
    account the documentary evidence, I find that he falls within paragraph
    276ADE of the rules.  The documentary evidence includes  a  copy  of  a
    decree absolute recording the appellant's first marriage in 1990 and it
    is not in dispute that he was arrested in that year as  an  overstayer.
    The appellant was candid in  his  evidence  about  unlawful  employment
    before he obtained  a  national  insurance  number  and  I  accept  his
    evidence that, at least since 1990, he has made only two short  returns
    to  Nigeria,  in  2005   and   2014.    He   falls   within   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii).  Turning to the suitability requirements, these  appear
    in section S-LTR of Appendix FM.  I find in the light of  the  evidence
    that none of the particular categories applies, so as to show that  the
    appellant is not suitable for a grant of leave to remain.  There is  no
    evidence of any convictions or offending behaviour and nothing to  show
    that his character, associations or other reasons make  it  undesirable
    to allow him to remain in the United Kingdom and nothing to  show  that
    his presence is not  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  of  his
    conduct.  He made a full disclosure of his immigration history  in  his
    application for further leave and has not failed to  disclose  material
    facts.  He has shown that the requirements of the rules are met in this
    context.

24.  Secondly, EX.1 applies in his favour, in the light of the  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationships with his two older children, who  are
    British.  They are now aged 16 and 11 and,  although  it  appears  that
    they have made a visit to Nigeria, the extent of  their  ties  here  is
    such that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the United
    Kingdom.  They have not resided in any other country and are  currently
    being educated.  They live with their mother in Scotland.

25.  It is also clear that section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act applies  in  this
    case.  The appellant is not liable to deportation and has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship  with  qualifying  children  (his  two
    British citizen children).  It would not be reasonable to expect  those
    children to leave the United Kingdom.  Again, they have only ever lived
    here, save for their location  at  the  time  of  their  births,  which
    appears to have been the United States.   Leaving  the  United  Kingdom
    would disrupt their settled family  life  with  their  British  citizen
    mother, their social relationships and interrupt their  education.   In
    these circumstances, section 117B(6) provides that the public  interest
    does not require the appellant's removal.

26.  The evidence also shows that the Secretary of State  has  not,  in  the
    past, been particularly concerned to remove the  appellant.   As  noted
    earlier, he was arrested in 1990 and then bailed,  apparently  to  give
    him an opportunity to continue his studies.   In  2011,  he  was  given
    discretionary leave,  in  the  light  of  his  relationships  with  his
    children.  Inevitably, those ties deepened even  though  the  appellant
    himself had no legitimate expectation  that  he  would  be  given  more
    leave.  Overall, the  evidence  shows  that  the  appellant  has  fully
    integrated into British society, having been married here, having acted
    as a parent to his children and having over the past four years or  so,
    worked lawfully and established a business.

27.  The appellant has succeeded in showing that  the  requirements  of  the
    rules in paragraph 276ADE and in relation to EX.1 are met.  The state's
    case that he should be removed is weakened by section  117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act, which provides that there is no public interest in removal in
    his particular circumstances.  There would appear to be no need  to  go
    further and make an Article 8 assessment outside the rules but if there
    were, the evidence clearly shows that the appellant's removal would  be
    disproportionate in the light of his family and private life ties  here
    and his success in showing that the requirements of the rules have been
    met.  The appeal is allowed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, it is  remade
as follows: the appeal is allowed.

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, and noting that all the  salient  features  of
the appellant's case  were  identified  in  his  application  for  leave  to
remain, I make a fee award in respect of any fee that has been  paid  or  is
payable in these proceedings.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
