
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 5th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT



                                   Between

                             Mr Okeremute Saduwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Jacobs of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 19th  January  1976.   He
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Stott
    sitting at Birmingham on 1st October 2014 who dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 26th March 2014. That
    decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for further leave to
    remain and to remove the Appellant by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  Appellant
    landed in the United Kingdom on 29th April 2012 accompanied by his wife
    and three children as his dependants with leave to enter as  a  Tier  4
    Student valid from 31st  January  2012  to  31st  July  2013.   He  was
    subsequently granted an extension of stay in the United  Kingdom  until
    6th March 2014 in the same category.

2.   The Appellant and his wife separated in May  2013  and  she  has  since
    made her own application for leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  That was refused and she appealed.   As  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before Judge Stott the outcome of that appeal  was  not  known.
    In February 2014 the Bedfordshire  Family  Proceedings  Court  made  an
    order that there be no direct contact between  the  Appellant  and  his
    children.  He was only allowed indirect contact, sending them cards  or
    photographs once a month through his wife's solicitors.  On  6th  March
    2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain under Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules and the  refusal  of  that  application  led  to  the
    present proceedings.

3.   A non-molestation order was granted in favour of the  Appellant's  wife
    against the Appellant on 19th June 2014 by  Luton  Family  Court  which
    Judge Stott noted had not been lifted despite the limited  contact  now
    granted to the Appellant.  The police had been  called  to  the  former
    matrimonial home and allegations  of  assault  had  been  made  by  the
    Appellant's wife against the  Appellant  and  she  had  petitioned  for
    divorce.  The Appellant applied to the Luton Family Court for a contact
    order which was made  in  September  2014  increasing  the  Appellant's
    contact to supervised contact for one day a month for the period of six
    months with each session lasting one hour.  A further hearing date  was
    fixed for 2nd March 2015.

The Explanation for Refusal

4.   The Respondent refused the  application  as  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy Appendix FM.  In particular he could not satisfy the provisions
    set out in E-LTRPT.2.2,
    2.3 and 2.4 for leave to remain as a parent.   The  Appellant  and  his
    wife had three children but they had not been in the United Kingdom for
    at least seven years nor were  they  British  citizens  nor  were  they
    settled in this country.  The Appellant  did  not  have  sole  parental
    responsibility for  them  and  the  Appellant's  wife,  the  children's
    mother, was also not a British citizen or settled in this country.  The
    Appellant could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules because he had not lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least
    twenty years and given that he was 38 and had only come to  the  United
    Kingdom two years before it was considered he still must have ties  and
    connections with Nigeria which would enable him to reintegrate there.

5.   The Appellant had stated that he was bisexual and was  afraid  of  ill-
    treatment if returned to  Nigeria  on  that  account.   The  Respondent
    rejected that claim as the Appellant had lived in Nigeria for 36  years
    without experiencing problems and had fathered three children.  He  had
    remained married to his wife and they  only  separated  in  2013.   The
    Appellant  had  business  interests  in  Nigeria  and  there  were   no
    significant obstacles which would prevent his reintegration.

6.   The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision  arguing  that
    his removal would have a deleterious affect on his three young children
    whose best interests had to be considered.   All  three  children  were
    anxious to see him as was evidenced by a report from  Social  Services.
    He wished to play a full and productive part in their lives which would
    not be possible if he had to return to Nigeria.

The Decision at First Instance

7.   The Appellant argued that if  his  current  application  for  leave  to
    remain was dismissed and he had to return to Nigeria the  Family  Court
    would have to make a final order on his contact  application  in  March
    2015 without knowing how the six monthly  trial  developed.  The  Judge
    characterised  the  contact  arrangements  at  paragraph   7   of   his
    determination as "An assessment of how the Appellant and  his  children
    relate to each other".

8.   The Judge did not accept the Appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  upon
    return to Nigeria by reason of sexual orientation.  He rejected letters
    of support produced by the Appellant  noting  that  the  disclosure  of
    bisexuality was made at a very late stage  namely  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal. The Appellant's evidence  on  this  point  lacked  credibility.
    Further the Judge  did  not  consider  it  a  strong  factor  that  the
    Appellant  needed  to  be  in  this  country  to  attend  any   divorce
    proceedings.  The Appellant could be kept informed of the date  of  any
    hearing and could apply to return to the United Kingdom when  necessary
    to make his representations.   The  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules because of  the  lack  of  status  of  his  wife  and
    children thus he could not rely upon the provisions of Appendix FM.

9.   At paragraph 14 of  the  determination  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a family life with his children as  he  had  contact  and
    that their best interests were a primary feature in  this  appeal.   At
    paragraphs 15 and 16 the Judge said as follows:

         "15. I take into account however the history of  the  relationship,
         when from the Appellant's own written information, the police  have
         been called to the matrimonial home and allegations of assault have
         been made.  It is also
         the position, judging  by  the  information  contained  within  the
         Social Services Report prepared for the  Luton  case  that  a  non-
         molestation order is in place.  That  order  will  only  have  been
         granted after the hearing  of  evidence  and  a  finding  that  the
         Appellant's wife and children needed protection.

         16. From reading the Social Worker's Report  there  is  information
         that physical  and  emotional  abuse  has  been  practised  by  the
         Appellant against his family.  Presumably that is why  any  contact
         between him and his children was banned in February  2014.   It  is
         also of note however that the  children  are  agreeable  to  seeing
         their father and I accept that it is in their best  interests  that
         they develop having frequent contact with their natural  father  if
         that is considered to be appropriate."

10.  At paragraph 22 the Judge accepted that the Appellant had  an  arguable
    case under Article 8, having been granted  contact  with  the  children
    "albeit on a limited basis".  Following the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT
    00640 the Judge directed himself that he had to consider whether or not
    there were compelling and exceptional circumstances which would lead to
    the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to  have
    to go back  to  Nigeria.   The  children's  interests  were  a  primary
    consideration  but  could  be  outweighed  by   other   factors.    The
    maintenance of effective immigration control was in the public interest
    and must be taken into account.

11.  The Judge was aware of the matrimonial history and the initial  banning
    of any contact.  At paragraph 24 he concluded:

         "Although I accept that there may  well  be  initial  distress  and
         upset caused to his children I find that  the  Appellant's  removal
         would not  be  disproportionate  bearing  in  mind  what  has  been
         happening to them and their mother in the recent  past.   From  the
         Social Worker's Report it is apparent that  they  have  started  to
         thrive and develop more fully once apart  from  the  Appellant  and
         consider that in all the circumstances compelling  reasons  do  not
         exist to enable the Appellant to succeed in this appeal."

     The Judge dismissed the appeal declining to make an anonymity order.

The Onward Appeal

12.  The Appellant who had represented himself at  first  instance  appealed
    against the Judge's  decision  arguing  that  the  order  made  by  the
    Bedfordshire Family Court prohibiting him from having contact was  made
    by that court of its own volition as a  precautionary  measure  pending
    the outcome of the hearing.  The order was  amended  on  9th  September
    2014 in the Appellant's favour as there  was  nothing  which  suggested
    that  the  children  required  protection  from  the  Appellant.    The
    Appellant denied all allegations of assault against his  wife  and  the
    grounds made counter allegations against  the  Appellant's  wife  while
    noting that the Bedfordshire Family Court had  upheld  her  allegations
    against the Appellant.   The  court  had  made  an  order  barring  the
    children's removal pending the outcome of the contact proceedings.  The
    Appellant's grounds stated that he did not have any family  in  Nigeria
    that he could reintegrate with upon return.  Removing him now would  no
    doubt cause emotional and financial damage to the children as he  would
    not be able to cater for their needs. Much  of  the  remainder  of  the
    grounds of appeal was taken up with the Appellant's arguments as to the
    findings against him  on  the  grounds  of  sexual  orientation  and/or
    repeating parts of previous paragraphs in the grounds.

13.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on 25th November  2014.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that:

         "For the most part the application merely seeks to reargue  matters
         already argued before the Judge and  matters  in  issue  in  Family
         Court Proceedings without identifying any arguable  error  of  law.
         However on 9th September 2014 the Family Court  at  Luton  made  an
         order relating to the Appellant's three children  that  subject  to
         the children's wishes and feelings their mother  should  make  them
         available for six one hour sessions of supervised  contact  in  the
         months of September 2014 to February  2015  inclusive  prior  to  a
         final hearing on 3rd March 2015 of the Appellant's application  for
         a child arrangements order.  In carrying  out  the  proportionality
         exercise under Article 8 it  is  arguable  that  in  particular  in
         paragraphs 15, 16, 23 and 24 the  Judge  erred  in  law  by  making
         findings on matters properly within the jurisdiction of the  Family
         Court.  It is arguable in any event that the Judge erred in law  by
         precluding the development of contact between the Appellant and his
         children and pre-empting the hearing of the Family Court listed for
         3rd March 2015."

14.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission on 3rd December  2014
    stating that the Judge had directed himself appropriately.  It was open
    to the Judge to consider  all  relevant  evidence  and  reach  reasoned
    findings on the Appellant's and his family's  circumstances  and  their
    impact on the Article 8 rights of the parties.

15.  Following the grant  of  permission  the  Appellant  instructed  Messrs
    Duncan Lewis Solicitors to act for him  in  relation  to  this  appeal.
    They applied for an adjournment of the hearing which had been fixed for
    5th January 2015 by letter dated 31st December 2014.   The  solicitors'
    letter noted that the Appellant, whilst acting in person, had disclosed
    a number of  documents  relating  to  the  family  proceedings  without
    permission  from  the  Family  Court.   They  had  now  made  such   an
    application for permission but due to the length of time it would  take
    the Family Court to consider the application they sought an adjournment
    of the hearing.  The solicitors raised a second point  which  was  that
    they were not aware  of  the  children's  immigration  status  in  this
    country as the Appellant had no contact with his wife and therefore did
    not know what if any applications she might have made  in  relation  to
    them.  The application was granted and the hearing was adjourned  until
    5th February 2015.

16.   On  3rd  February  the  solicitors  made  a  further  request  for  an
    adjournment as the Family Court had still not  listed  the  Appellant's
    application for permission to disclose documents.  As it  was  possible
    that the Family Proceedings Court might not deal with  the  application
    for permission to disclose as a separate  matter  but  wait  until  the
    hearing for 3rd March 2015 the solicitors requested an  adjournment  of
    the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  until  after  that  date.
    This second application was refused by  an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who
    wrote:

         "The relevance of the documents relating to the Appellant's ongoing
         family proceedings is a matter best determined by the Judge hearing
         the appeal and in any  event  would  not  appear  to  be  a  matter
         preventing the determination of the error of law issue.  Should  it
         be the case that an error of law is found  and  the  documents  are
         considered necessary for the decision to be remade it will then  be
         open to the Judge to adjourn the case to another date for a resumed
         hearing".

The Hearing Before Me

17.  The matter came before me to determine whether there was  an  error  of
    law. The Appellant submitted a bundle of documents for the error of law
    hearing before me, the most relevant of which  was  Counsel's  skeleton
    argument.  This argued that the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were erroneous in that they usurped the function of  the  Family  Court
    which was seized of the issue of whether  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were being met by contact with  the  Appellant.   The  Judge's
    decision pre-empted the outcome of the final contact hearing listed for
    3rd March 2015.  The Judge had failed to take account of a settled line
    of authorities including the case of MH [2010] UKUT 439 that a decision
    to remove an applicant in the process of seeking a  contact  order  may
    violate  Article  8  particularly  on  the  basis  that  removal  of  a
    parent/applicant during contact order  proceedings  would  be  unlawful
    because it prejudged the outcome of the contact  proceedings  and  more
    importantly  denied  the  applicant  all  possibility  of  any  further
    meaningful involvement in the proceedings which may breach Article 6.

18.  A refusal to adjourn proceedings before the Tribunal may  have  similar
    consequences.  It was usual for the appeal to be  allowed  pursuant  to
    Article 8 rather than for the proceedings to remain within the Tribunal
    system to be adjourned perhaps more than once.   The  Respondent  would
    then normally grant a short period of discretionary  leave  bearing  in
    mind any relevant facts found by  or  observations  of  an  Immigration
    Judge.  If an application for a contact order is  successful  a  parent
    may make application for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

19.  In oral submissions Counsel argued that the hearing on 2nd  March  2015
    had been allotted half a day and the  Immigration  Judge  had  accepted
    that the Appellant  had  made  a  valid  and  genuine  application  for
    contact.  This case was on all fours with the case of  MH.   The  Judge
    had taken a partway stage, the making of an interim order in September,
    as the final stage.  If the Appellant had to leave the  United  Kingdom
    with only interim supervised contact his contact application  would  be
    fundamentally compromised.  If the Appellant had no  contact  order  he
    would not be able to make an application to visit the children in  this
    country.  The direction in RS India [2012] UKUT 00218 that the Tribunal
    should  consider  whether  an  application  was   made   to   frustrate
    deportation did not apply in this case.   Counsel accepted he  was  not
    previously aware of the case of Mohammed [2014] UKUT 419 relied upon by
    the Respondent in this case but that case could be distinguished as  it
    dealt with a situation  where  there  was  a  mere  possibility  of  an
    application being made.

20.  In reply the Presenting Officer argued that  the  Appellant's  analysis
    of the law was not correct.  The starting point for  an  assessment  of
    the relationship between the Family Court and the Immigration  Tribunal
    was what was said in the case of MS [2007] EWCA Civ  133.   In  MS  the
    Court of Appeal had said:

         "The  question  of  whether  the  Appellant's  removal  would  have
         violated Article 8 ... should have been decided by the Tribunal  on
         the facts as they were when it  heard  the  appeal  i.e.  with  her
         outstanding  application  for  contact  with  her  children.   That
         question was capable of resolution one way or the  other.   It  was
         not open to the Tribunal to rely on the Respondent's  assurance  or
         undertaking that the Appellant  would  not  be  removed  until  the
         contact application had been resolved.  Nor was it  appropriate  to
         speculate upon whether there might be a violation of Article  8  on
         different facts at some point in  the  future.   Had  the  Tribunal
         decided the Article 8 point in the Appellant's  favour  she  should
         have been granted discretionary leave to remain.  This  could  have
         been for quite a short period whatever was regarded  as  sufficient
         to cover the outstanding contact application.  It would  have  been
         open to the Appellant later to apply for the period to be  extended
         should the circumstances so warrant."

21.  The Presenting Officer argued that MH did not  say  anything  different
    to the Court of Appeal in MS what the cases were saying was that  there
    was no formulaic approach.  MH could not be read as saying that if  the
    Family Court had not yet made a decision the Tribunal should adjourn or
    grant a short period of  leave.   At  paragraph  42  of  RS  the  Upper
    Tribunal had said "There is no universal obligation that  a  period  of
    discretionary leave must be granted  where  family  proceedings  remain
    unresolved".  The Judge had evidence from Social Workers  which  showed
    emotional and physical abuse of the Appellants' wife and children.  The
    purpose of the hearing in March 2015 was to see  how  the  contact  had
    gone as it was for a trial period.  This was not the same as  where  an
    Appellant was requesting contact for the first time.  The Appellant had
    been granted  very  limited  contact  which  was  clearly  based  on  a
    significant amount of evidence for example  about  police  visits.  The
    Judge had to take into account the Social  Worker's  evidence  and  was
    entitled to give that weight and find the Appellant's removal would not
    be disproportionate.  The Judge had approached this matter by  weighing
    up what the interference was.  There were  no  compelling  factors  why
    leave should have been granted.

22.  In closing for the Appellant it was argued that there was no  authority
    to say that MH was wrong, RS was a  case  which  related  to  automatic
    deportation as was Mohammed.  The Appellant had made an application for
    contact and relied on the case of MS.  He should be afforded procedural
    protection by Article 8.   There  must  be  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination because the Judge had not addressed MH or RS.  There  was
    no reference to either case in the determination.  The Judge had sought
    to pre-empt the Family Court proceedings.  It was speculation  for  the
    Judge to say at  paragraph  15  of  the  determination  that  the  non-
    molestation order would only have been  granted  after  evidence.   The
    Appellant denied that there was any allegation of violence against  the
    children.  It might be that the children were exposed to domestic abuse
    by the children witnessing their parents' violent  arguments.   All  of
    this was within the domain of the Family Court and there had  to  be  a
    separation between the two jurisdictions.  The appeal should be allowed
    and discretionary leave granted to the  Appellant  whilst  the  contact
    proceedings were underway.





Findings

23.  In the case of Mohammed the Upper Tribunal  stated  that  the  guidance
    given in the earlier authority such as RS was  concerned  with  whether
    there was a realistic prospect of the Family Court  making  a  decision
    that would have a material impact on the relationship between  a  child
    and the parent facing immigration measures  such  as  deportation.   In
    Mohammed the Appellant had indirect contact via letters  etc.  but  the
    Tribunal found particularly pertinent certain observations in an  Upper
    Tribunal decision of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 that  where  evidence
    gives no hint of  a  suggestion  that  the  welfare  of  the  child  is
    threatened by the immigration decision in question or that the  child's
    best interests are undermined thereby there is no basis for any further
    judicial explanation or reasoned decision on the matter.

24.  In the instant case before  me  the  Judge  was  well  aware  that  the
    Appellant had interim contact of one hour per month and that there  was
    to be a further hearing in March.  The Judge  also  had  evidence  from
    Social Services that the Appellant had been emotionally abusive against
    all of the family including the children (and  physically  against  his
    wife).  It was reasonable for the Judge to deduce  that  that  was  the
    reason why the  Appellant  had  been  banned  from  having  contact  in
    February 2014.  The Judge also had evidence from  the  Social  Worker's
    Report that the children had started to thrive and develop  more  fully
    once they were apart from the Appellant.

25.  In granting permission to appeal the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appears to make the criticism that  Judge  Stott  was  taking  it  upon
    himself matters more properly open to the  Family  Court.   In  RS  the
    Upper Tribunal made the point that although the First-tier Tribunal had
    a duty to treat the child's best interests as a primary  consideration,
    the Tribunal had no means of assessing those  matters  for  itself,  in
    particular there was usually no local authority or children's guardian,
    no access to the service provided by CAFCASS and no  independent  means
    of ascertaining the wishes, concerns and interests of  the  child.   In
    the instant case before me however the  Judge  had  evidence  from  the
    Social Workers of the best interests of the  child  and  accepted  that
    evidence.

26.  I take the point that the Appellant had not  obtained  permission  from
    the Family Court for the disclosure of papers to the Tribunal  but  the
    alternative would have been that the Tribunal simply refused to  accept
    any evidence from the Appellant affirming the contact proceedings which
    would have been deleterious to the Appellant.  As Counsel  observed  in
    closing submissions to me, we are where we are.  Unless it is said that
    it is an error of law per se for the Judge to have considered  evidence
    put before him for which permission had not been obtained then  it  was
    open for the Judge to consider that  evidence  and  make  his  findings
    accordingly.

27.  Unlike cases therefore where the Tribunal has to adjourn  a  resolution
    of the immigration proceedings whilst contact proceedings  are  ongoing
    the rationale being that it  simply  has  insufficient  information  to
    proceed, that was not the case here.   The  Judge  had  evidence  which
    would enable him to proceed.

28.  The argument in essence for the Appellant is that there is  a  line  of
    authorities  that  say  that  where  there  are  ongoing  Family  Court
    proceedings the case must be adjourned  and/or  the  Appellant  granted
    some  form  of  discretionary  leave  whilst  the  outcome   of   those
    proceedings is awaited.  As will be seen from the  quotation  from  the
    case of RS (paragraph above) there is no such universal obligation that
    a  period  of  discretionary  leave  must  be  granted   where   family
    proceedings remain unresolved.

29.  As the Respondent pointed out in submissions to me this was not a  case
    where there was a  first  application  for  contact  which  was  to  be
    decided.  The Appellant had been barred from having contact earlier  in
    the year and later had  only  been  granted  limited  contact  for  six
    months.  What the Judge did was to weigh that against other factors  in
    the case.  The Judge was aware of the need to treat the welfare of  the
    children as a  primary  concern.   He  had  evidence  from  the  Social
    Services as to that welfare.  His  view  was  that  given  the  limited
    contact available to  the  Appellant  and  in  the  light  of  all  the
    circumstances including the history of emotional abuse of the children,
    that he could decide the Appellant's application for  leave  to  remain
    there and then without adjourning it.

30.  Ultimately  it  was  a  matter  of  assessing  the  proportionality  of
    interference with such established rights as existed.  In the  case  of
    RS at paragraph 43 the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  that  a  Judge  should
    consider certain questions.  The first was whether the outcome  of  the
    contemplative family proceedings was  likely  to  be  material  to  the
    immigration decision. In the instant case before me the Judge was aware
    that as a result of the Appellant having been granted  limited  contact
    there was an Article 8 argument before him.  To that extent the outcome
    was likely to be material.

31.  The second question posed by the Upper Tribunal is  whether  there  are
    compelling public interest reasons to exclude  the  claimant  from  the
    United Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of family proceedings or the
    best interests of the child.  Here the  Judge  was  influenced  by  the
    evidence he had from the Social Workers that  the  Appellant's  removal
    would not be disproportionate bearing in mind what had happened to  the
    children and their mother in the recent past and that the children  had
    started to thrive and develop more fully once apart from the Appellant.
     The Judge made no specific finding on whether the contact  proceedings
    had been instituted to delay or frustrate removal but he was clearly of
    the view that they were not designed to promote the children's welfare.



32.  The fourth question posed by RS  is  that  the  Judge  should  normally
    consider the degree of the claimant's previous interest in and  contact
    with the child, the timing of contact proceedings  and  the  commitment
    with which they have been progressed and whether the decision is likely
    to be reached and what materials were  already  available  to  identify
    pointers to where the children's welfare lies.  The Judge was took into
    account a previous ban on contact and the level  of  abuse  (which  the
    Appellant continues to deny indicating perhaps an  inability  to  amend
    his behaviour).

33.  In the light of  that  the  Judge  was  not  prepared  to  adjourn  the
    proceedings for a short period to enable a core decision to be taken in
    the family proceedings.  He felt he was able to make a  decision  there
    and then on the Appellant's removal taking into account the  children's
    best interests and  that  they  were  thriving  being  apart  from  the
    Appellant.  As the Upper Tribunal points out in RS:

         "There  is  a  public  interest  that  immigration  proceedings  be
         expeditiously decided and a right to remain on human rights grounds
         should not be created solely by reason of family links  created  or
         significantly developed during pending appeals."

     In this case the Appellant's connections to this country  were  tenuous
    at best. His case  turned  entirely  on  his  relationship  with  three
    children who themselves had no leave to remain.

34.  It may be that at some point a Family Court gives  the  Appellant  more
    contact to his children than he currently has over and above the  level
    which was taken into account by the Judge at first instance. Whether at
    that point the matter should be reviewed is not a matter  for  me.   My
    concern was whether the Judge had made an error of law in proceeding to
    deal with the hearing before him rather than adjourn it for the contact
    proceedings to be resolved.  The Appellant had made a number of  points
    rejected by the Judge as to why he should remain in the United Kingdom.
     The Judge was entitled to find that the  Appellant  had  been  abusive
    towards his wife and children, physically violent towards his wife  and
    emotionally abusive towards his children.  He was entitled to find that
    there was evidence from Social Services as to the best interests of the
    children and in those circumstances to proceed to deal with  the  case.
    Ultimately it was a matter for the judgment of the  First-tier  whether
    the case should go ahead and a decision  made  or  whether  the  appeal
    should be adjourned.  The Judge gave his reasons for his  decision  and
    whilst another Judge might have decided  the  matter  differently  that
    makes no difference to the test of whether there is an  error  of  law.
    In the circumstances I do not find that there is an error of law in the
    determination and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so  doing.
 I note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  the  application  by  the
Appellant for an anonymity order.

Signed this 3rd day of March   2015

.......................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.

Signed this 3rd day of March   2015

.......................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

