

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA/18670/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard             at             Field             House,             London
  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              19th              August               2015
         On the 4th September 2015


                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:

                                   MR Z Y
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss Solanki (Counsel)
For the Respondent:   Miss Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is  the  Respondent's  (The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department's) appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Norton-Taylor dated  the  12th  December  2014.  Although  it  is  the
      Respondent's appeal, for the sake of clarity, throughout this decision
      the parties will be referred to as they were referred to in the First-
      Tier Tribunal hearing, such  that  Mr  Z  Y  is  referred  to  as  the
      Appellant and the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
      referred to as the Respondent.



Background

   2. The Appellant had initially entered the UK illegally in July 2009  and
      claimed asylum on the 6th August that year. He claimed asylum  on  the
      basis that he is a national of Afghanistan and that his father was  an
      important figure in the local community and had interacted with the US
      forces when they visited his home village, such that  his  father  had
      received threats from the Taliban who were active in the  region.  His
      case  is  that  the  Taliban  had  attacked  his  home,  killing   the
      Appellant's father and brother and the Appellant had made arrangements
      to leave Afghanistan, and had come on a long  journey  to  the  United
      Kingdom via Iran, probably Turkey, Greece, Italy and France  and  that
      during that journey it is said that the Appellant was  told  that  his
      mother had died.




   3. The  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  original  rejected  by  the
      Respondent on the 14th January 2010, but he was granted  discretionary
      Leave as a minor that ran until  the  1st  July  2010,  the  Appellant
      having been born on the 1st January 1993. On the  17th  June  2010  he
      made a further application for Leave to Remain which was  refused.  He
      appealed and that appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Aujla. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and  Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Davidge on the 9th September 2011 found an error of law
      existed in that Judge Aujla failed to consider  the  Appellant's  best
      interests as a minor at the time and therefore  set  aside  the  Judge
      Aujla's determination. He remade the  decision  by  relying  upon  the
      adverse credibility findings found by  Judge  Aujla  and  went  on  to
      dismiss the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.




   4. Thereafter on the  2nd  April  2013  the  Appellant's  representatives
      submitted  further  submissions  in  support  of  a  fresh  claim  for
      international protection and in respect of Article  8.  The  Appellant
      now relied upon a report  from  Dr  German,  a  Chartered  Educational
      Psychologist dated the 28th February 2013, in which it was  said  that
      the Appellant had severe learning difficulties and also PTSD, and that
      he was suffering from distress, depression  and  also  was  a  suicide
      risk. The Respondent considered those submissions as a new  claim  but
      still refused the Appellant's claim in a refusal letter dated the 10th
      March 2014. That decision was the subject of the appeal that was heard
      before First-Tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor on  the  14th  November
      2014.

   5.  First-Tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor noted that the Respondent had
      conceded that the Appellant had PTSD and severe learning  difficulties
      and she equally found that  he  had  both  PTSD  and  severe  learning
      difficulties, irrespective of the concessions that had been made.  The
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
      severe suicide risk in that the Respondent's removal decision in March
      2014 did not result in any adverse action by the Appellant and he  was
      not under the care of mental health services.  However,  she  accepted
      that the combination of the Appellant's age at the time, together with
      his cognitive and mental health problems did undermine the reliability
      of the previous adverse credibility findings reached by Judge Aujla.




   6.  Judge  Norton-Taylor  accepted  that  the  Appellant's   father   was
      considered by the Taliban to have assisted the US forces and that  the
      Taliban had attacked the Appellant's home sometime  in  2008  and  his
      father and brother had been killed and that  the  Appellant  had  then
      left Afghanistan in 2008 and made his way to the UK  and  that  during
      that journey he been told that his mother had died. However the First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge did not accept the Appellant was at  a  real  risk
      upon  return  as  he  was  the  surviving  relative  of  a   perceived
      collaborator who had already been killed. Further, the Appellant given
      his limited capability was found not to be an individual who was  able
      to mount any sort of threat against the Taliban, nor did she  consider
      that there was there any real risk of the Taliban forcibly  recruiting
      him. The Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds was therefore  rejected,
      as was his claim under Article 3.




   7.  However,  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge   Norton-Taylor   allowed   the
      Appellant's appeal under paragraph 276 ADE  (vi)  of  the  Immigration
      Rules,  for  the  reasons  set  out  within  [71]  to  [80]   of   her
      determination. She concluded that the Appellant was a very  vulnerable
      young man who  would  face  "very  significant  obstacles"  indeed  to
      reintegration back into Afghan society at this time.  She  appreciated
      the test was a high one, but found that it was satisfied in this case.






   8. The Respondent has appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal. In  the
      Grounds of Appeal it is argued that First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Norton-
      Taylor materially misdirected herself in law regarding her  assessment
      as to whether or not there were very  significant  obstacles  for  the
      Appellant's integration into Afghan society and that  the  Appellant's
      ability to access medical treatment and the fact  that  he  would  not
      receive a level of comparable support to that which he receives in the
      UK did not amount to significant obstacles  and  that  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge's approach was  thereby  fundamentally  flawed.  It  is
      further argued that the Home Office Presenting Officer at  the  First-
      tier hearing relied upon  the  case  of  Akhalu  (Health  Claim:  ECHR
      Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 in support of the  Respondent's  position
      regarding the Appellant's medical needs and that the  public  interest
      in removal is a weighty factor and that whilst in  the  difference  in
      care and availability of care  was  relevant  to  the  proportionality
      assessment, such factors will be defeasible by the public interest  in
      removal, particularly in light of the need to ensure "that the limited
      resources of this country's health  services  are  used  to  the  best
      effect for the benefit of those for whom they are intended".




   9. It is argued that the First-Tier Judge did not engage with Akhalu  nor
      establish why this appeal is one of those very rare cases envisaged by
      the Tribunal in the Akhalu case. Although the Appellant  has  learning
      difficulties compounded by PTSD, it is argued that it  was  not  clear
      why the circumstances amounted to a "very rare case".




  10. The second ground of appeal argues that the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
      was wrong in law to find that although "little weight" should normally
      be given to an Appellant's private  life  that  was  formed  when  his
      status was  precarious  under  section  117B(5)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in this case  the  reduction  in  the
      weight should be reduced as the Appellant was present in the UK having
      had leave as a minor. It is argued that  there  is  no  authority  for
      concluding that a distinction should be drawn in the  weight  afforded
      under section 117B (5) based upon whether or  not  the  Appellant  was
      here as a minor and that the Appellant's private life should have been
      afforded little weight as he was present in a temporary  capacity  and
      could hold no  legitimate  expectation  of  remaining  in  the  United
      Kingdom.




  11. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Davey
      on the 19th May 2014 and it was stated that it was arguable  that  the
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge concentrated  on  the  Appellant's  problems
      rather  than  balancing  the  considerations,  including  the   public
      interest and that the Judge did not address Akhalu but if he  had  the
      decision may have been no different. However, it was stated  that  the
      Respondent should not be unduly optimistic about the  outcome  of  the
      error of law issues and the materiality of the error. It  was  further
      stated that the second ground was also arguable, although whether  any
      different outcome might arise would require a fuller argument.

Submissions

  12. In her submissions Miss Everett relied upon the Grounds of Appeal. She
      said that there was not much else that she could add. I asked  whether
      or not in fact section  117B  was  relevant  at  all  to  the  Judge's
      determination, given that the Judge was considering the  appeal  under
      the Immigration Rules rather than outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      under Article 8. She was unable to advance any reasons as to  why  the
      considerations  of  section  117B  should  apply  when  a  Judge   was
      considering an appeal under paragraph 276ADE, as opposed to outside of
      the Immigration Rules under Article  8,  but  still  relied  upon  the
      Grounds of Appeal. Further, she did not feel able to assist further as
      to how it was being argued that any failure on the part of  the  Judge
      considering the case  of  Akhalu  would  have  been  relevant  to  his
      consideration of the appeal under paragraph 276ADE. She  simply  again
      relied upon the Grounds of Appeal and asked me to dismiss the appeal.




  13. Miss Solanki on behalf of  the  Appellant  relied  upon  the  skeleton
      argument. She further submitted  that  the  original  appeal  she  had
      argued before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge that section 117B was  not
      relevant for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE, but that as a  belt  and
      braces approach, the Judge had considered section 117B, in addition to
      the requirements of paragraph 276ADE and she argued that he could  not
      be criticised in respect of having done so,  and  that  this  did  not
      amount to an error of law. She relied upon paragraphs [28) and [29] of
      her skeleton argument regarding the weight to be attached  to  section
      117B (5). She further argued that it was in fact the Appellant Mr Z  Y
      who was seeking to rely at the First-Tier Tribunal upon  the  case  of
      Akhalu rather than the Respondent and that  in  that  case  the  Upper
      Tribunal had upheld the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  allowing
      the  Appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,  based   upon   the
      Appellant's health.




  14. However she argued that Mr Z Y's case was not concerned  with  whether
      or not he was able to access medical treatment and that  in  his  case
      given  that  he  had  severe  learning  difficulties,  such  that   he
      functioned at the level of a 6-year-old,  had  Post  Traumatic  Stress
      Disorder and the Judge found that he would  have  lacked  the  support
      that he had in the UK and also found that he  had  no  family  now  to
      return to in Afghanistan, his father, brother and mother  having  been
      killed and the Judge made findings regarding his employment  prospects
      and ability to find housing. She argued that it was perfectly open  to
      the First-Tier Tribunal Judge to find that there would have been  very
      significant obstacles to the Appellant integrating back into  life  in
      Afghanistan for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE  and  that  they  were
      consolation of factors in that regard, not simply a comparison of  the
      availability  of  medical  services  or  treatment  in  the   UK   and
      Afghanistan. She asked me to find that there was no material error  of
      law and to uphold the original decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Norton-Taylor.

My Findings on Error of Law

  15. I find that there was an error of law in the  decision  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor, when he applied the factors  in  section
      117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  to  the
      consideration that  he  gave  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules under paragraph 276ADE (vi).  Section  117A  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  specifically  states  at
      section 117A (1) that "this part applies where Court  or  Tribunal  is
      required to determine whether a decision made  under  the  Immigration
      Acts-

(a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family  life  under
Article 8, and

(b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
1998."

  16.  Part 5A which includes the provisions of section 117B therefore  only
      applies where the Tribunal is determine whether or  not  the  decision
      breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life under
      Article 8 and as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998. However, the decision being made by  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor was not as to whether or not the decision
      was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, but  simply
      whether or not the Appellant should succeed under  the  provisions  of
      paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Although   the
      Immigration Rules have been amended in July 2012 to  take  account  of
      Article 8, the assessment being made by the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
      was simply under the Immigration Rules, rather than an  assessment  of
      lawfulness under section 6.




  17. Further, under section 117A (2) it  is  when  considering  the  public
      interest question that the Court or Tribunal must (in particular) have
      regard in all cases to considerations  listed  in  section  117B.  The
      public interest question is defined at section  117A  (3)  as  meaning
      "the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to
      respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8 (2)."
      However, an assessment as to whether or not there are very significant
      obstacles to integration for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE (vi) does
      not involve the Judge determining whether or not an interference  with
      the person's right to respect for private and family life is justified
      under Article 8 (2). Although the  Rules  have  been  amended  by  the
      Respondent in an attempt to  reflect  Article  8  considerations,  the
      Judge  is  not  in  fact  carrying  out   an   Article   8   balancing
      consideration, when  considering  the  application  purely  under  the
      Immigration Rules.




  18.  Had the Judge gone on to consider  the  application  outside  of  the
      Immigration Rules and in  respect  of  Article  8,  then  clearly  the
      considerations under section 117B would have  been  relevant  and  the
      Judge would have been duty-bound to consider the  same.  However,  the
      Judge  is  not  in  fact  carrying  out  a  balancing  exercise   when
      considering the appeal under paragraph 276ADE (vi) and is  not  making
      any findings in respect of unlawfulness under section 6 of  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998. The Judge was purely looking at whether or not  there
      are very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  integration  back
      into life, in this case Afghanistan, being the  country  to  which  he
      would be returned. However, for the reasons set out below,  I  do  not
      consider that the error made by the Judge in this regard was material.



  19. Although it is argued within the Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  Judge
      erred in law in his assessment as to the Appellant's ability to access
      medical treatment and the comparable support that he would receive  in
      the UK compared to that which he would receive in Afghanistan and that
      he was required to undertake  a  holistic  assessment  of  that,  with
      particular regard to the public interest in such cases and that  these
      factors did not amount to very  significant  obstacles.  However,  the
      Judge was not carrying out a balancing exercise in order to  determine
      whether or not the decision taken was proportionate to the  legitimate
      aim sought to be achieved for the purpose of article 8 (2) when simply
      considering  the  application  under  the  Immigration   Rules   under
      paragraph 276ADE (vi).




  20. Further, the First-Tier Tribunal Judge was not in his decision  simply
      comparing the Appellant's  ability  to  access  medical  treatment  or
      health  care  facilities  in  the  United  Kingdom  compared  to  that
      available in Afghanistan, but was between  paragraphs  [71]  and  [80]
      considering whether  or  not  the  Appellant  would  face  significant
      obstacles in terms of integration back into Afghan society. The  Judge
      considered that  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's  severe  learning
      difficulties with an overall function age of just 6 compounded by  his
      PTSD and without familial assistance, given  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge accepted that the Appellant's father and brother had been killed
      and his mother  had  died  that  the  appellant's  ability  to  access
      healthcare of any sort, the labour market, housing, social integration
      would be extremely limited.




  21. The Judge further found that the support the Appellant received in the
      UK would simply not be available to him in Afghanistan,  but  although
      these were factors that the Judge did take into account, they were not
      the only factors, but were part of a plethora of factors found by  the
      Judge as to why the Appellant would face very significant obstacles in
      terms  of  integration  back  into  Afghan  society  and   given   the
      Appellant's severe learning difficulties, his functioning age and  his
      parents and his lack of familiar  assistance  and  his  PTSD,  it  was
      perfectly open to the Judge in such circumstances  to  find  that  the
      Appellant was  a  very  vulnerable  young  man  who  would  face  very
      significant obstacles integrating back into Afghan society. The  Judge
      had simply not just carried out in assessment as  to  the  ability  of
      healthcare or  support,  but  has  specifically  looked  at  also  the
      Appellant's availability and access to the labour market, housing, and
      his ability to integrate back into society.




  22. As regards the argument that First-Tier Tribunal Judge failed to  deal
      with the case of Akhalu (health claim: ECHR  Article  8)  [2013]  UKUT
      00400, I accept that in fact it was Miss  Solanki  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant who relied upon that case before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,
      rather than the Respondent, and that  in  any  event,  that  case  was
      dealing with Article 8 considerations outside of the Immigration Rules
      rather than under  paragraph  276ADE,  and  that  the  Judge  was  not
      carrying out a proportionality assessment for the purpose of Article 8
      when considering paragraph 276ADE, and  that  therefore  the  case  of
      Akhalu I find was in fact irrelevant to that consideration. The  Judge
      therefore did not err in law in failing to refer to that case.




  23. That case would have been relevant if  he  was  considering  the  case
      outside of the Immigration Rules for the purpose of Article 8  on  the
      basis of a consideration as to the difference in care and availability
      of care in Afghanistan and the United Kingdom, but the Judge  was  not
      considering  the  case  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  he  was
      considering it within the Immigration Rules. The circumstances did not
      therefore need to be a "very rare case". The circumstances simply  had
      to amount to very significant obstacles to integration for the purpose
      of paragraph 276ADE.




  24. Further, given that the Judge was conducting his  consideration  under
      paragraph 276ADE (vi) I find that the Judge did in fact err in  making
      an assessment under section 117B (5) at all, given that 117B  did  not
      apply to his consideration under paragraph 276ADE (vi).




  25. However, given that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge considered that  the
      factors under section 117B in  terms  of  the  Appellant  knowing  his
      status was precarious, his limited ability to learn English  and  that
      he in fact was financially dependent were potentially factors counting
      against the Appellant, rather  than  in  his  favour,  and  given  the
      plethora of reasons for the Judge's findings that the Appellant was  a
      very vulnerable young man who would face very significant obstacles in
      terms of  integration  back  into  Afghan  society  given  his  severe
      learning difficulties, his overall functioning age of 6 years old, his
      lack of family support given the murder of his father and brother  and
      the death of his mother and his problems being compounded by his  PTSD
      and his extremely limited ability to access the labour market, housing
      and social integration as well as any  healthcare,  and  his  lack  of
      support available to him in Afghanistan, it was perfectly open to  the
      Judge  to  find  various  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
      integration back into Afghanistan, irrespective  of  his  findings  in
      respect of section 117B.




  26. The First-Tier Tribunal  Judge's  findings  on  section  117B  do  not
      undermine any of his findings in terms of the  Appellant  facing  very
      significant obstacles to integration back into Afghanistan, were he to
      be returned. The error of law by the Judge was therefore not material.






  27. In the very particular circumstances of this  case  it  was  perfectly
      open to the Judge to find that there were very  significant  obstacles
      to the Appellant's integration back into Afghan society now  and  that
      he should succeed under  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The Judge's reasons were perfectly adequate and sufficient  and
      it is clear from reading the Judge's decision as to why he reached the
      decision made. The decision does not disclose any  material  error  of
      law, the appeal is dismissed and the decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Norton-Taylor is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor  does  not  contain
any material errors of law and is maintained.

The First-Tier Tribunal did make  an  order  pursuant  to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 in respect of anonymity, given the  Appellant's  severe  learning
difficulties and functioning details of his functioning age, as  appropriate
for his anonymity to be maintained. Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs
otherwise the Appellant is granted anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent.
Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being
brought for contempt of court.

Signed
                                        Dated 19th August 2015

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

