
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA187192015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th June 2017                             |On 27th June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MJ
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks of Counsel instructed by Wright Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Thomas of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 5th October 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male Nigerian citizen born in  December  1975.   His
    wife and four children are dependants in his appeal.

 3. In August 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom based upon his family and private life.

 4. The application was refused on 28th April 2015.  The Appellant appealed
    to the FtT.

 5. The FtT found that the Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules contained within Appendix FM in relation to family life, and  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) in relation to  private  life  were
    not satisfied.  The FtT considered Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The FtT accepted that Article 8 was engaged but concluded  that
    the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control,
    outweighed the weight to be attached to the family and private life  of
    the Appellant and his family,  and  therefore  found  the  Respondent's
    decision to be proportionate, and accordingly there was  no  breach  of
    Article 8, and the appeal was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FtT had erred in  concluding  that
    the best interests of the Appellant's children lay  in  remaining  with
    their parents and returning to Nigeria.  It was noted that  the  eldest
    child, being 9 years of  age,  and  having  been  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom, would shortly be eligible to register  as  a  British  citizen
    based on ten years' residence.

 7. It was submitted that the FtT had erred  by  failing  to  consider  the
    private lives of the children in the United Kingdom,  had  inadequately
    considered proportionality, and failed to  explain  the  conclusion  at
    paragraph 27, that  the  children  did  not  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE
    because it was not unreasonable to expect them  to  return  to  Nigeria
    with their parents.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but subsequently granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul in the following terms;

         As is averred in the renewed grounds at 6(g), it is  arguable  that
         First-tier Tribunal Judge D A  Thomas  erred  in  failing  to  give
         adequate reasons why, given that at least one of the  children  has
         lived here for over seven years, it was reasonable  to  expect  the
         family to return to Nigeria,  given  also  the  impact  of  section
         117B(6) which is arguably not directly addressed.

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately.  The Respondent considered that the FtT had conducted  a
    careful analysis  of  the  evidence  and  had  given  reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached.  The FtT looked at the circumstances in the round,
    and noted that the Appellant had been an overstayer and found that  the
    Appellant and his wife had knowingly set out to establish themselves in
    the United Kingdom.  The Respondent considered that although there  was
    no specific reference  to  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  the
    principles set out therein had been followed.

10. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The Appellant attended and was represented by Mr Brooks who applied for
    an adjournment.   Mr  Brooks  explained  that  the  Appellant's  eldest
    daughter had now made an application for British citizenship,  and  the
    Respondent had acknowledged the application by letter  dated  17th  May
    2017.  Mr Brooks requested an adjournment to await a decision upon  the
    application for British citizenship.

12. Mr Mills opposed the application, submitting that the eldest daughter's
    application for British citizenship was  not  relevant  to  the  issues
    before the Upper Tribunal.

13. I refused the adjournment application.  I found that the result of  the
    application for British citizenship would  have  no  bearing  upon  the
    issue to be decided by the Upper Tribunal, which was  whether  the  FtT
    had erred in law.  The FtT decision had been promulgated as long ago as
    5th October  2016,  and  the  fact  that  an  application  for  British
    citizenship had now been made, was irrelevant to the issues  considered
    by the FtT.

14. I then heard oral submissions  from  Mr  Brooks  who  relied  upon  his
    comprehensive skeleton argument dated 14th June 2017.

15. In brief summary Mr Brooks submitted that the FtT had erred in  law  as
    indicated by the grant of permission, and had failed  to  consider  the
    interests  of  the   Appellant's   four   children   specifically   and
    individually.  I was asked to find that at paragraph  23  the  FtT  had
    adopted an incorrect starting point in finding that the children  could
    return to Nigeria with their parents.  The FtT should  have  considered
    the private lives of  the  children  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    proposed interference with their private lives.

16. Mr Mills relied upon the rule 24 response.  He submitted that the  best
    interests  of  children  must  be  considered  separately  from   other
    considerations, but when considering the  question  of  reasonableness,
    which was a separate test, then all circumstances must  be  taken  into
    account, including the immigration history of the parents.

17. Mr Mills submitted  that  paragraph  12  of  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument was incorrect on this point.

18. Mr Mills' submission was that the FtT had correctly considered the best
    interests of the children at paragraph  23.   There  was  reference  at
    paragraph 27 to the fact that it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect
    the children to return to Nigeria with  their  parents.   Paragraph  31
    summed up the various issues in the  appeal,  and  concluded  that  the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate,  and  therefore  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children  to  travel  to  Nigeria  with  their
    parents.

19. Mr Mills submitted that the challenge to the FtT  decision  related  to
    form rather than substance, and  even  though  there  was  no  specific
    reference to  section  117B(6)  the  FtT  had  considered  the  correct
    principles and reached  a  conclusion  open  to  it,  with  sustainable
    reasons.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. The primary challenge to the FtT decision relates to  whether  the  FtT
    correctly assessed whether it would be reasonable for children who have
    acquired seven years' continuous residence to leave the United Kingdom,
    and whether adequate reasons were given.

22. The Appellant has four children, born 9th April  2007,  22nd  September
    2008, 25th July 2010, and 9th December 2013.   All  were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant has had no leave to  remain  since  June
    2008.

23. When the application for leave to remain was made in August  2014  only
    the eldest child had acquired seven  years'  residence,  and  therefore
    only she could potentially benefit from paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  which
    requires a child to be under  the  age  of  18  years  and  have  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven years at the date
    of application, and it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

24. However by the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  FtT,  two  of  the
    Appellant's children had acquired  seven  years'  residence,  and  when
    considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, section 117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act)  needed
    to be considered in relation to both of them.  For ease of reference  I
    set out below section 117B(6);

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

25. Section 117D of the 2002 Act confirms that  a  qualifying  child  is  a
    child under the age of 18 who is either a British citizen or has  lived
    in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years  or  more
    (at the date of hearing rather than the date of application).

26. The FtT found Article 8 to be engaged.  That finding is not challenged.
     The FtT found that the Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of
    Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family  life.   That  finding  is   not
    challenged.

27. The FtT set out the Appellant's immigration history at paragraph 3, and
    there has been no challenge to that history.  It is clear that the  FtT
    realised that the Appellant's wife and four children were dependants in
    his appeal.  It is also clear that  the  FtT  realised  that  all  four
    children had been born in the United Kingdom, and at  paragraph  4  the
    FtT found that the eldest two children  had  accrued  more  than  seven
    years' continuous residence.

28. The Court of Appeal issued guidance in MA (Pakistan) on how to approach
    the question of reasonableness, when a child had accrued  seven  years'
    residence.  It is correct that the FtT made no reference to this  case,
    and there was no specific reference to section 117B(6).  However,  this
    without more, is not an error of law if the principles contained within
    the case law and section 117B(6) are followed.

29. The  FtT  appreciated  that  considering  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's four children, regardless of whether they had accrued seven
    years' residence, was a primary consideration, and the  best  interests
    of the children are considered in paragraph 23.   This  is  a  separate
    test from considering reasonableness,  as  when  considering  the  best
    interests, as  confirmed  in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public
    interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC) the  best  interests  of  a
    child must be  assessed  in  isolation  from  other  factors,  such  as
    parental misconduct.

30. I do not find the FtT erred in law in considering the best interests of
    the children.  I do not find  that  the  FtT  failed  to  consider  any
    material factor when considering their best  interests.   It  is  clear
    that the ages of the children were taken into account,  the  fact  that
    they were born in the United Kingdom, that they live with their parents
    in a close family unit and speak Igbo and English.

31. The FtT specifically referred at paragraph 23 to letters written by the
    eldest children expressing their wishes.  The FtT  accepted  that  they
    had made friends in this country, and that  they  undertook  activities
    outside school.  The health of the children  was  considered,  and  all
    found to be in good health save one of the boys who suffers from asthma
    and eczema.

32. The conclusion as to best interests, is that their best interests would
    be to remain with each other and their parents, and live in  a  country
    where they would  have  access  to  financial  support,  education  and
    medical care.  The FtT found, and gave adequate reasons for  so  doing,
    that these facilities would be available to the children in Nigeria  as
    they are in the United Kingdom.

33. The question that must be decided, is whether the  FtT  having  made  a
    conclusion in relation to best interests, also considered, in the  case
    of the two elder children, the issue of  reasonableness.   There  is  a
    brief reference to reasonableness in the context of paragraph 276ADE at
    paragraph 27 but this could only apply to the eldest child as only  she
    had accrued seven years' residence at the date of application.

34. It may be said, that the FtT could have been clearer on  the  issue  of
    reasonableness  and  had  there  been  specific  reference  to  section
    117B(6), this would have made the position clear.  However, in my  view
    the FtT  does  go  on  to  consider  reasonableness,  having  made  its
    conclusion on best interests at paragraph 23, by going on  to  consider
    proportionality at paragraphs 30 and 31.  At paragraph 31 the FtT makes
    a specific reference to there being an educational  system  in  Nigeria
    together with medical and mental  healthcare  and  church  communities.
    There is also reference to financial matters, the FtT  concluding  that
    the family would not be destitute.  The FtT also considers the concerns
    expressed by the Appellant's wife in relation to FGM.

35. In my view, the FtT is considering reasonableness at paragraph  31,  by
    making the point that the children were born in the United Kingdom, and
    cannot be held responsible for the actions of their parents.  There was
    no reference to the actions of the parents  when  best  interests  were
    considered at paragraph 23 and that is the correct approach.   However,
    MA (Pakistan) makes it clear (paragraph 101) that the court or tribunal
    can have regard to the wider public interest, including the immigration
    history of the parents.

36. The FtT at paragraph  31  considers  the  immigration  history  of  the
    parents which is set out  in  paragraph  3,  which  confirms  that  the
    Appellant has had no leave since 2008, and it  would  appear  that  his
    wife has had no leave since 2007.  In any event, the FtT was  entitled,
    and bound to take this into account and was entitled to make the  point
    that the parents had set out to  establish  themselves  in  the  United
    Kingdom knowing that they had no status.

37. At paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan) the  point  is  made  in  relation  to
    section 117B(6) that the fact that a child has been in the UK for seven
    years must be given significant weight and establishes  as  a  starting
    point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to
    the contrary.

38. Although there is no specific reference to this by  the  FtT,  this,  I
    find, is what the FtT has considered.  The FtT has taken  into  account
    the length of residence and the integration into the United Kingdom  by
    the eldest two  children,  but  also  taken  into  account  what  their
    circumstances would be if they went to Nigeria, the  country  of  which
    they are citizens.  The reference by the Court of Appeal  at  paragraph
    49  to  "powerful  reasons  to  the  contrary"  could   encompass   the
    immigration history of parents.  In this case, that is the  view  taken
    by the FtT, having balanced the circumstances of the children in the UK
    and in Nigeria, and then added to that balance,  the  public  interest,
    and specifically the consideration  of  the  parents  of  the  children
    deliberately remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  without  leave  for  a
    substantial period of time.

39. Overall, I therefore  conclude  that  the  FtT  has  analysed  all  the
    material evidence, made findings  and  provided  adequate  reasons  for
    those findings, and applied the appropriate legal principles.

40. For the above reasons the FtT did not materially err in law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do not  set  aside
the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I  continue  that  order  pursuant  to
rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant or any member of his family.  This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   This  direction  is
made because this appeal involves considering the best  interests  of  minor
children.






Signed                              Date         19th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date         19th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall











