
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18198/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th November 2014                          |On 17th December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS SANDRA DAWN SIDEY
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Palmer, Counsel instructed by the Secretary of
State
For the Respondent:    Mr T Buley, Counsel, instructed by Bates Wells and
                    Braithwaite Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State we will refer to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Canada born on 29th September 1981. She
       started a  relationship  with  a  German  citizen,  called  Mr  Goetz
       Schrader, in December 2005 in Canada. In January 2006  she  moved  to
       Germany to be with Mr Schrader.

    3. On 11th September 2007 they  both  came  to  the  UK.  The  appellant
       entered with a visit visa. She was then able to switch to  remain  in
       the UK as a  working  holiday-maker,  with  leave  valid  until  29th
       January 2010. On 8th October 2009 the appellant  was  granted  an  EU
       residence card as  the  durable  partner  of  Mr  Schrader.  On  22nd
       December 2010 the appellant's relationship  with  Mr  Schrader  broke
       down due to domestic violence.  He  then  left  the  UK  although  he
       returned briefly in January 2011 for his trial at the Old Bailey.  He
       was convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm on 8th August
       2013 and was sentenced to 12 months  imprisonment  suspended  for  24
       months.

    4. On 15th August 2011 the appellant made an application outside of  the
       Immigration Rules which  was  refused.  On  18th  November  2011  she
       applied for an EU permanent residence card on the basis of a retained
       right of residence. On 2nd March 2012 this  application  was  refused
       and her existing residence card was revoked. On 3rd  April  2012  the
       appellant appealed against this decision.

    5. Her appeal against the decision was allowed to the  extent  that  the
       matter was remitted to the Secretary of State by First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Ruth in a determination promulgated on the 12th June  2012.  In
       that determination, Judge Ruth found that Article 7(2) of  Regulation
       492/2011 provided a social advantage  such  that  the  appellant  was
       entitled to potentially use paragraph 289A of the Immigration  Rules.
       That finding was not challenged by the Secretary of State, and it  is
       accepted by both parties that, for the purposes of this appeal  only,
       that finding is binding on us and on the Secretary of State.

    6. Judge Ruth did not allow the appeal outright but  directed  that  the
       Secretary of State should make a fresh decision on the basis  of  his
       findings and on the basis that the decision of 2nd March 2012 has not
       been in accordance with the law.

    7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
       but this was refused in a determination of Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
       and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E  Grant  dated  23rd  October  2012.
       Applications to the Upper Tribunal and  Court  of  Appeal  to  obtain
       permission to appeal further were refused.

    8. On 7th May 2013 the Secretary of State made a new  decision  refusing
       the appellant's application for a permanent residence  card;  and  on
       21st May 2013 the appellant appealed once  again  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. A further  supplemental  reasons  for  refusal  letter  was
       issued on 2nd  July  2013.  The  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Crawford in a determination promulgated on 31st  March
       2014.

    9. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds
       that Judge Crawford erred:

          i. in finding that Regulation 492/2011 applies to the appellant

         ii. in considering the appellant to have been anything other  than
             a temporary migrant at the material times

        iii. by allowing the appeal under the immigration rules

         iv. in concluding that the respondent should  have  exercised  her
             discretion in the appellant's favour

          v. in failing when assessing proportionality under article  8  to
             have any or adequate regard to the  public  interest  in  firm
             immigration control

         vi. in failing expressly to weigh the competing interests or  give
             adequate reasons for concluding that the  appellant's  removal
             would be disproportionate

   10. Permission to appeal against the determination of Judge Crawford  was
       granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJG White on 14th  May  2014  on
       all grounds. The respondent does not, however, now pursue ground (i).



   11. The matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. It was accepted by both parties that there
       were two substantive issues. Firstly whether there was  an  error  of
       law in allowing the appeal under EU law (with reference to  paragraph
       289A of the  Immigration  Rules  by  way  of  the  non-discrimination
       provisions Article 7(2) of Regulation 492/2011) and secondly  whether
       there was an error of law in allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8
       ECHR.

   12. It was agreed that to the  extent  Judge  Crawford  had  allowed  the
       appeal simply under the  Immigration  Rules  or  on  the  basis  that
       discretion  should  have  been  exercised  to  grant  the   appellant
       indefinite leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules this  was
       in error, although the appellant maintained  any  such  legal  errors
       were immaterial as she was entitled  to  succeed  under  EU  law  (as
       outlined above) and under Article 8 ECHR.

Submissions

   13. Mr Palmer set out his submission in a skeleton argument and  in  oral
       submissions. In summary he argues as follows.

   14. As a matter of principle it had not been  right  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal because there was  no  right
       of permanent residence provided to a durable  partner  under  any  EU
       regulation or directive; because it would mean that the appellant had
       a more secure status than Mr Schrader held or  had ever  achieved  in
       circumstances where she was deriving her status from him; and because
       the appellant would be getting a better right than  a  third  country
       national spouse of an EU national who  was  the  victim  of  domestic
       violence  would  achieve  under  Article  13(2)  of   the   Directive
       2004/38/EC. These  issues  all  indicate  that  the  outcome  of  the
       determination of Judge Crawford cannot be right.

   15. It was accepted that in this instance (and in this case  only  as  it
       would be the intention of the Secretary of State to  strongly  oppose
       any similar finding being made in the future) we must start from  the
       finding of Judge Ruth that Article 7(2) of  Regulation  492/2011  did
       provide a social advantage such that the appellant  was  entitled  to
       potentially use paragraph 289A of the Immigration  Rules.  Mr  Palmer
       submitted that it  is  notable  that  efforts  by  the  appellant  to
       persuade the higher courts that the First-tier Tribunal ought to have
       determined whether the appellant did in fact qualify under  paragraph
       289A rather than remit the matter to  the  Secretary  of  State  were
       unsuccessful. To this extent there must  be  some  discretion  to  be
       exercised by the Secretary of State in the application  of  paragraph
       289A of the Immigration Rules otherwise  the  Upper  Tribunal  and/or
       Court of Appeal would have allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on  this
       point.

   16. Further it is to be noted that the idea of equal treatment  and  non-
       discrimination in Community law is to put the EU worker in  the  same
       position as a British citizen worker whilst they are in the UK.  Such
       a worker will  however  never  be  the  same  position  in  terms  of
       residence rights as British citizens  because  British  citizens  can
       never be deported. In this sense it is not a provision that can  give
       or equalise residence rights.

   17. Mr Palmer submitted that while  Judge  Crawford's  finding  that  the
       appellant and Mr Schrader had intended to remain permanently  in  the
       UK was open to him, he erred in law  when  he  found  that  this  was
       sufficient to say that the appellant qualified under  paragraph  289A
       of the Immigration Rules. Mr Schrader did not have the  legal  status
       of permanent residence in EU law so should  not  have  been  seen  as
       equivalent to a person present and settled here. The appeal could not
       succeed under the Immigration Rules in these circumstances.

   18. Mr Palmer did, however accept, that references to specific periods of
       leave within 298A would have necessarily to be adapted  to  give  the
       provision meaning in the context of EU law.

   19. Mr Palmer argued further that Mr Schrader's EU residence  permit  did
       not give him the same status as a person  with  indefinite  leave  to
       remain who was settled in the UK.  Those  with  indefinite  leave  to
       remain will always be allowed to remain  bar  proceedings  to  deport
       them. Mr Schrader might have been someone who intended to qualify for
       permanent residence but he had not got to that point. To get  to  the
       point of an expectation of permanent residence  the  appellant  would
       have had to remain the partner of Mr Schrader for five years  and  he
       would have had to have remained in the UK  exercising  Treaty  rights
       for this period. This might thus  have  never  been  achieved  as  Mr
       Schrader's plans might  have  changed:  he  might  have  returned  to
       Germany for instance.  As a result the appellant,  as  Mr  Schrader's
       partner, did not have the same quality of expectation as  the  spouse
       or partner of someone with indefinite leave to remain who expects  an
       entitlement to remain in the UK. It was this quality  of  expectation
       which led to the Secretary of State formulating the domestic violence
       immigration rule at paragraph 289A.

   20. Other temporary migrants  do  not  get  indefinite  leave  under  the
       Immigration Rules if  their  marriages  break  down  for  reasons  of
       domestic violence for this policy reason. They know  that  they  will
       not remain in the UK if their relationship breaks down, and so do not
       have the same quality of expectation to be settled  in  the  UK.  The
       appellant's situation was comparable  to  those  of  other  temporary
       migrants.  It cannot be said that it was discriminatory or indirectly
       discriminatory that Mr  Schrader  did  not  get  permanent  residence
       immediately as this is simply part of the scheme of EU law.

   21. Mr Buley argued that the consequence  of  the  finding  of  a  social
       advantage is that the Secretary of State should have  approached  the
       case on the basis that paragraph 298A was to be applied by analogy as
       though the appellant was the partner of a British Citizen,  and  that
       it was incorrect to submit that the proper comparison  was  to  treat
       the appellant as though she was the partner of a third country person
       settled here.  He submitted that the correct force of Article 7(2) of
       Regulation 492/2011 is to ensure that the EU national  has  the  same
       social advantages as a British citizen. This was what was done by the
       ECJ in Netherlands v Reed Case 59/85. The comparison in Netherlands v
       Reed is between the treatment of the national of the  home  EU  state
       and the national of the other member state of the EU (see Netherlands
       v Reed at [7]).

   22. Mr Buley's central  argument  leading  to  the  conclusion  that  the
       appellant was entitled under paragraph 289A of the Immigration  Rules
       was that the proper comparator was  an  ordinarily  resident  British
       citizen worker. As Mr Schrader did not plan to leave immediately  and
       was here for the meanwhile, as was found factually to be the case  by
       Judge Crawford, then he was in  the  comparable  positon  of  such  a
       British citizen. Mr Schrader was  entitled  to  bring  his  unmarried
       partner to the UK as was a  British  citizen  worker,  and  was  also
       entitled to the same protections to remain in the UK for that  spouse
       in circumstances of domestic violence via Article 7(2) of  Regulation
       492/2011.

   23. In reply Mr Palmer, submitted that paragraph 298A does not  apply  to
       all British citizen workers; for example those employed by  UK  based
       employers but seconded to work for a number of  years  in  Dubai.  On
       that basis, there would be no  discrimination  in  not  applying  the
       provision to the appellant.

Discussion

   24. The parameters within which this  appeal  is  to  be  considered  are
       somewhat artificial. They flow from the finding of Judge Ruth in  the
       First-tier that there was a  social  advantage  for  the  appellant's
       former partner,  Mr  Schrader  such  that  she  is  entitled  to  the
       application to her of paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules.

   25. Article 7 (2) of Regulation No 492/2011 provides that a worker who is
       a national of a Member state shall enjoy  the  same  social  and  tax
       advantages as national workers.  It is  not  in  doubt  that  at  the
       relevant time, Mr Schrader was a worker or  that  in  this  case  the
       social advantage is  the  applicability  of  paragraph  289A  to  the
       partner of a British Citizen, or more correctly,  a  person  "present
       and settled here".

   26. The essential difference between  the  parties  in  relation  to  the
       application of EU law is the question of the correct  comparator  for
       Mr Schrader. Two alternatives are proposed:

       (i)  Mr Schrader's position must be compared with that of  a  foreign
       national who has indefinite leave to remain (the Secretary of State's
       position); and

       (ii)  Mr Schrader's position must be compared with a national of  the
       home EU state, that is, the  UK  and  thus  a  British  citizen  (the
       appellant's position).

   27. Paragraph 289A applies to the partners of those "present and  settled
       in the United Kingdom" a category which is  not  limited  to  British
       citizens.  The phrase is defined in paragraph 6  of  the  Immigration
       Rules as follows:-

          "present and settled in the UK"  means that the  person  concerned
          is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  at  the  time  that  an
          application under these Rules is made,  is physically present here
          or is coming here with or to join the  applicant  and  intends  to
          make the UK their home with the applicant if  the  application  is
          successful.

   28. "Settled" in this context is  defined  in  section  33  (2A)  of  the
       Immigration Act 1971 which provides that:

          Subject to section  8(5)  above,  references  to  a  person  being
          settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  references  to  his  being
          ordinarily resident [emphasis added]there  without  being  subject
          under the immigration laws to any restriction on  the  period  for
          which he may remain

   29. "Settled" therefore does not equate with having indefinite  leave  to
       remain. When applied to a British citizen, it means  only  that  that
       person is ordinarily resident in the UK. On that basis the cohort  of
       individuals who are "present and settled" includes probably most (but
       not all) British Citizens, and a number of nationals of other states,
       including those EEA nationals entitled to permanent residence.

   30. It follows from the qualification of being "ordinarily resident" that
       a British Citizen who, in Mr Palmer's example,  lives  and  works  in
       Dubai, and who comes here for a holiday with a  non-British  (or  EU)
       spouse would not fall to be treated as present and settled  here.  It
       is possible that such a person, if employed by a business established
       in London is a worker under British and EU law,  but  not  ordinarily
       resident here.  To that extent, Mr Palmer is correct in stating  that
       not  all  British  workers  would  benefit  from   paragraph   289A's
       applicability. But that is not the issue under  Regulation  492/2011;
       it would not be a comparison of like with like and, such a submission
       is not properly compatible with the finding of a social advantage. It
       is not in doubt that Mr Schrader was a worker and ordinarily resident
       here, and thus the comparator is a British Citizen worker in the same
       situation of residence.

   31. We accept that "settled" in the  context  of  an  EU  national  means
       having permanent residence, but to restrict the social  advantage  of
       the applicability of paragraphs 289A to those who  hold  that  status
       would be to impose an additional requirement which would not apply to
       a British worker in the  same  position  as  Mr  Schrader;  that  is,
       ordinarily resident within the territory of the UK. We note also that
       "ordinary residence" does not connote any specific length of time.

   32. The Upper Tribunal who considered this issue  on  appeal  from  Judge
       Ruth had, like him, decided it was appropriate for the  Secretary  of
       State as primary decision-maker to consider the matter  prior  to  an
       appeal  as  there  had  been  absolutely  no  consideration   of   an
       entitlement  under  paragraph  289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules   in
       accordance with Article 7(2) of Regulation 492/2011  at  that  point.
       The only question for the Secretary of State in this  reconsideration
       was whether the status of the appellant's partner entitled her to the
       benefit of paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules in  the  light  of
       this being deemed a social advantage to which a German worker, like a
       British worker, was entitled: there was  no  additional  issue  of  a
       discretion.

   33. For the reasons set out above, we  consider  that  the  appellant  is
       entitled to the benefit of paragraphs 289A as though she had been the
       partner of British citizen worker present and settled in the UK. This
       is because she is someone who meets, in essence, all the requirements
       of a person seeking indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
       as a victim of domestic violence under this provision.  The  question
       then arises as to the extent of the respondent's  discretion  flowing
       from the use of the word "may" in paragraph 289B, which  states  that
       the Secretary of State may grant indefinite if all  the  requirements
       at paragraph 289A are met.

   34. The appellant does not, fall within the provisions of the Immigration
       Rules as she is entitled simply to an equivalent "social  advantage".
       Any issue of the discretion flowing from 289B of the Rules is  not  a
       matter on which we can make a decision as the Secretary of State must
       in any case consider what equivalent leave to grant the appellant, in
       accordance with her rights under EU  law  as  established  above.  In
       considering what permission to remain  to  grant,  the  Secretary  of
       State is constrained by the fact that the provisions of 289A are, for
       the reasons set out above, met. In a case  of  "social  advantage  it
       must always be for the Secretary of State to consider how  ultimately
       to comply with EU  law  and  thereby  provide  an  equivalent  social
       advantage to the EU worker.

Conclusions - Error of Law & Remaking

   35. In light of the above, we agree that Judge Crawford did err in law in
       allowing the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  in  his  decision.
       Clearly the appellant did not qualify on a domestic  law  application
       of the Immigration Rules. The matter was  either  to  be  allowed  or
       dismissed under EU law on the basis that the  decision  breached  the
       appellant's rights under the Community Treaties or because  it  would
       be a breach of the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  ECHR  if  the
       appellant is removed from the UK.

   36. Further, to the extent that Judge Crawford suggested at paragraph  32
       of his determination that he was allowing the  appeal  as  discretion
       should have been exercised differently  outside  of  the  Immigration
       Rules and EU law then he was  acting  beyond  his  jurisdiction,  and
       erred in law

   37. Judge Crawford correctly starts the "Findings and Reasons" section of
       his determination with the un-appealed finding of Judge Ruth  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal that paragraph  289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
       confers a social advantage which  Mr  Schrader  was  entitled  to  by
       application of the principle of equal treatment at  Article  7(2)  of
       Regulation 492/2011.  Whilst  this  might  seem  initially  to  be  a
       surprising conclusion it is accepted by all to be the starting  point
       for this appeal, and we do not investigate its merits.

   38. Paragraph 289A(ii) of the Immigration Rules allows for  an  unmarried
       partner to be granted indefinite leave to remain if she is the victim
       of domestic violence; and if she has been  granted  an  extension  of
       stay for a period of 2 years as an unmarried partner; and if  she  is
       the partner of a person present and settled. The Secretary  of  State
       accepts that the appellant is able to meet all the  requirements  bar
       that her partner is present and settled.

   39. We  find that the correct approach  is  to  compare  Mr  Schrader,  a
       settled and present EU worker who  is  getting  the  benefit  of  the
       "social advantage" of domestic violence protection for his  unmarried
       partner, with a settled and present British  citizen  worker  because
       this is what is said must happen at Article 7 of Regulation 492/2011.
       According to this provision Mr Schrader: "shall enjoy the same social
       and tax advantages as national workers."  It follows  logically  from
       this that Mr Schrader gets this social advantage  as  a  settled  and
       present worker because a settled and present working British  citizen
       would undoubtedly  have  this  protection  for  his  unmarried  third
       country national partner who had been granted permission to remain in
       the UK as such by the Secretary of State. Issues of  the  equivalence
       of Mr Schrader and third country nationals with indefinite  leave  to
       remain then simply do not arise as EU law does not require him to  be
       put in the same position as such a person.

   40. Mr Palmer has argued that the  Secretary  of  State  has  some  extra
       element of discretion in the application of  paragraph  289A  of  the
       Immigration Rules which was acknowledged by Judge Ruth in the  First-
       tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal and the Court of  Appeal  in  their
       finding that  the  matter  should  return  for  a  decision  applying
       paragraph 289A to the facts  of  this  case  prior  (should  that  be
       necessary) to the Tribunal determining the matter.

   41.  We  find  that  whilst  member  states  have  a  discretion  in  the
       facilitation of the entry of other family members in accordance  with
       Article 3(2) of directive 2004/38/EC this does not mean that they are
       not to be treated equally in terms of  non-discrimination  provisions
       once they have been found to be entitled to a  residence  card  by  a
       member state (as happened with this appellant) or (as here) have been
       found to be entitled to a social advantage and thus are placed within
       the ambit of EU law.

   42. The Upper Tribunal who considered  Judge  Ruth's  decision  found  it
       procedurally correct for the matter to be  first  considered  by  the
       Secretary of State as no  decision  had  been  taken  on  this  issue
       whatsoever on an application of  UKUS  (discretion  when  reviewable)
       [2012] UKUT 000307. The Court of Appeal did not find  it  appropriate
       to grant permission to appeal on this point:  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Stanley
       Burnton said in the Court of Appeal in refusing permission to  appeal
       on 29th January 2013 it was not unarguable  that  the  First-tier  or
       Upper  Tribunal  should  have  considered  the  application  of   the
       appellant's facts to paragraph 289A of the Immigration  Rules  rather
       than remitting it back  but  there  was  no  point  of  principle  or
       practice or compelling reason to do this rather  than  obtain  a  new
       decision from the Secretary of State.

   43. As with the application of Article 7(2) of Regulation 492/2011 to the
       appellant's facts it is not the task before us to go  back  into  the
       merits of the decision to remit to the Secretary of State rather than
       for the First-tier Tribunal to have proceeded with applying the facts
       to paragraph 289A without first having the benefit of  the  Secretary
       of State's decision on the matter.

   44. The Secretary of State now concedes that, for  the  purpose  of  this
       case, and contrary to the case she put in the  Refusal  Letter,  that
       the claimant is entitled to the benefit of the  social  advantage  as
       found by Judge Ruth. In light of this, and on consideration  of  this
       background and the issue of discretion that this  raises  we  do  not
       find that it was open to the Secretary of State on reconsideration of
       this matter to refuse to grant  the  appellant  leave  equivalent  to
       indefinite leave to remain given her ability to  meet  the  essential
       requirements of paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules.

   45.  The  appellant  can  show  that  she  can  meet  all  the  essential
       requirements of that paragraph and no general grounds for refusal are
       made out. There would therefore appear to be no  rational  basis  for
       the Secretary of State not to  grant  equivalent  residence  to  that
       offered by the Immigration  Rules  unless  there  is  further  policy
       guidance relevant to the applicability of paragraph  289A  which  has
       not been drawn to our attention. It is however for the  Secretary  of
       State ultimately  to  decide  what  equivalent  leave  to  grant  the
       appellant.

   46. As Mr Buley has indicated the  fact  that  the  Directive  2004/38/EC
       provides at Article 13(2) married partners with a protection which is
       not  the  equivalent  to  settlement  does  not  make  this   outcome
       incorrect. If  Judge  Ruth  is  right  about  the  interpretation  of
       domestic violence protection being  a  social  advantage,  which  the
       respondent says  is  not  accepted  for  future  cases  and  so  will
       presumably be litigated further in the future, then this  will  apply
       equally to married partners and there will be no differential  impact
       for these two groups.  In  any  event,  the  rights  granted  by  the
       Directive do not preclude greater rights being granted by the  effect
       of domestic law.

   47. If the appellant obtains leave  equivalent  to  indefinite  leave  to
       remain via this route earlier than Mr Schrader  could  have  obtained
       permanent residence in EU law then this is simply by operation  of  a
       provision which  in  almost  all  cases  foreshortens  the  route  to
       settlement of the unmarried partner. In almost all cases the  partner
       who has been a victim of domestic violence will get settlement sooner
       than they had reason to expect by the misfortune of being a victim of
       domestic violence. This does not contravene  the  principle  that  EU
       nationals should get at least equal rights with others as the fact of
       the appellant getting permission to remain, which may  be  indefinite
       or permanent, in this way has been deemed to be a social advantage to
       Mr Schrader, the EU national.  Mr Schrader is in no way disadvantaged
       by this but chose, as the British citizen worker might have  done  to
       leave the UK and work elsewhere. Like the British citizen  worker  he
       is also free to return and  acquire  permanent  residence  if  he  so
       wishes.

   48. We have concerns at the  way  in  which  Judge  Crawford  dealt  with
       Article  8  ECHR  in  his  analysis  of  the  public   interest   and
       proportionality but in the light of our finding  that  the  appellant
       was entitled to succeed in her appeal under EU law we find  that  any
       legal errors were ultimately not material and thus that the  decision
       need not be remade although it has been set aside.



Decision

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error on a point of law.

    2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    3. The appeal is remade allowing the appeal under EU law as the decision
       of the Secretary of State breached the rights of the appellant  under
       the Community Treaties.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
15th December 2014

