
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18250/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2016                                |On 05 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DOVE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              PREM THAPA MAGAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Sadiq, Government Legal Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nepal, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  7  May  2013  to
    refuse his application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK as  the
    dependant relative of a person present and settled in  the  UK.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana  dismissed  the  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 27 May 2014. Permission to appeal was refused twice  and
    the  second  decision  was  challenged  by  way  of   judicial   review
    proceedings which led to  a  fresh  decision  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal. The appeal was considered by a panel comprising the  President,
    Mr Justice McCloskey, and Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb who, at a  hearing
    on 10 February 2016, set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    aside for the reasons set out in the panel's written decision which  is
    appended hereto.

The proceedings

 2. The appeal came before the instant panel so that the decision could  be
    remade. We heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his  father
    through an interpreter  having  ensured  that  the  witnesses  and  the
    interpreter understood each other. We heard submissions from  Mr  Sadiq
    and Mr Ball and we reserved our decision.

The Law

 3. Mr Ball accepted that the appellant does not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules therefore the appeal proceeded on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 4. Article 8 states:

        "1. Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

 5. It is for the respondent to demonstrate that any interference with  the
    right to private and family life under Article 8 is in accordance  with
    the law, corresponds to a pressing social need and is proportionate  to
    the legitimate aim pursued.

The background

 6. The background to this appeal is set out in  the  appellant's  SET  (F)
    application form, witness statements  and  in  his  oral  evidence.  In
    summary  the  basis  of  his  claim  is  that  the  appellant's  father
    (hereinafter the sponsor) joined the British Army Gurkha Brigade  on  2
    November 1972 and was discharged on 25 March 1988 at which stage he had
    reached the rank of Corporal. The sponsor's  father  and  father-in-law
    also served as Gurkhas as does his son-in-law. The appellant  was  born
    on 2 December 1976 in Nepal. He is the eldest child and has  a  younger
    sister and two younger brothers. Whilst he served with the Gurkhas  the
    sponsor was away from home leaving his wife to look after the family.

 7. The sponsor and his wife came to the UK as a visitor  on  22  September
    2006 to visit their daughter who lives in the UK. They applied for  and
    were granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  9  October  2006.  The
    sponsor's youngest son who was a minor at that time joined the  sponsor
    in the UK. Their other son was working in the US and remains there. The
    sponsor and his wife and  youngest  son  were  naturalised  as  British
    citizens on 17 December 2013.

 8. The appellant remained in Nepal. He says that he remained at the family
    home which is  in  a  very  remote  area.  His  parents  supported  him
    financially through money transfers  and  through  the  Hundi  transfer
    system. He said in oral evidence that they spoke on the telephone every
    other day. He married on 28 August 2008. He came to  the  UK  with  his
    wife on 31 August 2010 when he was 33 years old, his wife had a student
    visa and he came as her dependant. However their  marriage  broke  down
    and they were divorced on 31 January 2012. He says that he has remained
    living with his parents since then and they  continue  to  support  him
    emotionally and financially.

 9. The sponsor said at paragraphs 6-7 of his  witness  statement  dated  7
    March 2014 that at the time of his discharge there  was  no  settlement
    policy in place for Gurkhas and their dependant families  and  that  he
    did not therefore have the opportunity to apply for settlement  in  the
    UK with his family at the time of his discharge. He said that he  would
    have applied for settlement along with his family if there had  been  a
    policy allowing Gurkha veterans and their families to settle in the  UK
    after service in the UK.

10. The respondent refused the appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    she was not satisfied that he met the  requirements  of  paragraph  319
    with reference to 317 of the Immigration Rules  nor  did  he  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE which sets out  the  requirements  for
    leave to remain on the basis of private life  or  Appendix  FM  dealing
    with  family  life.  The  respondent  decided  that  there   were   not
    exceptional circumstances to justify  the  grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.

Discussion and conclusions

11. It was  accepted  by  Mr  Ball  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to  family  and  private
    life. In the circumstances of this case we are satisfied that there are
    arguably good grounds for considering the appeal  under  Article  8  as
    there may be compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under
    the Rules.

12. We therefore follow the guidance given by Lord Bingham in R v  SSHD  ex
    parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 (17);

         "... In a case where removal is resisted in reliance on Article  8,
         these questions are likely to be:
         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
         (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

13. The first question is therefore whether the appellant  has  established
    that he has a private or family life in  the  UK.  We  asked  Mr  Sadiq
    whether, in the light of his  residence  in  the  UK  since  2010,  the
    Secretary of State  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  established  a
    private life in the UK. He took instructions and advised the panel that
    she did not.

14. In assessing family life between the adult appellant and his parents we
    have considered the relevant case law. In Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31, which concerned an adult's relationship  with  his  mother  and
    adult siblings, at paragraph 14 of the decision Sedley LJ  referred  to
    the following passage from S v United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196:

           "Generally, the  protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it   extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the  circumstances  of  the  particular
           case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year old
           son in the present  case,  would  not  necessarily  acquire  the
           protection of Article 8 of the Convention  without  evidence  of
           further elements of dependency, involving more than  the  normal
           emotional ties."

15. Sedley LJ accepted the submission that 'dependency' was not limited  to
    economic dependency, at [17].  He said:

           "But if dependency is read down  as  meaning  "support"  in  the
           personal  sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the   Strasbourg
           jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the  word
           "support", then it represents in my view the irreducible minimum
           of what family life implies."

16. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160
    (IAC) (Ghising No1) the Tribunal's findings were summarised in the head
    note as follows:

        "1. A review of the jurisprudence discloses that there is no general
             proposition that Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
             Rights can never be engaged when the family life it is  sought
             to  establish  is  between  adult  siblings  living  together.
             Rather than applying a  blanket  rule  with  regard  to  adult
             children, each case should be analysed on its  own  facts,  to
             decide whether or not family life exists, within  the  meaning
             of Article 8(1).  Whilst some  generalisations  are  possible,
             each case is fact-sensitive.

         2. The historic injustice and its consequences suffered  by  former
             members of the Brigade of Gurkhas are to be taken into account
             when assessing proportionality  under  Article  8(2)  but  the
             'historical wrong' was not as severe as that perpetrated  upon
             British  Overseas  Citizens  and  carries  substantially  less
             weight.   Because  of  the  exceptional  position  of   Gurkha
             veterans, and their families, the Secretary of State has  made
             special provision for  their  entry  to  the  UK  outside  the
             Immigration Rules as an  acknowledgment  that  it  is  in  the
             public interest to remedy the injustice.

         3.  Given  that  the  Gurkhas  are  Nepali  nationals,  it  is  not
             inherently unfair or  in  breach  of  their  human  rights  to
             distinguish between Gurkha veterans,  their  wives  and  minor
             children on the one hand, who will generally be given leave to
             remain, and adult children on the  other,  who  will  only  be
             given leave  to  remain  in  exceptional  circumstances.   The
             scheme that the Secretary of State has developed is capable of
             addressing the historical  wrong  and  contains  within  it  a
             flexibility  that,  in  most  cases,  will  avoid  conspicuous
             unfairness."

17. In Gurung & Ors, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 the
    Court of Appeal said that the correct approach  to  the  assessment  of
    family life is as follows:


           "45.     Ultimately, the question whether an individual enjoys
           family life is one of fact and depends on a careful
           consideration of all the relevant facts of the particular case.
           Ms McGahey submits, therefore, that the case law, both domestic
           and European, can be of only limited assistance. She (rightly)
           accepts that, as a matter of law, in some instances an adult
           child (particularly if he does not have a partner or children of
           his own) may establish that he has a family life with his
           parents. It all depends on the facts.


           46.     We think that the cases are of some assistance to
           decision-makers and tribunals who have to decide these issues.
           Paras 50 to 62 of the determination of the UT
           in Ghising contains a useful review of some of the jurisprudence
           and the correct approach to be adopted. It concludes at para 62
           that "the different outcomes in cases with superficially similar
           features emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1) is
           highly fact-sensitive". The correctness of the UT's review has
           not been doubted before us. We endorse it. We doubt whether any
           useful purpose is served by further general elaboration."

18. We therefore consider the particular facts in this  case  in  assessing
    whether the relationship between the appellant and his parents  amounts
    to family life under Article 8. We  must  consider  whether  there  are
    further elements of dependency involving more than the normal emotional
    ties and whether there is committed real or effective  support  between
    the appellant and his parents.

19. Mr Sadiq relied in the apparent conflict in the appellant's evidence in
    relation to his contact with his parents between 2006 and 2010 in  that
    he did not mention prior to his oral  evidence  that  he  had  been  in
    contact with them by telephone every other day.

20. Mr Sadiq submitted that there is no emotional dependence in  this  case
    and he highlighted the following factors in support of his submission:

     . When his parents entered the UK in 2006 they left the  appellant  in
       Nepal;

     . There is very little in this relationship over and above the  normal
       emotional ties in particular during the period between 2006 and 2010
       given the lack of evidence in  relation  to  financial  support  and
       ongoing contact and the conflict between  the  appellant's  evidence
       and the contents of the  divorce  petition  which  states  that  the
       appellant's family did not support the appellant's wife;

     . The fact that the appellant married  a  Nepalese  national  and  his
       parents did not attend the wedding and there is as  suggestion  that
       he did not inform his parents that  he  was  getting  married  which
       indicates that he was living independently;

     . The appellant entered the UK four years after  his  parents  as  the
       dependant of his spouse who had leave to enter as a Tier  4  student
       and at that time he was 33 years old;

     . The appellant is a healthy adult male;

     . The witness statements made no reference  to  the  appellant  living
       with his parents since he entered the UK;

     . The appellant worked as a cleaner in the UK for around 2  years  and
       supported his wife during that time;

     . There is little evidence of any  family  life  over  and  above  the
       normal emotional ties since  the  divorce  and  little  evidence  of
       financial dependency over  and  above  what  would  be  expected  in
       Nepalese culture;

     . It is Nepalese culture that the youngest son  is  expected  to  look
       after elderly parents and the sponsor's youngest son lives with  his
       parents in the UK.

21. Mr Sadiq made no submissions in relation to private life  but  accepted
    that he had an uphill struggle  arguing  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established a private life in the UK.

22. Mr Ball submitted that  Article  8(1)  is  engaged.  He  relied  on  AG
    (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801 and submitted that  the  threshold
    for engagement of Article 8 is not high. He referred to paragraph 56 of
    the judgement in Ghising (No1) where the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    judgment in Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in the past
    and ought to be read in  the  light  of  subsequent  decisions  of  the
    domestic and Strasbourg courts. He relied on the words of Sedley LJ  at
    paragraph 17 of the judgement  in  Kugathas  where  he  said  that  the
    'irreducible minimum' of family life is dependency amounting  to  real,
    committed or effective  support.  He  submitted  that  family  life  is
    dynamic and is not set in stone. He submitted that it may exist at  one
    point in time and not at another and it may reengage. He submitted that
    the issue is whether there is family life today.  In  this  context  he
    submitted that the main point put forward by the respondent was alleged
    differences between what was said earlier and what  was  said  in  oral
    evidence but the evidence at the hearing was  simply  amplification  of
    the same material. He submitted that the appellant's wife said  in  the
    divorce petition that she was not supported by the appellant's  parents
    and that this is consistent with the appellant's evidence that  he  was
    working from 2010 until 2012 and is not inconsistent with the existence
    of a current family life.

23. Mr Ball submitted that Article 8  (1)  is  engaged  for  the  following
    reasons:

     . The appellant has lived all of his life with his mother  apart  from
       the period from 2006-2010 during which  period  he  was  in  regular
       contact and was financially dependant on his parents;

     . Cultural factors which mean that  there  is  an  particularly  close
       family life in Nepali families;

     . The family are from  a  remote  area  and  growing  up  in  isolated
       conditions led to them being a very close unit;

     . The effects of the sponsor's peripatetic  lifestyle  were  that  the
       appellant's mother was left as a single  parent  under  considerable
       strain raising children leading to a particularly close bond between
       the appellant and his mother;

     . There was emotional  dependency  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
       marriage breakdown as described in the witness statements;

     . There was ongoing financial dependency.

24. Mr Ball submitted that the appellant has established a private life  in
    the UK. He accepted  that  if  it  is  found  that  the  appellant  has
    established only  a  private  life  a  more  nuanced  approach  to  the
    assessment of the historic injustice in  the  proportionality  exercise
    would be required.

25. We accept that there is a lack of evidence between 2006 and  2010.  The
    appellant has not  established  that  there  was  ongoing  contact  and
    dependency during this period. However we accept Mr  Ball's  submission
    that family life is dynamic.  Family life evolves and, whilst the  fact
    that dependence did not exist at a particular time in the past  may  be
    relevant to as assessment of family life, it is  not  determinative  of
    the  existence  of  family  life  at   present.   In   the   particular
    circumstances of this case we accept that before 2006  and  since  2012
    the appellant has been financially and  emotionally  dependant  on  his
    parents. We accept on the basis of  the  witness  statements  that  the
    appellant's parents have offered him emotional  and  financial  support
    during the stressful period during  and  since  his  divorce.  We  take
    account of the factors set out by Mr Ball,  in  particular  the  strong
    bonds between the appellant and his mother developed as a result of the
    isolation of their home  and  his  father's  absence.  We  accept  that
    cultural factors and  the  appellant's  divorce  mean  that  there  are
    currently very strong bonds between the appellant and his  parents.  We
    accept that the appellant has established on the  particular  facts  of
    this case that the bond between him and his parents  constitutes  real,
    effective  or  committed  support.  We  find  that  the  appellant  has
    established that he has family life  within  Article  8  (1)  with  his
    parents. Given his length of residence in the UK we also find that  the
    appellant has established a private life in the UK.

26. We accept that the removal of the appellant would  interfere  with  his
    private  and  family  life  and  that  such  interference  would   have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8. As the decision is in accordance with the Immigration  Rules
    it is in accordance with the law. This brings  us  to  the  fourth  and
    fifth questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar and  an  assessment  of
    proportionality.

27. Mr Sadiq submitted that the proposed interference is  proportionate  to
    the respondent's legitimate aim of the maintenance of a fair  and  firm
    immigration control. He submitted that it was  established  in  Ghising
    and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT  00567
    (IAC) (Ghising No2) that the burden of proof is not reversed  in  these
    cases. Despite what had been submitted in the skeleton argument  (which
    had not been drafted by him), Mr Ball accepted on the basis of  Ghising
    No 2 that the burden of proof is not reversed in these cases.

28. Mr Sadiq submitted that the historic injustice is a factor which should
    be  weighed  in  the  proportionality  balance  but  that  it  is   not
    determinative and he relied on paragraph 38  of  Gurung.  He  submitted
    that causation must be  established,  that  is  whether,  but  for  the
    Gurkha's inability to settle in the UK, they would  have  come  a  long
    time ago. In other words whether there is a causal  nexus  between  the
    historic injustice and the current situation. He submitted that if  the
    sponsor would not have come earlier then there is no  prejudice  caused
    by the historic injustice. He submitted that the sponsor's evidence  in
    cross-examination was that he only decided to settle in the UK when  he
    entered in 2006, at that stage the appellant would  have  been  29.  He
    submitted that section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 must be considered.  He  referred  to  section  117B  (3)  and
    submitted  that  the  appellant  is  not  financially  independent.  He
    referred to section 117B  (5)  and  submitted  that  any  private  life
    established by the appellant whilst his status was precarious should be
    given little weight. Mr Sadiq further submitted that there is no reason
    why the appellant cannot return to Nepal and get a job there and  could
    relocate within Nepal if necessary.

29. Mr Ball submitted that there is a causal connection in  this  case.  He
    submitted that Mr Sadiq had  asked  the  sponsor  in  cross-examination
    whether he would have come to the UK in 2006, however the relevant time
    for the purposes of assessment of the historic injustice is 1988,  when
    the sponsor was discharged from the Army. He submitted that the sponsor
    had answered that question at paragraph 6 of his witness statement.  He
    submitted that the causal connection is therefore made  good  and  that
    there are no matters over  and  above  the  public  interest  to  weigh
    against the appellant in this case.

30. The head note in Ghising No2  summarises  the  Tribunals'  guidance  in
    assessing the historic injustice where the question of  proportionality
    is reached as follows:


           "(1) In finding that the weight to be accorded to  the  historic
           wrong in Gurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to  be  regarded  as
           less than that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
           British Overseas citizens, the Court of  Appeal  in Gurung  and
           others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or
           BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong  is  to  reverse  or
           otherwise alter the burden of proof that applies  in  Article  8
           proportionality assessments.


           (2) When an Appellant has shown  that  there  is  family/private
           life and the decision made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
           interference with it, the burden lies  with  the  Respondent  to
           show that  a  decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
           Appellants  will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility   of
           adducing evidence that lies within their remit and  about  which
           the Respondent may be unaware).


           (3) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not  the
           burden  of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in   a
           proportionality assessment. The Court held that, as in the  case
           of BOCs, the historic wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-servicemen
           should be given substantial weight.


           (4) Accordingly, where it is found that  Article  8  is  engaged
           and, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would  have  been
           settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily  determine  the
           outcome of  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
           Appellant's favour, where the matters relied on by the Secretary
           of State/ entry clearance officer consist solely of  the  public
           interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.


           (5) It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha (and BOC)
           cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (i) their family
           life engages Article 8(1); and  (ii)  the  evidence  shows  they
           would have come to the United Kingdom with their father, but for
           the injustice that  prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here
           earlier. If the Respondent can point to matters over  and  above
           the public interest in maintaining a  firm  immigration  policy,
           which argue in favour of removal or  the  refusal  of  leave  to
           enter, these matters must be given  appropriate  weight  in  the
           balance in the Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad  immigration
           history and/or criminal behaviour may  still  be  sufficient  to
           outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's side of
           the balance."

31. In considering the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant we note that Mr Sadiq accepted that the historical  injustice
    is a relevant factor to be considered in assessing the  proportionality
    of the Secretary of State's decision.

32. We take account of the sponsor's unchallenged evidence at paragraphs  6
    and 7 of his witness statement and we accept that he would have applied
    for settlement in the UK with his family after his discharge  from  the
    British Army. At that time the appellant would have been  a  minor.  We
    therefore accept that there is a causal  connection  here  between  the
    historic injustice and the current  situation.  But  for  the  historic
    injustice it is likely that the appellant would have come to the UK  to
    settle when he was a minor.  The  respondent  has  not  relied  on  any
    additional factors in this case to be weighed against the appellant. We
    note that the appellant's sister and younger brother live  in  the  UK.
    The appellant lives with his parents and brother. The sponsor  and  his
    wife work and support the appellant. The appellant's  brother  is  also
    working.

33. On the other side of the scales we accept that the appellant  does  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. We have considered  the
    provisions  of  section  117A   and   117B   in   the   assessment   of
    proportionality. We note that the maintenance of effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest. We  note  that  the  appellant  gave
    evidence to us through an interpreter and it is not  clear  whether  he
    can speak English. Whilst there is no evidence that he is in receipt of
    benefits we note that the appellant is not financially  independent  as
    he is supported by his parents. However he has  previously  worked  and
    there is no reason why he cannot do so again.  We attach little  weight
    to any private life  established  whilst  the  appellant's  immigration
    status was precarious.

34. Considering all of these factors and attaching particular weight to the
    historic injustice we conclude that the respondent has not  established
    that the decision to remove the appellant is proportionate to his right
    to enjoy private and family life in the UK.

Decision

The appeal is remade by allowing it on human rights grounds.

No direction for anonymity is made.


Signed                                                        Date: 4 July
2016


A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tier Tribunal


Fee Award
No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                                        Date: 4 July
2016



A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tier Tribunal

ANNEX
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18250/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Decision given orally on 10 February|
|on 10 February 2016                    |2016 and promulgated on             |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |....................................|
|                                       |...                                 |


                                   Before

                 The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb


                                   Between

                              PREM THAPA MAGAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

Appellant:   Mr  Jesurum  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Howe   and   Company
             Solicitors
Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. The origins of this appeal lie in a decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 07 May 2013, whereby the application of the Appellant, a national
    of Nepal, aged  39  years,  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
    dependent relative of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom was refused.

 2. The procedural history thereafter is as follows:

    (a)    By its decision promulgated  on  27  May  2014,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  dismissed  the  ensuing  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

      (b)   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was twice refused.

    (c)    The second of these refusals was challenged  by  an  application
         for judicial review in the Administrative Court.

    (d)    By order dated 06 January 2015 permission to apply for  judicial
         review was granted.

    (e)    The judicial review proceedings were not contested and, by order
         dated 30 January 2015 the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  refusing
         permission to appeal was quashed.


    (f)    By further order of the Upper Tribunal dated 21  May  2015,  the
         Vice-President granted permission to appeal. He stated:

             "Permission is granted in the light of  the  decision  of  the
             High Court in this case.  The parties are  reminded  that  the
             Upper Tribunal's task is that set out in  Section  12  of  the
             2007 Act."

The Secretary of State's Decision

 3. The Appellant was considered to be a person "applying as the  dependent
    relative aged over 18 of your father, a person present and  settled  in
    the United Kingdom". It was acknowledged that the  Appellant's  parents
    had entered the United Kingdom on 22 September 2006, securing the grant
    of indefinite leave to remain one month later.   The Appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom four years later, then aged 33.  The decision  maker
    reasoned:


         "It is considered that you are  a  healthy  educated  man  aged  36
         ......  You have worked  while  in  the  UK  and  [have]  therefore
         demonstrated your capacity to support yourself.  You  were  married
         until January 2012 and this further indicates your capacity to live
         independently from your sponsor ...


         It is therefore believed that you will be capable  of  working  and
         supporting yourself on return to Nepal ....


         Therefore, the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you will be
         living alone outside the United Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
         compassionate circumstances and  mainly  dependent  financially  on
         relatives settled in the United Kingdom."

    On this basis the Appellant's application was refused under Immigration
    Rules 317 and 319.

 4. The decision maker then gave consideration to the second basis  of  the
    Appellant's  claim,  namely  the  Secretary  of   State's   Immigration
    Directorate Instruction ("IDI") entitled "Persons Seeking Settlement on
    Discharge from HM  Forces",  specifically  section  2A  of  chapter  15
    thereof, which was published in December 2012. The decision continues:

         "The purpose has never been that [the IDI] should allow a means  by
         which over aged dependants with no previous attachment  to  the  UK
         may circumvent the Immigration Rules and achieve settlement  solely
         on the basis of being the children of  former  serving  Foreign  or
         Commonwealth members of HM Armed Forces ...."

    The assessment, therefore, was that this did not provide the  Appellant
    with a basis upon which to advance his claim.  Finally, the Appellant's
    claim was considered both within and outwith the framework of the Rules
    and rejected on both bases.  In  this  specific  context  the  decision
    maker stated:


         "Your  legal  representatives  claim   ......    that   there   are
         exceptional circumstances because your father is a  former  Ghurkha
         and you are a central part of the family unit. They claim  that  in
         Nepalese culture an elder child is expected to live in his parents'
         household. They also claim that you remain financially dependent on
         your father.  You also claim that it is  traditional  for  sons  to
         look after their parents when they become elderly."

    Noting that the Appellant's parents were aged 59  and  53  respectively
    and, further, that his sister and brother had been  granted  permission
    to enter the United Kingdom with settlement for the purpose of  joining
    the parents, in 2006, it was considered that these siblings "....  will
    be able to provide support if this eventually becomes necessary".

Decision of the FtT

 5. The core of the appeal was formulated by the  Judge  in  the  following
    terms:

         "The Appellant's central contention .... is that where it  not  for
         the injustice done to his father (a Ghurkha veteran) in  preventing
         him from making an earlier application for settlement upon his army
         discharge, the Appellant would be settled in the United Kingdom."

    The Judge paid particular attention to the Secretary of State's policy,
    as expressed in the IDI (supra). The  following  specific  finding  was
    made:


         "I find that the Respondent correctly applied  the  policy  to  the
         Appellant [sic] circumstances and came to a sustainable  conclusion
         that the Appellant does not satisfy the criteria  set  out  in  the
         policy to be granted settlement rights on a discretionary basis."

    Next, the  decision  adverts  to  an  agreement  between  the  parties'
    representatives  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  proceeding  under
    Article 8 ECHR only.

 6. Continuing, in considering the question of whether family life  existed
    vis-�-vis the Appellant and his parents and adverting to  the  decision
    in Kugathas - v - Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2003]
    INLR 170, the Judge made the following further specific finding:

         "I find that the Appellants and  his  parents'  insistence  at  the
         hearing that the Appellant has never worked and is unable  to  work
         because he has no qualifications is a  fantasy  so  that  they  can
         maintain the myth that he is dependent on his father in order to be
         captured by the Respondent's policy as an adult child dependent  on
         his parents."

    Having noted that the  Appellant  lived  independently  in  Nepal,  was
    married, travelled to the United Kingdom and worked here as a  cleaner,
    the Judge made the further finding:


      "I find that the Appellant can support  himself  in  Nepal  like  his
    father did by farming."

    Next,  the  Judge  pronounced  the  inter-related  findings  that   the
    Appellant has no financial dependency on his parents and that there  is
    no mutual  emotional  dependency  outwith  the  norm.  The  Judge  then
    concluded, in the alternative, that any interference with the right  to
    respect for family life would be underpinned by the legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control and would  be  proportionate,  essentially  on  the
    basis of the findings already noted and taking into account the  factor
    of historic injustice.

Error of Law?

 7. In a thoughtful submission, Mr Jesurum, on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    argued that the FtT had erred in law in two basic respects.  First,  in
    its consideration  of  the  evidence  and  in  certain  findings  made.
    Second, in its conduct of the proportionality exercise.  We identify  a
    series or error of law in the decision of the first  instance  tribunal
    which we enumerate thus.:

      i) The judge conflated two quite separate  questions,  namely  whether
         the Appellant could satisfy the terms of the Secretary  of  State's
         policy and whether the appeal could succeed under Article  8  ECHR,
         in circumstances where the appeal was  presented  under  Article  8
         exclusively.


     ii) The judge's blunt finding  that  the  Appellant  and  his  father's
         assertion in evidence that the Appellant "has never worked  and  is
         unable to work" is  unreasoned  and,  further,  confounded  by  the
         evidence, recorded in the determination,  that  the  Appellant  had
         worked since arriving in the United Kingdom until the expiry of his
         visa.  This is an irrational finding  in  the  Edwards  v  Bairstow
         sense.

    iii) Linked to (ii), the judge made a  related  error  of  substance  in
         summarising the Appellant's  claim  that  "...  he  is  financially
         dependent on [his] father as he has never worked in his  life".  In
         short,  [35]  and  [36]  of  the  determination  are  riddled  with
         confusion.

     iv) The further finding that the  Appellant  has  at  no  time  been  a
         dependant of his father since arriving in  the  United  Kingdom  is
         also irrational, given the clear evidence that the Appellant worked
         during a limited period only and the absence of any  evidence  that
         he had other means of supporting himself.

      v) In the proportionality exercise, the judge failed to  identify  the
         highly important factor, which by  authority  attracts  substantial
         weight, of historic injustice.  The  proportionality  exercise;  is
         manifestly flawed in consequence.

     vi) The judge gave no consideration  whatsoever  to  the  private  life
         dimension of Article 8.

 8. For this combination  of  reasons,  the  decision  of  the  FtT  cannot
    survive.  Ultimately, Mr Jarvis, on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    did not seek to maintain any defence of it.

Decision & Directions

 9. For the reasons and on the grounds elaborated above we  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT.

10. We make the following directions;

     i) The decision of the FtT will be remade in this forum.


    ii) The Appellant's skeleton argument will be served on  the  Secretary
        of State by 16.00hrs on 09 March 2016.


   iii) The Secretary of State's replying skeleton argument will be  served
        by 16.00hrs on 06 April 2016.

    iv) The Appellant's index and paginated  bundle  for  hearing  will  be
        served and filed by 16.00hrs on 20 April 2016.

     v) The  re-hearing  will  take  place  on  the  first  available  date
        thereafter.

11. If it is possible to assemble the same panel of  judges  this  will  be
    done.








                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                    Date:   29 February 2016



