
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18828/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 July 2016                          |On 22 August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RIZWAN WAHEED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bexson (counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of Rizwan Waheed,  who  had
    himself appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State  of  19
    January 2015 to refuse him leave to remain.

 2. Mr Waheed entered the United Kingdom as a student on  2  November  2002
    and his leave was extended by various grants of leave to remain for the
    purposes of study and work until 2 June 2011, when an  application  for
    leave as a highly skilled general migrant was refused;  his  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed and his  appeal  rights  became  exhausted  on  31
    January 2012. He then made the application leading to this appeal on 30
    August 2014.

 3. The Secretary of State refused  his  application  because  it  was  not
    accepted that had acquired ten years of lawful residence in the  United
    Kingdom or that he was an appropriate case for the favourable  exercise
    of discretion given the length of time by which he fell  short  of  the
    requisite decade of lawful residence.

 4. Mr Waheed appealed, whilst recognising  that  he  lacked  the  relevant
    period of residence under the Rules, on the grounds that he had  strong
    connections with this country.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  it  was
    important to bear in mind the impact of the immigration decision on the
    Respondent and his uncle. It was appropriate to give him the benefit of
    "discretion" in light of the matters drawn to the Judge's attention  by
    counsel, who had emphasised  in  submissions  that  but  for  misguided
    advice from a former representative, the Respondent would have acquired
    more than ten years of lawful residence in this country.

 6. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  argued  that  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules had not been identified or considered  and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider the case clearly outside the
    Rules under  the  staged  enquiry  required  by  the  authorities  with
    reference to the appropriate statutory criteria.

 7. Judge Saffer granted permission  to  appeal  on  26  May  2016  on  the
    somewhat  tart  basis  that  the  decision  below  was,  to  his  mind,
    "tediously incompetent", the Judge having failed  to  engage  with  the
    case for the Secretary of State, to analyse what Judge Saffer styled as
    "glaring weaknesses" in Mr  Waheed's  case;  and  having,  in  general,
    ignored the law.

 8. Before me Mr Deller emphasised the strong  wording  of  the  permission
    grant and relied on the grounds of appeal; Ms Bexson,  whilst  formally
    resisting the appeal, wisely made no substantive submissions as to  the
    quality of the reasoning below.

Findings and reasons

 9. Lord Bridge in Save Britain's Heritage v No 1 Poultry Ltd [1991] 1  WLR
    153 stated that:

         "The overriding test must always be: is the Tribunal providing both
         parties with the material which will enable them to know  that  the
         Tribunal has made no error of law in reaching its findings of fact?
         ... A party appearing before a Tribunal is entitled to know, either
         expressly stated by it or inferentially stated, what it is to which
         the Tribunal is addressing its  mind.  In  some  cases  it  may  be
         perfectly obvious without any expressed  reference  to  it  by  the
         Tribunal; in other cases it may not.  Secondly,  the  appellant  is
         entitled to know the basis of fact upon which  the  conclusion  has
         been reached."

10. I do not consider that the  approach  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    legally sustainable. The Secretary of State, as a party to the  appeal,
    and the public, are entitled to expect that the judiciary  will  engage
    with the reasoning of  a  representative  of  the  public  interest  in
    upholding immigration control. However poor  the  decision  subject  to
    appeal may be  considered  to  be,  it  requires  a  minimal  level  of
    engagement  before  the  judicial  decision   properly   respects   the
    separation of powers that is a hallmark of the rule of law.

11. There are no clear findings of fact from which one  can  determine  the
    basis on which the law was  applied.  There  is  no  reference  to  the
    relevant governing  Immigration  Rule,  which  should  have  been  Rule
    276ADE. There is no reference to the statutory criteria within  section
    117B of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by  which
    consideration of human  rights  claims  outside  the  Rules  should  be
    conducted. The beguiling reference to the operation of "discretion"  in
    the Respondent's favour has no apparent legal basis: if the  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded that he had made his case under the Rules or outside
    them by reference to the  protections  afforded  by  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, then he was entitled to his appeal succeeding as  a  matter
    of right, not because of any discretionary consideration.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law.  As there are no lawful relevant findings upon which to build, the
    matter is  suitable  for  re-hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    accordingly remit the appeal to that forum.


Signed:     Date: 28 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
