
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18606/2015
                                                               IA/18607/2015
                                                               IA/18608/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 April 2017                      |On 15 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                   Bibi Parween Busawon (first Appellant)
                    Md. Fawzi Busawon (second Appellant)
                   Bibi Saadiya Busawon (third Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Pascoe of Counsel instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1.  The  Appellants  are  husband  and  wife  and  their   daughter   born
    respectively in  1967,  1977  and  1998.   They  are  all  citizens  of
    Mauritius and entered the United Kingdom  as  visitors  on  1  December
    2007.  They overstayed and on 23 January  2015  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom based on the private and family life which
    each of them had established here.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 2. On 7 May 2015 the Respondent to whom I shall refer as the SSHD, refused
    the application of each of the Appellants.  The applications  had  been
    made at a time when they were unlawfully in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    husband and wife did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules either as  partners  or  as  parents  and  could  not
    benefit from the provisions of Appendix FM Section EX.

 3. The parents did not meet the time requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    of the Immigration Rules and there were no very  significant  obstacles
    to their integration into Mauritius on their return.

 4. The daughter did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM as  a  child.
    Although  she  met  the  age  and  time   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, that SSHD considered  it  would
    be reasonable to expect the daughter to return to  Mauritius  with  her
    parents as a family unit.

 5. In the case of all three Appellants the SSHD  did  not  consider  there
    were any exceptional circumstances which warranted  a  grant  of  leave
    under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 6. On 15 May 2015 each of the Appellants lodged  notice  of  appeal  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are entirely generic to  a  family
    and indeed  ground  8  refers  to  two  children  studying  for  public
    examinations which is clearly in error.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 7. By a decision promulgated on 19 August 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Samimi allowed the daughter's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules by reference to Section EX.1 of Appendix FM and  the  appeals  of
    the parents under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  outside  the
    Rules.  She found the daughter had passed her Level  2  Certificate  in
    Health and Social Care in 2015 and that this  was  the  route  she  had
    chosen towards her fulfilling her aspiration to become a nurse.  At the
    time she was studying for her  Level  3  Certificate.   She  found  the
    daughter satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Rules and additionally fell within the  scope  of  Section  EX.1.   The
    parents had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  their  daughter
    who was a qualifying child for the purpose of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).
    The Judge then went on to the proportionality of the  decision  to  the
    appeal under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules by way of a  brief
    reference to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and reciting the  headnote
    to the judgment in EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 and quoting paragraph 1 of the headnote to Azimi-Moayed and  Others
    (decision affecting children; onwards appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).
     She then concluded (on the totality of the circumstances)  "...  there
    are  factors  that  accumulatively  do  render  the  ...   decision   a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellants".

 8. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on three grounds.  First  that  at
    the date of the hearing the daughter was over the age of 18 and so fell
    outside the scope of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  Second,  the  Judge  had
    adopted  a  child-centred   approach   in   her   assessment   of   the
    reasonableness of return to Mauritius. Third, she  had  not  considered
    the circumstances of the  parents  or  the  wider  public  interest  as
    recognised in the judgment in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

Error of Law Decision

 9. By a decision promulgated on 25 January 2016 I found that there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    while preserving the findings of fact, set the  rest  of  the  decision
    aside.  A copy of that  error  of  law  decision  is  annexed  to  this
    decision.

10. The substantive appeal came before me on 20 April 2017.  Neither  party
    had seen the error of law decision and copies were made and  handed  to
    them.  Ms Pascoe wished to introduce additional evidence  to  show  the
    progress of the third Appellant in her studies.  This showed  that  she
    was on a two year course due to be completed in the summer of 2018  and
    that she was due to sit examinations in the coming  weeks.   Ms  Pascoe
    stated there was no other evidence to submit and the re-hearing  should
    proceed by way of submissions only.  The Appellants were present and  I
    explained the purpose of the hearing and the procedure to  be  adopted.
    By agreement between the parties Mr Nath for the SSHD  made  the  first
    submissions.

Submissions for the SSHD

11. Mr Nath submitted  that  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  had  fully
    addressed the issues of the private and family life of  the  Appellants
    and matters  referred  to  in  Section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  At the date  of  the  application  leading  to  the
    decision under appeal the Appellants did not meet the time requirements
    of the relevant provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.  It
    was  therefore  appropriate  only   to   have   regard   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).

12. The whole family had arrived together on 1 December 2007.   They  claim
    to have sold all their assets in Mauritius but there was no evidence to
    show this.  They had claimed to  fear  violence  from  moneylenders  in
    Mauritius to whom they were indebted but had not made an  asylum  claim
    and had not provided evidence of such indebtedness or  of  any  of  the
    claimed threats from moneylenders.  There was little  evidence  of  any
    strong ties in the United Kingdom save for the  continued  presence  of
    the Appellants as a family unit and the daughter's education.

13. He continued that the provisions of  Section  117B(6)  were  no  longer
    applicable because the daughter was now an adult.  In any event, it was
    not unreasonable for the Appellants to  return  as  a  family  unit  to
    Mauritius where they could continue family life.  Their status  in  the
    United Kingdom had been precarious since 2008.   They  had  arrived  as
    visitors and overstayed.  He referred to paragraph 60 of R (Agyarko)  v
    SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  and  submitted  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences to
    the Appellants as a family unit or each of them such  as  to  make  the
    removal disproportionate.  The appeals should be dismissed.

Submissions for the Appellants

14. Ms Pascoe noted there was no challenge to the facts found by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  At paragraph 5 of her decision she  had  referred
    to oral evidence  of  threats  and  had  made  no  adverse  credibility
    finding.

15. The daughter's application had been made as a  child  although  by  the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing she  was  an  adult.   She  had
    spent more than seven years in the United Kingdom as a  child,  all  of
    which had been in education.

16. She accepted there was a public interest in the proper  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control. In assessing the proportionality of  the
    decision it was necessary to have regard to the matters referred to  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  All three Appellants spoke English.  The
    daughter had said at paragraph 12(i) of her statement  that  she  spoke
    only a few words of Creole.  The family would be self-sufficient in the
    United Kingdom.  The consequences for the daughter if she had to  leave
    the United Kingdom would be unduly  harsh.   She  would  move  into  an
    education system which was very different.  She did not  understand  or
    speak Creole and would be forced to abandon her entire social life  and
    her education.

17. Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act provided that little weight  should  be
    given to a private life established when a person's immigration  status
    is precarious.  There was  no  case  law  on  the  meaning  of  "little
    weight".  The Appellant was in a close-knit family  and  on  return  to
    Mauritius she would have access to a limited network.

18. The test was whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  weighing
    against the public interest or very significant difficulties  would  be
    faced by the Appellants on return.  Ms Pascoe submitted the  daughter's
    circumstances were exceptional  and  on  return  she  would  face  very
    significant difficulties in re-integrating.   Further,  the  Appellants
    should be treated  as  a  family  unit.   The  decision  needed  to  be
    considered in  the  round  and  while  the  reintegration  to  life  in
    Mauritius might be easier for the parents, their daughter was even  now
    a very young adult and she could not fairly be treated separately  from
    her parents outside the family unit.

19. Ms Pascoe accepted there was no documentary  evidence  to  support  the
    claims about  lack  of  accommodation  being  available  or  about  the
    disposal of the family's accommodation or  the  loans  which  they  had
    previously  contracted.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had   heard   oral
    testimony and coupled with the documentary  evidence  had  reached  the
    right decision and the appeal should be allowed.



Further Submissions for the Secretary of State

20. Mr Nath emphasised the importance of the public interest and  that  the
    daughter could not be used as a trump card.   The  burden  was  on  the
    Appellants to show the extent of the difficulties  which  the  daughter
    would face if she had to re-enter the education system in Mauritius and
    whether it would be possible or not for her  to  obtain  an  equivalent
    qualification in Mauritius  to  the  one  towards  which  she  was  now
    working.  The Appellants had failed to discharge that burden of  proof.
    Ms Pascoe interjected that the daughter had been in the United  Kingdom
    since the age of 9 and in education throughout.

Findings and consideration

21. The facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal have been preserved.  The
    only evidence before the Upper Tribunal was to confirm  the  daughter's
    continued attendance on her course and satisfactory progress  to  date,
    although  she  still  has  her  end  of  first  year  exams   to   sit.
    Additionally, there is the fact that the daughter is now a young adult.



22. I have had regard to the learning in EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and PD and Others (Article  8  -  conjoined  family
    claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).

23. The Appellants were granted leave to enter for six months  as  visitors
    on 1 December 2007 and did not bring themselves to the attention of the
    Respondent until 23  January  2015  when  they  made  the  applications
    leading to the decisions currently under appeal.  They are overstayers:
    their immigration  status  has  been  of  the  most  precarious  nature
    throughout.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no positive credibility
    findings about matters which the parent Appellants claimed had happened
    in Mauritius and focussed very much on the  daughter's  position.   The
    daughter was brought to the United Kingdom as a child and no  blame  or
    opprobium can be attached to her on  account  of  her  overstaying  and
    being in breach of immigration control.

24. The parents have not  established  they  would  face  very  significant
    difficulties in re-integrating into Mauritius.   I  accept  that  given
    their long absence from Mauritius they will doubtless face difficulties
    in  re-establishing  themselves  but  I  do  not  consider  that   such
    difficulties which are of their own  making  are  so  significant  that
    their  removal  would  be  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

25. There was no documentary evidence to show the  family  has  been  self-
    sufficient but I accept it has been in receipt of some income from work
    done by one or other or both the parents.   There  was  no  documentary
    evidence of the  facility  of  each  of  the  parents  in  the  English
    language.  At the two hearings before me, it appeared as  if  the  wife
    had a considerably better understanding of English than the husband who
    hardly spoke at all.

26. The daughter has been in education since  her  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom and is currently approaching the halfway  mark  of  a  two-year
    course which she hopes on successful  completion  will  enable  her  to
    commence studies in nursing.  There was no documentary evidence to show
    that  the  completion  of  the  course   without   further   study   or
    qualification would enable  her  to  meet  the  academic  qualification
    requirements to commence nursing studies.

27. The First-tier Tribunal found the daughter had little or no facility in
    "the language".  I take it that this refers to either or both of French
    and Creole.  No differential mention of French is to be  found  in  the
    documentation Tribunal file.  There was no evidence of  a  private  and
    social life  beyond  that  assertion  by  the  Appellants  but  in  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that she enjoys a  social  life  which  is
    based around her schooling and education and  to  that  extent  she  is
    fully integrated into British society.  There  was  no  suggestion  she
    does not enjoy good health or would not seek  to  work  in  her  chosen
    profession upon qualification.

28. Adopting the approach to appeals on grounds of Article 8 summarised  at
    paragraphs 7-12 of EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41, the parents  have
    established a private and family life in the United Kingdom  and  their
    proposed removal would be an interference of such gravity to engage the
    State's obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention.   There
    was no suggestion that the interference  would  be  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with the law and  for  the  legitimate  public  end  of  the
    economic well-being of the State  which  includes  the  maintenance  of
    proper  and  effective  immigration  control.  The  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of removal must depend on the particular  circumstances
    of each case.

29. The parents have no right to remain in the United Kingdom.   They  have
    had little regard to the State's immigration laws.  Leaving  aside  the
    position of their daughter which has come about  as  a  consequence  of
    their failure to comply with the terms of their 2007  leaves  to  enter
    which expired in mid-2008, their  return  to  Mauritius  would  not  be
    unduly harsh or disproportionate to  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.

30. Their daughter has a family life, which on the evidence is  limited  to
    her parents.  They were described as a close-knit family.  She has been
    almost entirely educated here, has now spent more than  half  her  life
    here and is fully integrated into society.  She was a child at the date
    of the application and by the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    was just over a month past her 18th birthday.

31. She is in the middle of a course which is said will give her access  to
    training to  become  a  nurse  which  is  her  ambition.   She  is  not
    responsible for her parents' failure to comply with the terms of  their
    leave to enter.


32. She is now almost 19 years of age and notwithstanding the claimed close-
    knit relationship with her parents, having been educated in the United
    Kingdom she should now be able to look after herself.  Given her
    personal history and present circumstances I find she would face
    sufficient difficulties on return to Mauritius with her parents as to
    make the decision to refuse her further leave disproportionate to the
    State's need to maintain proper immigration control. The Respondent
    might consider limiting her leave to such time as she needs to finish
    the second year of the course she is now pursuing.


33. Taking account of the comments of Lady Hale in Makhlouf v  SSHD  [2016]
    UKSC 59 that children (and the daughter was a  child  at  the  date  of
    application and of the Respondent's decision), must  be  recognised  as
    rights-holders in their own right and not just  as  adjuncts  to  other
    people's rights but that does not mean that their rights are inevitably
    a passport to another person's rights.

34. The consequence is that the appeals of the parents, the first two named
    Appellants, must fail and the appeal of the daughter succeed.

Anonymity

35. There was no request for an anonymity order and for the  reasons  given
    in my error of law decision, no order is made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeals of the first two Appellants are dismissed on  human  rights
grounds.
     The appeal of the third named Appellant  is  allowed  on  human  rights
grounds.
     Anonymity order not made


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  11.  v.
2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeals of the first two named Appellant have been dismissed so  no  fee
award may be made in relation to them.
The appeal of the  third  named  Appellant  has  been  allowed  and  I  have
considered whether to make a fee award and have decided that  having  regard
to the circumstances it is not appropriate to make a fee award.

Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  11.  v.
2017


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
