
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18501/2015
     IA/18491/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 March 2018                        |On 08 May 2018                     |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              1) Mamita Bantawa
                               (2) Ashesh Kumar Rai
                         (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Singer of Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese promulgated on 22 June 2017  in  which  he  allowed  the
    appeals of Ms Bantawa and Mr Rai.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and Ms Bantawa and Mr Rai are the  Respondents,  for  the
    sake of continuity with the proceedings before the First-tier  Tribunal
    I shall hereafter refer to Ms Bantawa and Mr Rai as the Appellants  and
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellants are  citizens  of  Nepal.  Ms  Bantawa  was  born  on  6
    September 1982. She is married to Mr Rai, who was  born  on  14  August
    1979.  Mr Rai entered the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  Migrant  on  20
    October 2009 with leave until 31 March 2011.  On 2 June 2010 Ms  Banawa
    entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Dependent Partner with  leave  'in
    line' with her husband until 31 March 2011.   A  subsequent  period  of
    leave was granted to each of them on 21 April 2011 until 28 June  2014.
    However, it appears that such leave was subsequently curtailed, to take
    effect on 6 May 2014.


4.   An application was made in May 2014 for Mr Rai to  be  granted  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student Migrant, and for his wife again  to
    be granted leave 'in line' as a dependant.  Mr  Rai's  application  was
    made on the basis of his proposed study at Blake Hall College in Surrey
    Quays  from  19  May  2014  until  30  May  2015  on  a  BTEC  Advanced
    Professional Diploma in Innovative and Creative  Leadership.   However,
    whilst his application was pending the licence for Blake  Hall  College
    to issue certificates of approval of study ('CAS')  was  revoked.   The
    Appellants' joint applications relied upon a CAS issued by  Blake  Hall
    College; accordingly on 17 February 2015 the Respondent wrote to Mr Rai
    advising him of the fact of the revocation of the licence of Blake Hall
    College and advising him that he had  a  period  of  60  calendar  days
    during which consideration of his application would be  suspended.   He
    was informed of this circumstance in what  is  a  letter  in  'standard
    terms', accompanied by documentation that might assist him in obtaining
    a new CAS, and otherwise explaining his options.  The letter said  that
    the 60 day period would end on 18 April 2015.


5.   The Respondent filed before the First-tier  Tribunal  evidence  of  the
    posting of the letter of 17 February 2015, and evidence of its  receipt
    by way of a signed 'track and  trace'  document  from  the  Royal  Mail
    signed for on 19 February 2015 by Ashesh Kumar (the first two names  of
    Mr Rai).


6.   Mr Rai struggled to find a course  provider  willing  to  offer  him  a
    place and to issue him with a new valid CAS.   On  15  April  2015  his
    representatives wrote to the Respondent advising that  they  were  duly
    instructed by the Appellant, thanking the Respondent for the letter  of
    17 February 2015, and requesting an extension of time to submit further
    documents in support of the Tier 4 application.  The  relevant  passage
    in the representatives' letter is in these terms:

         "We kindly request an extension of time to submit these  documents.
         We request that we are  given  till  17  May  2015  to  file  these
         documents.  The extension of time is to ensure our client has ample
         time to provide the documents to send to you  taking  into  account
         the delay in receiving your letter."


7.   It is to be recalled from the chronology  indicated  above  that  there
    was in fact no particular delay in receiving the letter of 17  February
    2015, which was signed for on 19 February 2015.


8.   Nothing is specified in the representatives' letter as to the  measures
    that the Appellant had taken by way of obtaining a CAS, nor by  way  of
    identifying any particular difficulties that he was experiencing.


9.   The  Respondent  refused  both  the  application  of  Mr  Rai  and  the
    application of Mrs Bantawa by separate 'reasons  for  refusal'  letters
    ('RFRL') dated 11 May 2015.  Mr Rai's application was  refused  on  the
    basis that he did not have a valid CAS and accordingly he  was  awarded
    no points in respect of  'attributes',  and  also  in  consequence  was
    awarded no points in respect of 'maintenance (funds)'. Mrs Bantawa  was
    essentially refused 'in  line'  with  the  decision  on  her  husband's
    application: the RFRL in her case identified the fact of the refusal of
    Mr  Rai,  and  also  made  reference  to  the  consequent  failure   to
    demonstrate the requirements in respect of level of funding.


10.  Notices of appeal were lodged in respect of both Appellants.


11.  I pause at this juncture to deal with a preliminary matter.  It  is  to
    be noted that the RFRL in respect of Mr Rai stated that he did not have
    a right of appeal because his application for leave to remain had  been
    made after the expiry of his leave.  It was said  that  his  leave  was
    curtailed with effect from 5 May 2014 but that his application was  not
    made until 6 May 2014.  In contrast, no such point was taken in respect
    of his wife her RFRL informed her that she had a right of appeal.  This
    discrepancy in approach was  identified  in  the  combined  grounds  of
    appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  drafted   by   the   Appellants'
    representatives.  Indeed,  the  grounds  of  appeal  went   into   some
    considerable detail by way of preliminary submission as to why  it  was
    said that the application had been made 'in time' - in particular  that
    it had been posted on 3 May 2014 and that according to the Home  Office
    Guidance on Specified Application Forms  and  Procedures  the  date  of
    posting would be treated as the date of application.   To  that  extent
    there is evidence on file of the posting having been made on 3 May 2014
    at 12.19 hours.  There is also evidence that the application  form  was
    completed and the fee paid on 3 May 2014.


12.  The issue of Mr Rai's right of appeal does  not  appear  to  have  been
    determined  at  the  listing  stage,  as  is  sometimes  -  indeed  not
    infrequently - the case.  The Duty Judge indicated that the  'right  of
    appeal' issue could be taken as a preliminary  point  at  the  hearing;
    both appeals were listed accordingly.  It may be that because the cases
    were listed that the parties - and perhaps the  Judge  -  assumed  that
    jurisdiction had been accepted.  I say this because  it  is  absolutely
    clear that there was no discussion or exploration of this issue  before
    Judge Abebrese.


13.  Mr Singer, who appeared both  before  me  and  before  Judge  Abebrese,
    acknowledged that there was no such discussion at  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Moreover  I  note  that  in  Judge  Abebrese's
    rehearsal of the facts he gives the application  date  as  6  May  2014
    (paragraph 2), which would have been an out-of-time date,  and  thereby
    does not appear to have engaged with this issue.


14.  In such circumstances it seems to me right and proper that  I  formally
    acknowledge at this preliminary stage of my  deliberation  that  in  my
    judgment the application of Mr Rai for variation of leave to remain was
    made prior to the expiry of his  leave,  and  to  that  extent  he  was
    entitled to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  indeed  was  Mrs
    Bantawa (in respect of whom no such issue has ever been raised).


15.  I turn then to the consideration of Judge Abebrese's  approach  to  the
    appeals.


16.  It is  apparent  from  the  Decision  of  Judge  Abebrese  that  during
    preliminary discussions it was agreed by the representatives  that  the
    issues in the appeal were narrow and that the  matter  could  be  dealt
    with by way of submissions only: see paragraph 7.  The focus was on the
    60 day period which Mr Rai had been permitted in order to find  another
    college / course provider.  The argument on behalf  of  the  Appellants
    was, in short,  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
    application for an  extension  of  this  period  made  by  way  of  the
    representatives' letter of 15 April 2015.


17.  Judge Abebrese concluded in the Appellants' favour in this regard:  see
    paragraph 14.  In particular, Judge Abebrese concluded that  there  had
    been procedural unfairness:

         "Once the letter had been sent to the Respondent they had a duty to
         provide an answer to the Appellant in relation to the request which
         had been made.  It is the case in this instance that there has been
         no such engagement and that the Respondent  has  therefore  made  a
         decision which is flawed in law."


    On that basis the appeal was allowed.


18.  It is to be observed that these were 'old-style' appeals where  it  was
    permissible to allow an appeal on the basis that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law. As such the appeal was  not  restricted  to
    human rights grounds.  That said, it is not abundantly clear that Judge
    Abebrese had it in mind  that  the  application  therefore  essentially
    required to be considered further by the Secretary of State.


19.  I also pause to note that it was not argued  in  the  alternative  that
    the removal of  the  Appellants  in  consequence  of  the  Respondent's
    decisions would be in breach of their Article 8 rights.


20.  Mr Singer suggested that this was because  the  issue  of  the  alleged
    procedural unfairness in the Respondent not dealing with the  Mr  Rai's
    application for an extension of time to obtain a CAS, was dealt with as
    a preliminary issue.  I  am  not  sure  that  I  can  detect  from  the
    available materials that that was the case. It is  to  be  acknowledged
    that Judge Abebrese records "The representatives also as a  preliminary
    issue identified the  matter  to  be  determined  by  the  Tribunal  as
    concerning the 60-day period ..." (paragraph 8). It seems  to  me  that
    that means no more than that during the preliminary discussions the key
    issue was identified. I do not understand it inevitably  to  mean  that
    the issue of the 60-day period was considered to be a preliminary issue
    - with the implication that, contingent upon the outcome of the  issue,
    there might be some other argument to be pursued. If there were  to  be
    some further ground of appeal developed - such as human rights  grounds
    - that would have required the calling of evidence,  even  if  only  to
    offer the Appellants for cross-examination.


21.  Further, it was confirmed by Mr Singer, and from  the  access  that  Mr
    Wilding was able to have to the Respondent's representative's record of
    the hearing, that Judge Abebrese reserved his Decision. If the issue of
    the extension of the 60  day  period  was  being  advanced  only  as  a
    preliminary issue, and was not ruled upon at the hearing, then it seems
    obvious enough that any other grounds of appeal,  such  as  Article  8,
    would have to have been argued in the alternative at the  hearing  (and
    likely supported  by  the  calling  of  evidence).   The  circumstances
    suggests that an Article 8 case was not put before Judge Abebrese.


22.  Be that as it may, as I say, the  Judge  allowed  the  appeals  on  the
    basis that he considered that  there  had  been  procedural  unfairness
    because the Respondent had not dealt with the request for an  extension
    of time to obtain a CAS.  The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    is essentially based on the premise  that  the  Judge  proceeded  on  a
    fundamental misconception of fact.  Evidence has now been produced that
    the Respondent did consider the application for extension of time,  and
    communicated this to the Appellants' representatives by way of a letter
    that accompanied the decisions.


23.  I have been provided with  a  copy  of  a  letter  dated  11  May  2015
    addressed to the representatives which states:

         "Your clients' applications have been refused for the  reasons  set
         out in the enclosed notices.  Please ensure that these  are  passed
         to your clients immediately.  The notices inform  your  clients  of
         whether or not there is a right  of  appeal  or  of  administrative
         review and, if so, how this may be exercised, and sets out any time
         limit for an appeal or application for administrative review to  be
         made.  In our letter dated 15 April 2015 you requested an extension
         of time due to a delay in receiving our letter  dated  17  February
         2015.  Royal Mail has a record  of  your  client  signing  for  our
         letter dated 17 February 2015  on  19  February  2015  and  do  not
         consider this as a delay requiring an extension."


    On the face of it, the application for an extension was considered, and
    was refused because the Respondent did not consider any  basis  for  an
    extension had been shown. It  may  be  recalled  that  the  application
    asserted delay in  receiving  the  letter  of  17  February  2015,  but
    advanced no other basis  for  an  extension,  and  did  not  offer  any
    indication as to the steps pursued by Mr Rai in the meantime.


24.  It seems to me that had Mr Singer been aware of this  letter  he  would
    not have been able to pursue the submission that succeeded before Judge
    Abebrese.  It is clearly apparent that Mr Singer was  unaware  of  this
    letter, notwithstanding that his instructing solicitors must have  been
    aware of it.  Indeed, it seems to me significant that  the  Appellants'
    solicitors  did  not  raise  any  complaint  against  the  refusal   of
    extensions in the grounds of appeal accompanying the Notices of  Appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal - where they had otherwise set out  in  some
    competent detail their disquiet as to the denial of a right  of  appeal
    to Mr Rai.  Had the representatives been troubled by, or  thought  that
    some challenge was available in respect of, the refusal of an extension
    (or had though  the  application  had  not  been  dealt  with),  it  is
    reasonable to expect that it would have found its way into the  grounds
    of appeal alongside the carefully  articulated  complaint  against  the
    denial of a  right  of  appeal.   This  powerfully  suggests  that  the
    representatives were fully cognisant of the fact that  the  application
    had been adequately dealt with, even if Mr Singer in due course when he
    came to be instructed to appear at the hearing was not.


25.  The circumstances of Mr Singer being 'wrong-footed' in this  regard  is
    not helped by the fact that the Respondent's representative before  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not  appear  to  have  had  knowledge  of  the
    covering letter to the RFRLs - or if he did was not  astute  enough  to
    draw it to the attention of Judge Abebrese.  Be that  as  it  may,  the
    letter was clearly in existence and it is clearly  the  case  that  the
    Respondent did consider this aspect of the Appellants' representations.
     On that basis I am satisfied that the decision of  Judge  Abebrese  is
    founded on a fundamental misconception of fact which, in  my  judgment,
    amounts to an error of law.  In reaching this conclusion, necessarily I
    neither criticise Mr Singer in pursuing what he  considered  to  be  an
    available argument, or Judge Abebrese in  considering  and  finding  in
    favour of that argument where incomplete  materials  were  before  him.
    However, the nature of the error is so fundamental that it vitiates the
    lawfulness of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  it  is
    to be set aside.


26.  As discussed above, there  seems  to  have  been  no  consideration  of
    Article 8 in the alternative.  Mr Wilding very  helpfully  acknowledges
    that there were issues in respect of private life raised in the witness
    statements that were before the First-tier Tribunal, most notably  that
    of Ms Bantawa. No such matters have been addressed or  considered.   In
    the circumstances it  is  common  ground  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to give proper consideration to all
    the issues at large, again bearing  in  mind  that  this  an  old-style
    appeal and not limited to human rights grounds.


27.  In this latter regard I pause to observe that Mr Singer suggested  that
    had he been alert to the Respondent's response to the  application  for
    extension of time to obtain a CAS he might nonetheless have  sought  to
    present some further arguments on the merits of the decision to  refuse
    an extension.  Without  deciding  the  matter,  on  the  basis  of  the
    available evidence it is difficult to see what further  might  be  said
    with regard to the merits of the refusal.  The application  was  simply
    made on the basis of supposed delay  in  receiving  the  letter  of  17
    February 2015 (when the evidence suggests that there was no delay), and
    did not provide any other detail, or offer any other reason as  to  why
    more time was needed; the Respondent's rejection of the application  is
    clear in addressing the single point raised. It may also be noted  that
    it is reiterated in the Respondent's grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the letter of 17 February 2015 itself emphasised that  no
    further extensions beyond the 60 calendar day period would be  allowed.
    Yet further it is to be observed that even though there was  no  formal
    extension it was not until a further 20 days after the  60  day  period
    had expired that a decision was actually made on Mr  Rai's  application
    for leave to remain - and there is no evidence filed as to what  steps,
    if any, were ever taken by Mr Rai between 19 February 2015 and  11  May
    2015 by way of obtaining a CAS.


28.  Even if it were the case that something  more  might  be  said  on  the
    merits of the application for an extension  of  time,  or  against  the
    merits of the Respondent's refusal to extend time - I struggle  to  see
    how that  could  found  an  available  ground  of  appeal  against  the
    substantive decisions of 11 May 2015. The refusal to extend time is not
    itself an appealable decision, and can only impact upon the  appealable
    decisions  if  it  was  dealt  with  in  a  manner  that  rendered  the
    substantive  decisions  procedurally  unfair  or   otherwise   not   in
    accordance with the law. It is not remotely  apparent  that  the  facts
    give rise to any such argument. Any argument simply that  an  extension
    of time on its merits should have been granted does  not  amount  to  a
    ground of appeal that could impugn  the  substantive  decision  on  the
    applications: it does not  render  the  substantive  decisions  not  in
    accordance with the law or  not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules. I do not wish to be unduly prescriptive as to the way  in  which
    the First-tier Tribunal may look at this case  in  due  course,  or  to
    anticipate what might not yet have been fully formulated by Mr  Singer;
    nonetheless  I  offer  the  above  brief  observations   as   seemingly
    pertinent.


Notice of Decision

29.  The decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  are  vitiated  for  material
    error of law and are set aside.


30.  The decisions in the appeals  will  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in front of any Judge other than First-tier Judge Abebrese.


31.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 3 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

