
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18309/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th September 2015                        |On 16th October 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                      miss Melba Cynthia Wambui Njenga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Gillard, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on  15th  January  1979.   The
    Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom  on  4th  September  2002
    with entry clearance as a student.  Thereafter  the  Appellant  has  an
    extensive immigration history set out in the Notice  of  Refusal  which
    culminated on 19th November 2013 in  her  solicitors  applying  on  her
    behalf for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.   That  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State in a notice of refusal dated 31st
    March 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mrs R J N B Morris sitting at Richmond  on  13th  January
    2015.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  30th  January  2015  the
    Appellant's appeal was refused both under the Immigration Rules and  on
    human rights grounds.  On 30th January  2015  Grounds  of  Appeal  were
    lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  On 12th March 2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer granted permission to appeal.  Judge Colyer noted that the
    grounds contended:

      i) that the judge had erred  in  her  assessment  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, with respect to paragraph 276B (long residence) in that  the
         Appellant was not unlawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  a
         period exceeding two years;

     ii) the judge had erred in her assessment of the Respondent's  guidance
         in relation to ten years;

    iii) the judge erred in her assessment of the  new  Section  117B(5)  in
         holding that the maintenance of  immigration  control  will  always
         outweigh factors that are in the Appellant's favour;

     iv) it is submitted that paragraph 276ADE(vi) has not been  considered;
         and

      v) the judge has erred in  her  assessment  of  the  consideration  of
         exceptional circumstances in the Appellant's appeal.

 3. In granting permission to appeal Judge Colyer considered that the  main
    areas where there may have been a material error by the judge  were  in
    grounds (i), (ii) and (iv) but granted permission on all grounds.

 4. On 26th March 2015 the Secretary of State  served  a  response  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.   The  Respondent  contends  that  the
    judge's findings in relation to paragraph 276B are adequately  reasoned
    and properly open to her to find on the evidence before  her.   But  in
    relation to paragraph 276ADE the judge had noted at paragraph 18 of her
    determination that it was conceded by the  Appellant's  representatives
    that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.
     Further at paragraph 5 of the Rule 24 response it was  contended  that
    the Appellant did not meet the requirements of the long residence  Rule
    nor the private life Rule (276ADE) and that if the Appellant could  not
    succeed on long residence then she  could  not  succeed  in  her  claim
    pursuant to private life based on the facts of this case.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    legal representative Mr Gillard.  Mr Gillard is extremely familiar with
    this matter, he appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  also
    the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Kandola.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Gillard starts by contending that Grounds 1 and 2 of his Grounds  of
    Appeal are very similar.  He acknowledges that there is no "near  miss"
    principle to be followed but contends that the  judge  failed  to  make
    conclusions at paragraphs 16(iv) and (v) of her determination and  that
    in failing to do so there was a material error of law.

 7. Mr Kandola responds by stating that the Appellant made  an  application
    out of time because she had failed on her appeal and even if  I  accept
    that there was an application made for indefinite leave to  remain  and
    disregard the current discrepancy between  31 and 28 days for  applying
    out of time that this is in fact a misnomer.   Mr  Kandola  points  out
    that the Appellant's application was out of time and in any  event  she
    did not have any leave extant to her which it was possible for  her  to
    apply to continue to extend.

 8.  Mr  Gillard  challenges  the  purported  concessions  with  regard  to
    paragraph 276ADE pointing out that where the  judge  has  set  out  the
    statutory information at paragraph 10 no reference is made to paragraph
    276ADE.  Mr Gillard contends the Appellant meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) and therefore the judge has materially erred.   Mr
    Kandola responds that Mr Gillard is  raising  a  conflict  between  the
    Record of Proceedings and what is now submitted pointing out there  has
    been  no  request  made  for  a  handwritten  copy  of  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  In any event he contends that if such a concession is not
    made it would still not be material as the Appellant would have to show
    that  there  could  be  significant  obstacles   to   the   Appellant's
    integration into Kenyan society if she is returned and  an  examination
    of the evidence does not meet that threshold.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. It is the contention  of  Mr  Gillard  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) namely that  the  Appellant  is
    aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than
    twenty years but there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which she would have to  go
    if required to leave the UK.  I start by reminding myself  that  it  is
    for the Upper Tribunal to determine whether there are  material  errors
    of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  rather  than  to  be
    rehearing the matter.  Paragraph 276ADE is  addressed  briefly  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 18.  It does not  seem  to  have
    been argued before her that that paragraph is met.  The  issue  is  set
    out very clearly at paragraph 15 of the determination.   In  any  event
    the approach adopted by Mr Kandola on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    is persuasive.  The Appellant would have to show that there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into society if  returned  and
    there has been no argument or submission put forward  on  this  behalf.
    As such any such argument pursuant  to  such  ground  amounts  to  mere
    disagreement and is not material.

12. What is material relates to the issue in question which was set out  at
    paragraph 15 namely whether the March 2010 application had  broken  the
    Appellant's lawful continuous residence in the UK with the result  that
    she did not qualify for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence.  That issue is very fully addressed
    by the judge in paragraphs (i) to (iii) and thereafter  the  judge  has
    gone on to consider paragraph 276B of the Rules i.e.  the  requirements
    for indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence and has
    made findings of fact at paragraph (i) to (vii) which are well-reasoned
    and sustainable and disclose no material errors of law.

13. The judge gave due and proper attention to  the  issue  of  exceptional
    reasons and  addressed  these  at  paragraph  16(iv)  and  (v)  in  her
    determination.  I disagree with the view expressed by Mr  Gillard  that
    she did not make findings.  It is clear that she did.

14. Further the judge has given due and full attention to Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act and has approached due consideration of  these  paragraphs
    quite properly within paragraph 33 of her decision.  Finally, so far as
    it is  suggested  that  the  judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
    consideration of exceptional circumstances the judge has given due  and
    full consideration to the authorities that were before her and  in  any
    event Lord Justice Sales has confirmed the approach taken  in  previous
    cases in the more recent overall guidance given in SS (Congo).

15. In such circumstances the submissions made on behalf of  the  Appellant
    amount to little more than disagreement.  This  is  a  well-constructed
    and well-reasoned determination.  It discloses for the above reasons no
    material error of  law  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  is  consequently
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

