

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/18167/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |     Decision & Reasons           |
|On 26 January 2016                            |Promulgated                       |
|                                              |On 4 February 2016                |
|                                              |                                  |
|                                              |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Skinner, counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State pursues this appeal against the decision of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal to allow an appeal against the refusal to  issue  a
    residence card.

 2. I maintain the descriptions of the parties as they were in  the  First-
    Tier  Tribunal,  namely  as  appellant  and  respondent,  for  ease  of
    reference, notwithstanding it is the Secretary  of  State  who  pursues
    this appeal.

 3. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to issue a  residence  card  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as  amended)
    ("the Regulations").  His appeal against that decision was  allowed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 September 2015.

 4. An anonymity direction was not made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but,
    given my references to the appellant's personal circumstances,  I  make
    one now.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Foudy on 2  December  2015  in
    the following terms:

         "2. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in his approach  to  the
         Regulations in that he found that the sponsor had spent time in the
         UK as a student when there was insufficient evidence so to find.

         3. For an EEA national to exercise  Treaty  Rights  as  a  student,
         regulation 4  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regualtions  [sic]  2006
         require the student to prove that  she  has  comprehensive  medical
         insurance in place for the relevant period and for her  to  sign  a
         declaration that  she  holds  sufficient  funds  not  to  become  a
         financial burden on the state. It appears  that  neither  of  those
         requirements was satisfied in this appeal.

         4. It is arguable that the Judge fell into an error of law."

 6. Thus the appeal has come before me.

 7. In the grounds of appeal it is submitted for the  respondent  that  the
    FTTJ, in finding that the sponsor had been either a worker  or  student
    for five continuous years, had failed to engage with the requirement of
    the Regulations, particularly regulation 4(1)(d),  which  detailed  how
    student status was achieved.  It was submitted that "the appellant  has
    not provided evidence of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  being  in
    place while  the  sponsor  was  a  student,  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations have not  been  met  and  the  appeal  cannot  succeed.  By
    allowing the appeal the Judge has erred in law".

 8. Before me, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that between  September  2008
    (when the last residence card had been issued) and 2012,  when  it  was
    accepted the appellant's former  wife  was  employed,  the  appellant's
    former wife was said to have been in  full-time  education;  she  would
    have been a qualified person only if she  and  the  appellant  had  had
    sickness insurance cover.  It was  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  had  not
    identified those criteria in the decision or that they  had  been  met.
    Thus the FTTJ had erred in law in deciding  that  the  Regulations  had
    been met.

 9. Mr Skinner, for the appellant, submitted that the terms of the  reasons
    for refusal letter were such that the respondent could be said to  have
    accepted the appellant's former  spouse  had  been  a  student  at  all
    material  times.   In  any  event,  he  submitted  EEA  nationals   had
    reciprocal access to NHS services. This explained the FTTJ's failure to
    make a finding on the issue, albeit he had noted the existence  of  the
    evidence of her studies.  Since the respondent had not raised the  lack
    of comprehensive medical insurance or a declaration, the Judge had been
    entitled to assume it was not an issue.

10. Mr Skinner relied on the guidance in AA (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1249 and Das Gupta  (error  of  law  -  proportionality  -  correct
    approach [2016] UKUT 00028 (IAC).  This was, he submitted,  a  case  of
    the respondent taking a point in the Upper Tribunal which she had  been
    unable to raise in the First-tier Tribunal for  lack  of  a  Presenting
    Officer.

11. In response, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  all  issues  were  at
    large before the FTTJ. It was clear from the decision  letter  that  no
    explicit concessions had been made  to  the  effect  that  the  student
    provisions had been met.  It was accepted that the  appellant's  former
    spouse had been exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  latter  period  of
    residence, whilst working at Britannia.

Discussion and Findings

12. The FTTJ notes in paragraph 1 that Regulation 15 requires the appellant
    to demonstrate inter alia "that he resided in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    [his former wife's] husband or ex-husband for a  continuous  period  of
    five years while she was exercising treaty rights". However, he has not
    cited or referred to the Regulations to indicate  how  she  might  have
    exercised those rights, for example, as a student (with the  associated
    requirements as to comprehensive medical insurance cover) or a  worker.



13. Having identified specific evidence in an earlier paragraph,  the  FTTJ
    states "the documentary evidence I have referred to, together with  the
    voluminous 307 page Appellant's bundle with  much  additional  evidence
    is, in my judgement, ample to demonstrate  that  the  Regulations  have
    been satisfied".  Further, at paragraph 5, he states "on  the  totality
    of the evidence before me, I find that the Appellant has discharged the
    burden of proof and reasons given by the Respondent do not justify  the
    refusal. Therefore the Respondent's decision is not in accordance  with
    the law and the applicable Immigration Rules [sic]".   Given  that  the
    FTTJ has referred only to Regulation 15 in  his  decision,  it  can  be
    inferred that the appeal was successful on the ground that the decision
    was in breach of that Regulation.

14. I note the oral submissions of the parties: they  are  at  odds  as  to
    whether the respondent had, in effect, conceded  that  the  appellant's
    former wife had been exercising Treaty rights  as  a  student.   It  is
    instructive to set out the relevant passages of the reasons for refusal
    letter, as follows:

         "In your completed EEA4 application form you have stated that  your
         EEA National  sponsor  was  employed  and  a  student  during  your
         marriage and exercised her treaty rights for a continuous period of
         5 years. You have provided an employer  letter  from  'Costcutter',
         dated 12  November  2007,  2  student  letters  from  'St  Martin's
         Business School', dated 12 December  2008  and  28  April  2010,  a
         student letter from 'South Quay College', dated 03 June 2011 and  a
         print screen of 'Britannia Residential Properties'  website.   This
         department deemed this evidence alone insufficient in demonstrating
         that while you were married to your former EEA family  member,  she
         had exercised her  treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of 5 years.

         Due to  the  evidence  provided  being  deemed  insufficient,  this
         department conducted an inter-departmental check in order to  fully
         verify whether your EEA National sponsor  was  employed  -  as  you
         claim, or self-employed in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
         period of 5 years prior to your divorce, while also being a student
         from January 2008-  May  2011.  The  inter-departmental  check  was
         unable to trace [the EEA  national]  and  therefore  it  cannot  be
         accepted that she was  employed  or  self-employed  in  the  United
         Kingdom for a continuous period of 5 years.

         You have failed to provide evidence that you meet the  requirements
         of regulation 10(5) and you have therefore not retained a right  of
         residence following divorce.  Also your EEA National former  family
         member has not exercised treaty rights under the regulations for  5
         continuous years prior to divorce to in order for  to  quality  for
         permanent residence [sic]."

15. The evidence submitted in support of the application is listed  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter. The FTTJ had more evidence before him  than
    did the respondent at the date  of  decision.  In  particular,  he  had
    evidence of a further period of study than that covered by the evidence
    submitted to the respondent in support of the application.

16. The reasons given in the refusal letter  are  unclear  and  inadequate.
    The letter identifies all the evidence produced by the appellant  (both
    relating to his former wife's studies and to her claimed employment, eg
    South Quay College and Britannia) and the  decision-maker  then  states
    that this is insufficient to show the appellant's former wife has  been
    exercising Treaty rights for a  continuous  period  of  5  years.   The
    nature of this insufficiency is not explained in any  way.  It  is  not
    clear, for example, whether it relates to part or all of the  evidence,
    the quality  of  that  evidence  and/or  whether  further  evidence  is
    required.

17. In passing, I note the reference to the appellant  having  submitted  a
    screen  print  of  the  Britannia  Residential  Properties  website.  A
    reasonable explanation for the deemed  insufficiency  of  the  evidence
    might be that this screenprint was not evidence of employment. Such  an
    interpretation would be consistent with the  fact  that  the  appellant
    states in the application form that he does not know the period of  his
    former  wife's  employment  by  that  company.   As  it  happens,   the
    appellant's claim that his former wife was employed by that company was
    satisfactorily evidenced by the appellant before the  FTTJ,  a  finding
    which is not now challenged by the respondent.

18. The respondent then goes on to say in the  reasons  for  refusal  that,
    because of that [unspecified] insufficiency, an inter-department  check
    was carried out to check whether the EEA national "was employed ...  or
    self-employed ... for a continuous period of  5  years  prior  to  your
    divorce, whilst also being a student from January 2008 - May 2011"  (my
    emphasis).   Taking the letter as a whole, the inference from  the  use
    of this phrase is that the respondent accepted the  appellant's  former
    spouse had been exercising Treaty rights as a student  until  May  2011
    but that, nonetheless, in the absence of adequate evidence covering the
    whole five year period, the respondent had also conducted a check  with
    other government departments to establish whether  she  had  also  been
    working during that period.  This is consistent  with  the  appellant's
    having provided little evidence of his former wife's claimed employment
    between June  2011  and  the  date  of  application  (not  an  uncommon
    situation where parties had divorced acrimoniously).  Furthermore, such
    an interpretation is also consistent with the fact that the  respondent
    had accepted the appellant's former wife  was  a  qualified  person,  a
    student, in August  2008  and  had  issued  a  residence  card  to  the
    appellant, valid until 17 June 2013. There is no evidence that card had
    been revoked or cancelled.  It is also relevant  that  the  appellant's
    former wife continued, for a period, to study at the  same  institution
    as that where she had been  studying  at  the  date  of  issue  of  his
    residence card, a factor which the respondent  would  have  taken  into
    account in concluding that there were no concerns about the  period  to
    May 2011.

19. On the frontsheet to the respondent's bundle, there is reference to the
    evidence of studies and employment submitted by the appellant with  his
    application, as follows:

           "Treaty rights evidence:  1  Employer  letter  from  Costcutter,
           dated 2007,  2  student  letters  from  "St.  Martin's  Business
           School', dated 2008 and 2010, 1 student letter from 'South  Quay
           College', dated 2011, 1  online  print  screen  of  claimed  EEA
           employment - 'Britannia Residential Properties'." [my emphasis]

    These descriptions match  those  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    (second page). This again suggests that  the  respondent  had  concerns
    about the period of claimed employment but not the  period  of  claimed
    studies.

20. Significantly, the respondent makes no specific mention at all  in  her
    reasons for refusal letter to the appellant having  failed  to  provide
    evidence of comprehensive insurance cover or any declaration  of  self-
    sufficiency.  This  is  despite   the   respondent   appreciating   the
    appellant's claim that his former wife had  been  a  full-time  student
    until May 2011, ie a period post-dating the last issue of  a  residence
    card in 2008. It can be inferred from this that this was not  a  matter
    of concern to the respondent, at least for the period of study  claimed
    at the date of application. At that time, the appellant did not seek to
    suggest  that  his  former  wife  had  been  studying  after  May  2011
    (according to his application form).

21. Given these factors, it would not have been unreasonable for  the  FTTJ
    to conclude from the terms of the reasons for refusal letter  that  the
    respondent had no concerns arising from the appellant's  former  wife's
    claimed status as a student under the Regulations in the period January
    2008 - May 2011.  The FTTJ did not have the benefit of hearing  from  a
    Home Office Presenting  Officer  and  was  entitled  to  draw  his  own
    conclusions as to the nature and  extent  of  the  issues  between  the
    parties (provided they were sustainable on the content of  the  reasons
    for refusal letter).  The FTTJ was entitled to  assume  that,  its  not
    having been  brought  specifically  to  the  attention  of  either  the
    appellant or the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  was  no  need  to  make
    findings on the  appellant's  claim  that  his  former  wife  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights as a student between January 2008 and May 2011
    and that the sole issue was whether or not the appellant's former  wife
    had been exercising treaty rights after that date.

22. The FTTJ has noted additional evidence which was adduced at the hearing
    and which had not been before the respondent at the date  of  decision.
    This includes "a document from Thames College, Berkshire, where she had
    undertaken an advanced Diploma in Business Management and studied there
    between September 2011 and July 2013. It is not in dispute now that the
    appellant's former wife worked at Britannia Residential Properties from
    August 2012 until December 2013.  Thus  the  FTTJ  made  findings  with
    regard to a period outwith the perceived concession in the reasons  for
    refusal letter.  It is clear from the application form and the  reasons
    for refusal letter that the appellant had not applied on the  basis  of
    his former wife being a student during this period and that  therefore,
    the respondent had not considered this. Given that the  respondent  had
    not herself addressed this issue, the FTTJ should have  considered  and
    made a finding as to whether  the  appellant's  former  wife  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights as a student during  the  period  May  2011  -
    August 2012. This required consideration of the factors in Regulation 4
    and whether there was sufficient evidence to satisfy them.

23. I turn to the issue of materiality. In paragraph 6 of  the  grounds  of
    appeal, the respondent asserts that  the  appellant  had  not  provided
    evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance being in place  while  the
    sponsor was a student and that the FTTJ had erred in law as a result in
    allowing the appeal.  This  is  not  disputed  by  the  appellant.  The
    respondent makes no  reference  in  the  grounds  to  the  need  for  a
    declaration and I do not address  this  therefore.   In  Ahmad  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 988, it was held that where an EEA citizen  resided  in
    the UK but was not economically active, the right of the EEA  citizen's
    spouse to permanent residence was conditional, under  Article  7(1)  of
    Directive  2004/38/EC,  upon  the  EEA  citizen  holding  comprehensive
    sickness insurance cover. That condition had to  be  strictly  complied
    with, and could not be satisfied by the EEA  citizen's  entitlement  to
    free healthcare under the NHS.

24. It can be inferred from the decision and reasons, that  the  FTTJ  made
    his decision under Regulation 15, there being no reference to any other
    regulation, such as Regulation 10. It was therefore a material error of
    law for  the  FTTJ  to  fail  to  address  whether  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that his former wife was a  qualified  person  during  the
    five year period (as required by Regulations 15(1)(b) and 4,  including
    4(1)(d)(ii) and (iii)).

25. Mr Skinner submitted that, in such circumstances, the  decision  should
    be remade and that, irrespective of his client's claim to  be  entitled
    to a residence card as a  permanent  resident,  he  I  should  consider
    whether he would be entitled to a residence card under  Regulation  10,
    as a family  member  who  has  retained  the  right  of  residence.  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller, not unreasonably, submitted that this was  an  issue
    on which she had not been given any notice, there being no  mention  of
    it in the appellant's R24 reply. She said that she would need  time  to
    prepare appropriate submissions on the issue.

26. In the light of this  disadvantage  to  the  respondent,  both  parties
    agreed that the appropriate way forward  was  for  the  hearing  to  be
    adjourned  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  resumed  hearing  on   the
    appellant's entitlement to a residence card either under Regulation  15
    or Regulation 10.  I endorse that proposal, given the unfairness to the
    respondent of remaking the decision now.  I preserve  the  findings  of
    the FTTJ as they relate to the periods outside  May  2011-August  2012.
    Given the terms of  paragraph  6  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller's  oral  submissions,  I  find  that  there   remains
    outstanding the issue of whether the appellant has demonstrated that he
    fulfils the criteria in Regulation 4(1)(ii)  and  4(2)(b),  namely  the
    existence of comprehensive sickness insurance cover for his former wife
    and himself. In the light of my findings above, the relevant period for
    such cover is May 2011 - August 2012.  This issue is to be decided at a
    resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law Decision

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

28. I preserve the findings of the First Tier Tribunal Judge.

29. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge for  a  fresh
    decision to be taken at a resumed hearing in this Tribunal.

Signed           A M Black


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed           A M Black



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black





