
[pic]
IAC-FH

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18993/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ms euredice rita zirignon
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Al-Rashid, Counsel instructed by David A.
Grand


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in this case, for ease
    of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Ms Euredice Rita Zirignon is a citizen of the Ivory  Coast  born  on  2
    October 1972.  In a decision, dated 2  April  2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State refused to issue her with a permanent resident card in accordance
    with Regulation 15(1)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the  EEA  Regulations).   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Woolf  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the two grounds advanced:  that the
    Judge may have materially misdirected herself  in  requiring  a  higher
    standard of proof and in failing to give proper weight to the  evidence
    provided; and that the judge failed to make clear  findings  as  to  on
    what basis the appellant was entitled to a residence card.

 3. The respondent in the Reasons for Refusal letter asserted that the Home
    Office had evidence that the appellant's  EEA  sponsor  was  previously
    married under a different name on 23 October 1997.  The respondent  was
    not satisfied therefore that the marriage was genuine as the  appellant
    had not submitted a Decree Absolute  for  the  sponsor.   The  marriage
    certificate stated that he was a bachelor, rather than a divorcee.

Ground 1

 4. Judge Woolf considered the evidence in some detail  and  made  a  clear
    finding that there were no reasonable grounds for a suspicion that  the
    marriage was invalid.  She considered three witness statements provided
    by the Home Office.  The first of these refers to a  British  national,
    Mr Grinion Mathuron Guei, and provides  details  of  this  individual's
    wife and children.  The second statement was from the same Home  Office
    official,  Ms  Freakley  of  Criminal  and  Financial   Investigations,
    Heathrow and provided details of the  appellant's  spouse,  Jean  Louis
    Kemoagna, a French national and  their  children.   The  third  witness
    statement from another Home Office Official, Mr Brown,  indicates  that
    Ms Freakley gave him some images of Mr Guei and Mr Kemoagna to identify
    if they 'were one and the same person'.  Mr  Brown  concluded  from  an
    examination of the photographs that it was the same person.

 5. However Judge Woolf made a clear finding  that  the  evidence  provided
    fell 'way short of establishing any reason for believing that they  are
    one and the same person'.  Although the respondent's grounds of  appeal
    argued that the evidence provided  by  the  respondent  'was  far  more
    substantial than the FTJ stated' Mr Tarlow conceded that he could point
    to no evidence other than the witness statements (and he conceded  that
    it was only the third witness statement that made any  allegation  that
    the two individuals were the one person) and one photocopy of  identity
    pictures of both individuals side by side.  Although the third  witness
    statement refers to a number of exhibits showing scanned comparisons of
    different parts of the individuals' faces, these were not  provided  to
    either the First-tier Tribunal, or at all.

 6. Neither was there any information or evidence as to  what  had  led  to
    these comparisons being made in the first place.  No  particulars  were
    given of the expertise of Mr  Brown  that  enabled  him  to  make  this
    comparison, nor any methodology as to how he made his  comparisons  (in
    addition to the fact that a number of the scans referred  to  were  not
    produced).  Although Mr Tarlow asserted that weight should be placed on
    the  expertise  of  the  immigration  officials  making   the   witness
    statements, without  further  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the appellant had no case to answer on the basis of the
    evidence before the  Judge.   The  respondent  had  made  a  number  of
    unsupported assertions and there was  for  example,  as  noted  by  the
    Judge, no adequate evidence of the marriage certificate in relation  to
    the claimed marriage in another identity.

 7. The burden of proof in appeals considered under the EEA Regulations  is
    with the appellant to demonstrate that they meet  the  requirements  of
    the EEA Regulations and the Judge correctly directed  herself  in  this
    regard at [25].  As the Judge identified this was  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience case but the judge applied the jurisprudence of  Papajorgji
    (EEA spouse marriage of convenience) [2012] UKUT 38  as  analogous  and
    was satisfied that the respondent would bear an  evidential  burden  to
    produce sufficient evidence that there was a reasonable suspicion  that
    the marriage was not  valid.   The  respondent  did  not  dispute  this
    approach but was of the view that the  Judge  had  failed  to  properly
    apply the guidance.  That is not the case.   Although, as stated by the
    Court of Appeal in  Agho  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1198,  (in  approving  the
    Papajorgji approach) at paragraph 13 that 'the  evidential  burden  may
    shift to the applicant by proof of facts which  justify  the  inference
    that the marriage is not genuine' Judge Woolf reached a  decision  that
    was open to her in not being satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  'by
    proof of facts' justified  the  inference  that  the  marriage  is  not
    genuine.  It was not the case that the Judge required the respondent to
    prove that the marriage was not valid, but rather that  the  Judge  was
    not satisfied that there was sufficient evidence adduced to  shift  the
    burden to the appellant.

 8. Further, as cited in Agho, the Upper Tribunal in Papajorgji  (paragraph
    39) confirmed in relation to whether a marriage is one  of  convenience
    that:

         "... where the issue is raised in an appeal, the question  for  the
         judge will therefore be 'in  the  light  of  the  totality  of  the
         information before me, including the assessment of  the  claimant's
         answers and any information provided' am I  satisfied  that  it  is
         more probable than not ..."

 9. Judge Woolf also considered at [39]  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    appellant's evidence that undermined the credibility of her  claims  as
    to the marriage and that there was 'no discrepancy of any note'.

10. In addition, although the permission judge referred  to  the  appellant
    herself having been married before, that was not the case (and such was
    not alluded to either in the refusal letter or Judge Woolf's findings).
     Mr Tarlow did not pursue this additional ground which I  am  satisfied
    has no merit.

11. I am satisfied that there was no material error of  law  therefore  and
    there is no merit in Ground 1.

Ground 2

12. Mr Tarlow submitted that the Judge's findings that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to a permanent residence card 'needed more explanation'.   The
    Judge recorded the evidence at [10] that although separated and divorce
    proceedings had been issued, the appellant was still married to the EEA
    national.  The Judge's findings included, as already noted, that  there
    'was no discrepancy of any note'.  It is  implicit  in  those  findings
    that the Judge accepted that the marriage was valid and  had  not  been
    dissolved.

13. It was also clear from the refusal letter  dated  2  April  2014  that,
    although the appellant had  been  unsuccessful  in  a  previous  (2008)
    application and appeal (in 2010) due to the lack of  adequate  evidence
    that her  EEA  sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty  rights  for  the
    requisite 5 year period, further information (including Job Centre Plus
    Tax Year Contributions/Credits for a nine year  period  (from  2000  to
    2009) for the EEA sponsor) was provided with  the  appellant's  further
    application.  Although the findings of the Judge  in  2010  would  have
    been a starting point, Judge Woolf was entitled to find as she did that
    no issue had been raised (either  in  the  refusal  letter  or  by  the
    presenting officer) in relation to the new employment records  produced
    in respect of the application and appeal before her.

14. The Judge was satisfied on  the  basis  of  the  unchallenged  evidence
    before her therefore that the appellant had demonstrated that  her  EEA
    sponsor had been exercising treaty rights in the UK  for  a  continuous
    period of 5 years.  This was a properly reasoned conclusion in light of
    all the evidence.  The respondent's ground of appeal,  that  the  judge
    did not make clear findings on a material matter,  does  not  therefore
    bear scrutiny and amounts to no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's findings.

Notice of Decision

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Anonymity

16.  Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  an  anonymity  order,  on
    account of the appellant's children, there are no details  in  relation
    to those children in  this  appeal.   I  see  no  reason  therefore  to
    continue that order.


Signed   Date:  5 January 2016

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hutchinson
