
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/18763/2015
                                                               ia/18546/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2019                     |On 02 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                        Ramesh [R] (first appellant)
                       basantee [R] (second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Wilford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 26 January 2017, Judge Gandhi (the  judge)
    dismissed the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  them
    under Article 8.

 2. The grounds claim  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings, made  material  misdirections  in  law  and  made  irrational
    findings.  The grounds claim that the judge failed to adequately reason
    what the compelling circumstances were that warranted consideration  of
    the appellants'  circumstances  outside  of  the  Rules.   The  grounds
    submitted that the appellants' sadness at missing their adult  children
    and a possibility that the first appellant's diabetes might deteriorate
    were not compelling reasons for considering  the  appeals  outside  the
    Rules.  The grounds further claimed that the judge's "almost disregard"
    to S.117 of the Immigration Rules showed  inadequate  reasoning  and  a
    misdirection in law.  It was clear from the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah
    that an ability to speak English was no more than a neutral factor  and
    given the fact that the appellants were not supporting  themselves  and
    were living off the charity of friends, was a very important  issue  in
    the balancing exercise.

 3. It was  unclear  from  the  decision  why  the  judge  was  adopting  a
    reasonableness test at [94] and [108] when any  test  was  confined  to
    children who were settled here and the adult  sons  of  the  appellants
    were neither.  Further, whilst acknowledging that  the  appellants  had
    overstayed since 2007 and the first appellant had  a  criminal  record,
    the judge appeared to place no weight on those facts when  he  balanced
    proportionality leading to a clear misdirection in law.

 4.  The  reasons  given  for   finding   compelling   circumstances,   the
    misdirection as to the reasonableness test and failing to consider  the
    immigration history of the parents was such that the  judge's  decision
    was irrational and did not stand up to scrutiny.

 5. Judge Mark Davies granted permission on 31 July 2017.   He  said  inter
    alia:

         "2.  It is arguable  that  the  judge's  findings  that  there  are
             compelling circumstances to enable a  freestanding  Article  8
             claim  to  be  considered  are   flawed   and   based   on   a
             misunderstanding of the law.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge  did  not  apply  correctly  the
             'public interest' considerations set out in S.117B.

         4.   The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error  of
             law."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response, however, Mr Wilford handed up a skeleton
    dated 21 March 2019 in lieu.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Wilford submitted that there was no definition  of  "compelling"  in
    terms of the circumstances that  warranted  consideration  outside  the
    Rules.  The judge had identified the  following:  the  sons  had  never
    lived apart from their parents, interdependency between members of  the
    family, cultural practices, the parents'  anxiety  and  depression  and
    impact of removal on their mental  health  and  the  first  appellant's
    medical condition.

 8. The respondent had claimed that the judge's decision showed  an  almost
    disregard to Section 117.  Mr Wilford  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered S.117 at [69] and [70].

 9. As regards the judge's adoption of a "reasonableness" test,  the  issue
    was whether or not the interference  was  disproportionate  bearing  in
    mind the public interest.  The judge's reasoning  was  consistent  with
    Huang and Agyarko.

10. The Secretary of State asserted that the judge  appeared  to  place  no
    weight upon overstaying and criminality whereas it  was  apparent  that
    she had taken account of the appellants' poor  immigration  history  at
    [37].

11. Mr Wilford submitted that the judge might have been generous,  but  she
    was not irrational.  It might be that another judge would have  reached
    a different conclusion, however,  the  judge's  decision  displayed  no
    error of law.

12. Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. The appellants could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. Compelling reasons were required to go outside the Rules.   See  Garzon
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1225.

15. I find the judge materially erred in her approach  to  the  appellants'
    circumstances.  Her decision was irrational for the reasons set out  in
    the grounds; I need not repeat them here.  The judge  quotes  case  law
    but fails to engage with the principles.  The judge  placed  inadequate
    weight upon the appellants' poor immigration history and the fact  that
    the first appellant had a criminal record.  The judge's analysis  under
    S.117B was inadequate.

Notice of Decision

16. The judge materially erred.  I set aside her  decision  and  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 28 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

