
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18507/2013
                                                               IA/18541/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 May 2014                                   |On 02nd June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Mr MD Humayun Kabir Khan (First Appellant)
                     Mrs Ayrin Pervin (Second Appellant)
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Vidhyadharan
For the Respondents:   Mr T Bin-Aziz

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For ease I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal
    so that hereafter the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  is
    referred to as the respondent and Md Khan and Ayrin Pervin are referred
    to as the appellants.

 2. The appellants are a married couple who applied  for  leave  to  remain
    under Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) of the points-based  system  ("PBS").   The
    application was made on 28 November 2012 and was refused by a  decision
    dated 7 May 2013.  The appellants appealed the adverse decision and the
    matter came before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  In a very short
    determination the judge allowed the appeal but only to the extent  that
    the applications remain outstanding before the Secretary of State.  The
    intention of the judge  was  that  the  respondent  should  afford  the
    appellants the opportunity to adduce missing evidence,  the  respondent
    having failed to allow them to do so thus far.

 3. In substance the judge found that the application under paragraph 245DD
    and Appendix A of the Immigration Rules was refused on the  grounds  of
    deficiencies in the documentary evidence adduced in  support.   Details
    of the entrepreneurial team members and relevant telephone numbers were
    missing  from  the  contract  that  the  appellants  had  relied  upon.
    Furthermore, as evidence of the business being registered in the United
    Kingdom the appellants provided a blank copy of a tax return form.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal  the  judge's  decision  and
    permission was granted.  In granting  permission  the  judge  doing  so
    stated that the grounds of appeal argued that the judge erred  in  that
    he accepted that there were deficiencies in the documentation  produced
    by the appellants but failed to take into account the case of Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 which is
    to the effect that the respondent is not required to give an  applicant
    the opportunity to remedy any defect for inadequacy in the  application
    or supporting documentation so as to save the application from  refusal
    after substantive consideration.

 5. The representative for the appellants relied on his  skeleton  argument
    filed for the hearing before me.  If I found an error  of  law  in  the
    judge's determination then the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the
    Rules, but as argued in the original grounds of appeal  the  appellants
    should succeed under Article 8 ECHR in any event.

The Error of Law

 6. The First-tier Judge signed and dated the determination on  20  January
    2014. The determination was promulgated on  21  January  2014.   On  or
    about the same date the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  Rodriguez  was
    published but that case would  not  have  been  before  the  First-tier
    Judge.  There can be no criticism of him in that regard.   However,  in
    allowing the appeal to the extent that the respondent should afford the
    appellants the opportunity to adduce missing evidence the judge did not
    explain  sufficiently  why  the  appellants  should   be   given   that
    opportunity.

 7. Paragraph 245AA of the Rules makes clear that the  Secretary  of  State
    will  only  consider  documents  that  have  been  submitted  with   an
    application and  will  only  consider  documents  submitted  after  the
    application where they are submitted in accordance  with  sub-paragraph
    (b).  sub paragraph (b) was modified from  1  October  2013  which  was
    after the date of this  application  and  decision.   At  the  time  of
    application the practice was that if the applicant submitted a sequence
    of documents and some of them in a sequence were omitted (an example is
    given of one bank statement from a series being missing); a document is
    in the wrong format or a  document  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
    document UK Border Agency "will" - (this was deleted from  13  December
    2012 and then "may" was inserted from the  same  date)  -  contact  the
    applicant or his representative in  writing  and  request  the  correct
    documents.  The Rules required  that  missing  or  defective  documents
    would then need to be received within seven working days of the date of
    the request.  In 245 AA (c) UKBA would not request  documents  where  a
    specified document had not  been  submitted  (for  example  an  English
    language certificate) or where UKBA did not anticipate that  addressing
    the omission referred to in sub-paragraph (b) would  lead  to  a  grant
    because the application would be refused for other reasons.

 8. The relevant Section of the Rules has been further changed  as  from  1
    October 2013 to make more specific when and how the Secretary of  State
    may contact the applicant  or  his  representative  requesting  correct
    documents but those changes are of  no  application  here  because  the
    decision was made at an earlier date.

 9. The judge makes reference  to  missing  entrepreneurial  team  members'
    details  and  relevant  telephone  numbers,  and  also  the   appellant
    providing a blank copy of a tax return form which the judge  found  was
    "clearly an oversight" on the part of the appellant.  As the judge said
    "(it cannot) be said that the adduction of these documents  would  have
    made no difference, and that the  applications  were  bound  to  fail".
    That appears to me  to  be  precisely  the  point  and  that  important
    information was missing from the application itself.  It is clear  from
    reading the Rules and Guidance that it is only where  there  are  minor
    defects or omissions that the Secretary of State is obliged to  contact
    the applicant in writing to obtain missing information.

10. However, I find that it cannot be said that addressing the omission  or
    error would necessarily have lead or even have been likely to lead to a
    grant of leave. The complaint about the contract was not only  that  it
    did not contain the entrepreneurial team members' names and  the  other
    party's landline contact number, but  the  services  described  in  the
    contract did not appear to be client specific.  That reason for refusal
    does not seem to have been addressed by anybody. If the contract needed
    to be varied there would have to be agreement between  the  parties  to
    that contract to enable the variation to be made. That is not  a  minor
    matter capable of remedy as contemplated under the Rules and Guidance.

11. As to the blank copy of a tax return form, that may well  have  been  a
    mistake but not necessarily one that would be known to be a mistake  at
    the time of receipt of the application.  It is not apparent to me  that
    there would be sufficient reason to believe that form CT41G had in fact
    been completed, that it showed that a date of registration  existed  or
    that there was in  existence  a  completed  tax  return  document  that
    included the tax reference for the company.  As  per  paragraph  92  of
    Rodriguez   the   evidential   flexibility   process   instruction   is
    demonstrably not designed to give an applicant the opportunity first to
    remedy any defect  or  inadequacy  in  the  application  or  supporting
    documentation  so  as  to  save  the  application  from  refusal  after
    substantive consideration.  As is stated earlier in the paragraph it is
    to be  noted  that  although  there  is  no  limit  to  the  amount  of
    information that can be requested from the applicant, it is immediately
    qualified by the instruction that requests for information  should  not
    be speculative and  -  as  subsequently  reiterated  -  there  must  be
    sufficient reasons to believe that any requested evidence existed.

12. I mention at this point that on 15 March 2013 the first  appellant  was
    sent a letter referring to the Government  announcing  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules to take effect from 31 January  2013,  which  changes
    were made in response to evidence that some applicants were seeking  to
    abuse the Immigration Rules.  The first  appellant  was  told  that  he
    would  be  contacted  to  advise  how  the  changes  would  affect  his
    application and what steps (if any) he would need to take before making
    a decision on the application.  It appears he was not contacted. It  is
    not argued that by reason of the  contents  of  that  letter  alone  he
    should  have  been  contacted  if  there  were  shortcomings   in   the
    application rendering it insufficient to satisfy  the  requirements  or
    that it would be unfair in the public law sense for  the  Secretary  of
    State to go back on the representation made.  Such  an  argument  would
    fail in any event. See paragraphs 96 and 97 of Rodriguez.

13. In Rodriguez at paragraph 100 it  states"  Generally,  Sullivan  LJ  in
    terms said in paragraph 35 of Alam (Alam & Ors v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 960):

         "... the Immigration Rules, the Policy Guidance, and the prescribed
         application form all made it clear that submission of the specified
         documents with the application  was  mandatory:  if  the  specified
         documents were not  produced  with  the  application  it  would  be
         refused ... Mr Malik referred to the draconian  consequences  of  a
         failure to supply a specified document  but  that  is  an  inherent
         feature of the PBS which  puts  a  premium  on  predictability  and
         certainty at the expense of discretion".

          Sullivan LJ went on later to say in paragraph 45:

         "... the appellants were simply  at  fault  in  not  supplying  the
         specified documents with their applications.  I  endorse  the  view
         expressed by the Upper Tribunal  in  Shahzad  (paragraph  49)  that
         there is no unfairness in  the  requirement  in  the  PBS  that  an
         applicant must submit with his  application  all  of  the  evidence
         necessary to demonstrate compliance with the Rule  under  which  he
         seeks leave. The Immigration Rules, the  Policy  Guidance  and  the
         prescribed application form all make it clear that  the  prescribed
         documents must be submitted with the application, and if  they  are
         not the application  will  be  rejected.   The  price  of  securing
         consistency and predictability is a lack of  flexibility  that  may
         well result in 'hard' decisions in individual cases,  but  that  is
         not a justification for imposing an obligation on the Secretary  of
         State to conduct a preliminary check of  all  applications  to  see
         whether they are accompanied by all of the specified documents,  to
         contact applicants where this is not the case, and to give them  an
         opportunity to supply the  missing  documents.   Imposing  such  an
         obligation would not only have significant  resource  implications,
         it would also extend the time taken by the decision making process,
         contrary to the policy underlying the introduction of the PBS".

    Those remarks remain, in my view, and allowing for  the  terms  of  the
    process instruction, apposite to the present three cases."

Conclusions

14. The current appeal before me,  for  the  reasons  given,  leads  me  to
    conclude that the respondent was under no obligation in the  particular
    circumstances to contact the appellants to afford them the  opportunity
    to adduce missing evidence because the Border  Agency  could  not  have
    anticipated that addressing such omissions and  errors  as  there  were
    would lead to a grant.  My reasoning for coming to that finding  is  as
    set out above.

15. The First-tier Judge also  for  the  reasons  set  out  above  did  not
    adequately explain why the respondent should have acted as he found she
    should have done and therein lay the error.

16. For these reasons the decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside and
    the appeal under the Rules is dismissed.

The Article 8 ECHR Claim

17. The matter does not end there  because  the  appellants  also  made  an
    Article 8 claim in the notice of appeal to the First-tier.   The  judge
    did not deal with that element of the  appeal  considering,  no  doubt,
    that the fact that the  application  under  paragraph  245DD  would  be
    considered afresh there was therefore no need for him to make  findings
    in relation to the human rights claim.

18. On the basis as I have  found  that  the  appellants  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  -  the  second  appellant  is
    entirely  dependent  upon  her  husband  in  relation  to  meeting  the
    requirements of those Rules and therefore fails under them for the same
    reasons as he does - although they both have private and  family  lives
    in  the  United  Kingdom  worthy  of  respect  they  do  not  meet  the
    requirements to be met by applicants for leave to remain on the grounds
    of private life in the United Kingdom.  That much is not in issue.   As
    per paragraph 17 of Haleemudeen v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558:

         17. "........There is a useful summary of  the  background  to  the
         Rules and the aims of the Home Office in introducing  them  in  the
         judgment of Sales J in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2013 EWHC 720  (Admin)  at  [8]  -  [10],  in  which  a
         challenge to the lawfulness of the new  Rules  was  rejected.   The
         summary in Nagre's case stated  that  the  Rules  were  amended  to
         address more explicitly the factors which,  according  to  domestic
         and Strasbourg case-law, weigh in favour of or against a claim by a
         foreign national based on ECHR Article 8 to remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  They were thus  introduced  to  align  more  closely  the
         Immigration Rules and the approach under Article 8,  and  to  unify
         consideration under the Rules of Article 8 and Section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 which deals with  the
         welfare  of  children.  The  Secretary   of   State   also   issued
         instructions regarding the approach to be applied by  officials  in
         deciding  to  grant  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules.  Those
         instructions were that, if the requirements of the  Rules  are  not
         met, refusal will normally be appropriate but  that  leave  can  be
         granted  where  exceptional  circumstances,   in   the   sense   of
         'unjustifiably  harsh  consequences'  for  the  individual,   would
         result.  Sales J stated (at [36])  that  this  residual  discretion
         'fully accommodated the requirements of Article 8'."

19. I note from the statement of Mr Khan that he was granted leave to enter
    the UK on 16 August 2006 as a  student  until  31  December  2007.   He
    extended his leave subsequently on several occasions and  lastly  on  8
    December 2010 he was granted leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant until 8 December 2012.  Shortly before his leave was  due
    to expire he made  an  application  for  further  leave  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the PBS and that was the decision that was
    refused by the respondent and is the subject of this appeal.

20. Mr Khan states that he has established a private and family life in the
    UK and has invested time  and  substantial  amounts  of  money  in  the
    business which is operating successfully.  The UK has  stated  that  it
    wants to attract "the best and brightest" and he has been awarded a  UK
    degree from a recognised university which shows that he is fit for that
    category.  Apart from stating that he has formed "a very decent private
    and family life here in the UK" nothing further  is  given  by  way  of
    information as to what that constitutes. Mrs Pervin's statement follows
    closely that of her husband but she adds that she  has  created  social
    and community ties here.

21. I have considered the decision of the House of Lords in  Huang  v  SSHD
    [2007]  UKHL  11  where  guidance   was   given   that   in   assessing
    proportionality  there  is  no  legal   test   of   truly   exceptional
    circumstances and the analysis was reaffirmed that was given in Razgar,
    R (on the application of) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  Also  reaffirmed  was
    the  importance  of  continuing  reliance  on  established   Strasbourg
    jurisprudence relating to Article 8.  I have  considered  the  step-by-
    step approach set out in Razgar.  Although the question of removal  has
    yet to be decided following the ruling  that  the  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 decision was unlawful  the
    decision under appeal interferes with the appellants' right to  respect
    for their private and family life and engages the operation of  Article
    8.  The interference is in accordance  with  the  law  and  is  in  the
    interests of immigration control which although not a legitimate end in
    itself is a well-established means of protecting the economic wellbeing
    of the country.

22. I find that the decision is a proportionate one.  The  appellants  when
    they arrived in this country would have had no  expectation  that  they
    would be entitled to remain in the UK absent their being able to comply
    with the requirements of the Rules.  Their private and family life  may
    be enjoyed together elsewhere and presumably in their home  country  of
    Bangladesh.  They will have built up their private lives  here,  but  I
    have scant detail about them. There is little detail either about their
    business and in any event no reasons are shown as to why they would  be
    unable  to  carry  on  in  business  in  a  different  way  perhaps  in
    Bangladesh.

23. The circumstances therefore are such that I find that the  decision  is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to  be  achieved  and
    thus these appeals fail under the Immigration Rules and also  on  human
    rights grounds also.

Decision

 i) The First-tier Judge's decision is set aside for  the  reasons  already
    given.

ii) These appeals are dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

iii) No anonymity direction has been made previously and  the  circumstances
    do not appear to warrant one being made now and therefore I do not make
    such a direction.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton



