
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18981/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2016                  |On 14 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                           MUHMMAD MIRAZUR RAHMAn
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, London Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Samimi promulgated on 4 February  2016.   The  grounds  of  appeal  are
    extremely prolix but in submissions before me the basis of  the  appeal
    has much reduced so as to focus on the  single  issue  of  whether  the
    Judge had jurisdiction to hear the appeal and, in  particular,  whether
    there was a right of appeal in  the  particular  factual  circumstances
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He made an application  for
    a residence card in reliance on the provisions of Regulation 17(1) as a
    family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

3.   The respondent, in a refusal letter dated  20  April  2015,  considered
    the evidence supplied in relation to the claimed relationship with  the
    sponsor, Sunni Mostofa, and came to the  conclusion  that  insufficient
    evidence had been submitted to demonstrate a dependency  prior  to  the
    appellant entering the United Kingdom.

4.   The respondent therefore rejected the claim and stated at  the  top  of
    page 3 of the letter:

         "As your entitlement to rely on the provisions of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  cannot  be  established
         there is no right of appeal against this decision. However  redress
         through other legal channels may be possible and it is  recommended
         you seek legal advice should you choose to do so."

    There follows substantive text indicating  other  bases  on  which  the
    appellant might wish to pursue a future claim.

5.   Notwithstanding the assertion that there was no right  of  appeal,  the
    appellant nonetheless  lodged  an  application  seeking  permission  to
    appeal which was considered administratively by a Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The note  on  file  which  I  have  read  this  morning
    indicates that the Judge concluded that the matter should proceed.  The
    question of the validity of the proceedings should be determined at the
    hearing. It is recorded that the respondent says there is no  right  of
    appeal under Regulation 26B(2) and  the  appellant  says  that  he  has
    submitted  copies  of  birth  certificates   etc.    The   respondent's
    contention is that that is not adequate.  The note concludes by  saying
    that the Tribunal Judge can determine the validity issue.

6.   In due course the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  tribunal  for
    determination. At the time there were two appellants but only  one  has
    chosen to pursue the matter in the Upper Tribunal. The decision of  the
    Judge  is  extremely  brief.   It  runs  merely  to   two   substantive
    paragraphs, the second of which reads as follows:

         "The refusal letter provides that there are no  removal  directions
         in this case  and  if  the  appellants  wish  to  make  a  separate
         application under Appendix FM of the Rules or  in  accordance  with
         paragraph 276ADE they have to make a separate application which  in
         turn would give rise to a separate right of appeal.  The  appellant
         now wishes to proceed in accordance with Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
         The refusal letter has not considered  the  appellants'  Article  8
         rights under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADEC or outside the Rules.
          There is no removal direction in this case and I find there is  no
         jurisdiction to hear the appeal  before  me.   The  respondent  has
         maintained that the appellant has no right of appeal."

7.   It seems to me (and is fairly conceded by Mr Clark on the  respondent's
    behalf) that the Judge did not turn her mind to the question of whether
    there was in fact a right of appeal which, under the Regulations, is  a
    mixed matter of fact and law.

8.   Part 6  of  the  Regulations  deals  with  appeals.  Appeal  rights  in
    particular are dealt with  in  Regulation  26.  After  some  discussion
    between legal representatives this morning we have established that the
    text then current is as follows in relation to Regulation 26(3).

         "If a person ... claims to be a family member who has retained  the
         right of residence or the family member of a  relative  on  an  EEA
         national he may  not  appeal  under  these  Regulations  unless  he
         produces


         (a)  a passport and
         (b)  either
             (i)  an EEA family permit
             (ia)     a qualifying EEA state residence card
             (ii)     proof that he is the family member or relative of  an
             EEA national, or
             (iii)    in a case of a person claiming to be a family  member
                  who has retained the right of residence, proof that he was
                  a family member of the relevant person."

9.   Mr Islam takes me to a number of documents which were before the First-
    tier  Tribunal  although  not  referred  to  in  the  decision.   Those
    documents include birth certificates for the appellant, his mother  and
    the sponsor, and in addition  the  passport  of  the  sponsor.   In  my
    opinion the judge was under a duty when considering  whether  there  is
    jurisdiction to entertain the appeal to  assess  the  evidence  and  to
    consider whether that evidence  triggers  the  right  of  appeal  under
    Regulation 26(3).  Her oversight in not doing so is a material error of
    law and it must follow that her decision on jurisdiction be set aside.

10.  Both Mr Clarke and Mr  Islam  agree  that  convenience  and  expedition
    militate in favour of the jurisdiction decision being remade by  me  in
    the Upper Tribunal rather than remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  Mr Clarke makes the short submission  that  the  fact  that  the  birth
    certificates are photocopies and not originals mean that the burden  of
    proof was not been discharged by the appellant. I reject that. I am  of
    the view that the witness statement of the appellant coupled with those
    copy documents is sufficient factually to bring this matter within  the
    ambit of Regulation 26(3) in relation to the issue of family member.

12.  Accordingly as a matter of fact and law, the First-tier  Tribunal  does
    have the jurisdiction to entertain, and in due  course  determine,  the
    appeal.

13.  Having made that determination,  the  proper  order  which  necessarily
    follows is that this matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which then proceeds to determine the appeal  on  its  merits.  As  this
    appeal  has  turned  exclusively  on  jurisdiction,  it  would  not  be
    appropriate for me to make any comment on  the  underlying  substantive
    appeal.


Notice of Decision

Having found there to be an error of law on the issue of  jurisdiction,  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade as follows.   On
the basis of the information available, there was a right of appeal  to  the
First-tier Tribunal under Regulation  26(3)  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and, in the  circumstances,  the  First-tier
Tribunal had jurisdiction to hear and determine the appeal on its merits.

The matter is therefore remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for  the  appeal
to be heard and determined.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date          13 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
