

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18167/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 4 April 2016                               |On 13 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Beach, counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State pursues this appeal against the decision of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal to allow an appeal against the refusal to  issue  a
    residence card under Regulation 10(5) and Regulation  15(1)(f)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as  amended)
    ("the Regulations").

 2. I maintain the descriptions of the parties as they were in  the  First-
    Tier  Tribunal,  namely  as  appellant  and  respondent,  for  ease  of
    reference, notwithstanding it is the Secretary  of  State  who  pursues
    this appeal.

 3. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to issue a  residence  card  under
    the Regulations.  His appeal against that decision was allowed by Judge
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McDade  ("the  FTTJ")  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 24 September 2015.

 4. An anonymity direction was not made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but,
    given my references to the appellant's personal circumstances,  I  make
    one now.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Foudy on 2 December 2015.

 6. On 26 January 2016 I found that the FTTJ had made a material  error  of
    law in  his  findings  under  Regulations  15(1)(b)  and  4,  including
    4(1)(d)(ii) and (iii)) in that the FTJ had failed to address the  issue
    of whether the appellant had demonstrated that his former  wife  was  a
    qualified person during the whole of the five year period (as  required
    by Regulations 15(1)(b) and 4, including  4(1)(d)(ii)  and  (iii)).   I
    directed that the decision should be remade at a resumed hearing before
    me. I preserved the findings of the FTTJ as they related to the periods
    outside May 2011-August 2012.  Given the terms of paragraph  6  of  the
    grounds of appeal and Ms Brocklesby-Weller's oral  submissions  at  the
    hearing in January 2016, I found that there  remained  outstanding  the
    issue of whether the appellant had demonstrated that he  fulfilled  the
    criteria in Regulation 4(1)(ii) and 4(2)(b), namely  the  existence  of
    comprehensive sickness insurance cover for his former wife and  himself
    for the period May 2011 - August 2012.  This was the  issue  is  to  be
    decided at the resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

 7. Thus the matter has come before me today.

 8. Ms Beach, for the appellant, accepted that  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence of the existence of comprehensive sickness  cover  either  for
    the appellant or his  former  wife  during  the  material  period.  She
    accepted  that  appellant  was  in  some  difficulty  with  regard   to
    demonstrating he was entitled  to  a  permanent  residence  card  under
    Regulation 15. However, she  submitted  he  had  retained  a  right  of
    residence under Regulation 10.

 9. Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent, accepted that  the  appellant
    fulfilled the criteria in Regulation 10 and  that  he  had  retained  a
    right of residence in the UK. Given the evidence before  the  FTTJ  and
    before me now, I agree with the oral submissions to that effect.

10. I indicated to the parties that I would  remake  the  FTTJ's  decision,
    allowing the appeal on  the  ground  that,  the  respondent's  decision
    having been made under both Regulation 10 as  well  as  Regulation  15,
    that decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Regulation  10,  the
    respondent's representative having conceded  as  much  at  the  hearing
    before me.  Both parties' representatives agreed that was  the  correct
    approach.  Thus I find that the  appellant  has  demonstrated  that  he
    fulfils the criteria in Regulation 10 and  that  he  has  retained  the
    right of residence in the UK. He does not have  a  right  of  permanent
    residence, under Regulation 15.



Decision Notice

11. Having previously set aside the decision of the  FTTJ,  I  remake  that
    decision and allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


Signed           A M Black                Date           4 April 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award
I maintain the  fee  award  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the
decision of the Judge  having  been  set  aside  and  remade,  allowing  the
appeal.


Signed           A M Black                Date           4 April 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


