
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18295/2013
                                                               IA/19425/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                          Mr Muhammad Sufian Sheikh
                             Mrs Rukhsana Sheikh
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Canter, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant,  Mr  Muhammad  Sufian  Sheikh,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan and his date of birth is 14 June 1984.  His  mother,  Rukhsana
    Sheikh, is the second appellant.  Her date of birth is 16 October  1944
    and she also is a citizen of Pakistan.

2.   Both appellants were granted visit visas  on  21  November  2011  which
    expired on 21 November 2013.  The  appellants  entered  the  UK  on  17
    October 2012. On 28 March 2013 both appellants made an  application  to
    vary their leave to remain in the  UK  under  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention on  Human  Rights.   The  applications  were  refused  in  a
    decision of the respondent of 14 May  2013.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considered the appellants' private lives and decided that they did  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.
    They were advised by the Secretary of State that if they are in fear of
    persecution they should make an application for asylum.

3.   The appellants appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    on the grounds of their private and family life and under Article 3  of
    the 1950 Convention on Human Rights.  The appeal was dismissed by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Taylor in a  decision  dated  1  April  2014
    following a hearing on 24 March 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher on 12  May  2014.  Thus  the
    matter came before me.

The Evidence Before the First -tier Tribunal and the Findings

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellants both  gave
    oral evidence.  In addition the first appellant's siblings (the  second
    appellant's adult children) gave oral  evidence.   There  were  witness
    statements from those who gave oral evidence and other members  of  the
    family.

5.   The evidence of the appellants was that there had  been  a  problem  in
    Pakistan prior to coming to the UK relating to a plot of land which had
    been transferred into the name of the second  appellant  following  the
    death of her  husband  in  2008.   They  had  been  threatened  on  the
    telephone.  People had attended their house in Pakistan and  pointed  a
    gun at the first appellant.  He was  assaulted  and  shots  were  fired
    through a window of the house.  The police were called.   There  was  a
    second incident where a kidnap attempt was made on the first appellant.
     It was shortly after this incident that the  appellants  travelled  to
    the UK.  The appellants suspect that the assailants are someone  within
    the family who are aware of the land and who are trying to  force  them
    to sell the land to them.  The incident was reported to the police  and
    the appellants submitted a police report which had been translated into
    English for the appeal.  Since they came to the UK they have been  told
    by their neighbours in Pakistan that their house (the appellants' home)
    has been broken into. They  changed  their  minds  about  returning  to
    Pakistan.     The appellants do not believe that the police are able to
    help them.  They could not live anywhere else in Pakistan  because  the
    assailants would be able to locate them.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  first  appellant's
    sister (the second appellant's daughter) Aroosa Sheikh.   Her  evidence
    was that her mother was very upset after  the  death  of  her  husband.
    There had been threats by people in Pakistan concerning family land and
    it is not safe for the appellants to return to Pakistan.  Aroosa Sheikh
    lives with her husband in the UK.  Her husband is a British citizen and
    she is here on a spouse visa but intends  to  apply  for  a  settlement
    visa.  The appellants do not have any contact with other family members
    in Pakistan.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  first  appellant's
    brother (second appellant's son), Usman Sheikh.  He  has  discretionary
    leave to remain in the UK and his evidence is that he is  eligible  for
    indefinite leave to remain in 2016.  Like his sister he is a citizen of
    Pakistan.  His evidence was that his mother is emotionally dependent on
    his family and is very close to his three children (her grandchildren).
     Mr Sheikh is separated from the mother of his eldest child and he  has
    made applications for access and  this  is  why  he  has  been  granted
    discretionary leave.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal made findings at [16], [17], [18] and  [20]  of
    the determination:

         "16. With regard to the claim under article 3  ECHR,  I  have  been
             duly reminded of the lower standard of proof in such cases but
             offered no explanation as to why neither of the appellants had
             chosen to make a proper application for asylum or humanitarian
             protection, despite the second appellant being advised in  the
             refusal letter that she should lodge a claim with  the  Asylum
             Screening Unit if she wished to progress the claim.   I  refer
             to S8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)
             Act 2004, which lists modes of behaviour by a person  claiming
             asylum or human rights, which damages their credibility.  This
             includes behaviour which is  designed  or  likely  to  conceal
             information, or mislead, or obstruct or delay the handling  or
             resolution of the claim.  S8 of the Act also includes  failure
             to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity to claim  asylum
             or humanitarian protection on reaching a safe country.  I find
             that the appellants'  complete  failure  to  claim  asylum  or
             humanitarian protection in the UK seriously adversely  effects
             the credibility of their claim that they would be at  risk  on
             return to Pakistan.  The appellants entered the UK on a  visit
             visa on 17th October 2012, they did not  claim  protection  on
             entry to the UK and did not make any application for a further
             five months until 28th March 2013 when their visas had  almost
             expired.  I find that their failure  to  claim  protection  on
             arrival in the UK  and  their  further  delay  in  making  any
             application  is  an  additional  adverse  indicator   of   the
             credibility  of   their   claim.    Even   in   making   their
             applications, the main  thrust  of  the  applications  was  to
             remain in the UK on the basis of family and private  life  and
             the threats in Pakistan were  secondary  to  the  extent  that
             there was no claim for asylum or protection.  In  giving  oral
             evidence, both the appellants and their  supporting  witnesses
             stated that the appellants came to the UK for the purpose of a
             three to four week visit and had return  tickets.   When  they
             came to the UK they intended to return but they  only  changed
             their minds after speaking to neighbours who  told  them  that
             their house had been broken into.  The submitted  evidence  is
             therefore clear that at the time  that  the  appellant's  left
             Pakistan they did not consider themselves to be at such a risk
             that they would not be returning.   It  is  sadly  common  all
             across the world that people who go on holiday find that their
             houses have been broken into while they have been  away.   The
             appellants have failed to offer any explanation as to why they
             considered that their house being broken into would  put  them
             in a position  of  requiring  international  protection,  they
             clearly did not think this necessary when they left Pakistan.


         17.  The appellants claimed that they  could  not  return  as  they
             could  not  rely  on  the  protection  of  the  police.    The
             appellants have submitted a copy of the report with the  first
             appellant made to the police, he clearly felt able  to  attend
             the  police  station  to  make  the  report  and  explain  the
             circumstances.  The appellants  gave  no  evidence  that  they
             would be unable to approach  the  police  or  expect  them  to
             assist.  I find it significant that the  alleged  shooting  at
             the appellants' house was  not  noted  in  the  report,  which
             suggests that it was either not mentioned  or  not  given  any
             prominence as part  of  the  account.   The  appellant's  have
             submitted no independent evidence  that  the  Pakistan  police
             force may not be able to cope with such  an  investigation  or
             would be unwilling to do so.  The supporting  statement  of  a
             neighbour says that no investigation had been carried out into
             the break in but that is based on his observations only, as he
             was not the complainant.  They have complained that the police
             had not  prevented  any  further  attacks  but  they  had  not
             provided the police with any names of  the  attackers  or  any
             possible identities of the attackers.   They  think  that  the
             attackers may have connections with the family but  have  been
             unable to state which members of the family may  be  involved.
             The appellants have provided the police with no information on
             which they may identity there assailants, and I consider  that
             they have provided no evidence of lack of co-operation by  the
             police.  The police report notes that the first telephone call
             from the assailants was on 4th October  2012,  less  than  two
             weeks prior to the appellants leaving for the UK,  the  second
             incident took place three days before they left  for  the  UK.
             The only evidence that the appellants have provided that  they
             reported these matters to the police  is  dated  14th  October
             2012, three days before  they  left  for  the  UK,  they  have
             submitted no evidence of a prior notification to  the  police.
             I find that  without  having  provided  the  police  with  any
             identification of  the  attackers,  the  appellants  left  the
             country  within  three  days,  leaving  the  police  with   no
             reasonable opportunity to investigate the matter  before  they
             left.  It is therefore not surprising that  they  intended  to
             return to Pakistan when they first arrived in the UK.  I  find
             that the appellants have not  claimed  that  they  were  under
             threat from agents of  the  state  and  they  have  failed  to
             provide any evidence of the lack  of  availability  of  police
             protection.  I have found that when they  arrived  in  the  UK
             that they had every intention of returning  and  they  had  no
             fear of return.  The appellants have given no evidence of  the
             identity of their assailants and I find that  their  assertion
             that they would be at risk in  any  part  of  the  country  is
             entirely speculative.  Even on the lower standard of  proof  I
             am not satisfied that the  appellants  would  be  at  risk  on
             return to Pakistan on account of a land  dispute  or  for  any
             other reason.


         18.  In considering the article 8 appeal, my starting point is  the
             five stage test as set out in the case of Razgar 2004 UKHL 27.
              I find that the refusal was in accordance with  the  law,  as
             the appellants currently have no basis to remain in the UK  in
             accordance with the Immigration Rules, they did not  claim  to
             remain under the Immigration Rules and I have found that  they
             would not satisfy the Rules with regard to family  life  under
             Appendix FM.  I find that the removal of the appellants  would
             be  for  the  legitimate  purpose  of  maintaining   effective
             immigration control.  With regard to  the  first  appellant  I
             refer  to  the  case  of  Advic  v  UK  1995  ECHR  57,  which
             established that the relationship between adult family members
             would not usually form the basis of an article 8  claim.   The
             first appellant is an independent adult, he worked in  the  IT
             sector in Pakistan and had qualifications from  the  UK.   His
             purpose to come to the UK was merely to visit his siblings and
             I have not accepted his claim that he had other reasons why he
             could not return.  While I may accept that the first appellant
             would be comfortable living with a sibling in the UK  and  the
             arrangement may be convenient, I find  no  additional  factors
             which would engage the first appellant's relationship with his
             siblings to article 8 ECHR.  I find that the  first  appellant
             does not meet the requirements of  the  first  of  the  Razgar
             tests and I find that he has not established a family life  in
             the UK for the purposes of article 8 ECHR.  There would be  no
             interference with family life which would engage article 8 and
             I find that his removal would be proportionate to the need for
             immigration control.  The first  appellant  has  more  distant
             relatives both in the UK  and  in  Pakistan.  With  regard  to
             private life, the first appellant has given evidence  of  some
             communal involvement and having friends in the UK.  I refer to
             the guidance in the case of  MG  Serbia  and  Montenegro  2005
             UKAIT 113, which is authority for  the  established  case  law
             that merely having a job and friends would be insufficient  to
             create a private life for the purpose of article  8,  as  they
             could be recreated elsewhere.  The first  appellant  does  not
             work in the UK and does not have  substantive  leave,  he  had
             employment in Pakistan and he gave no evidence that  he  could
             not restart his private life in Pakistan.   I  find  that  the
             first appellant has not established a private life in  the  UK
             for the purposes of article 8  ECHR.   Similarly,  the  second
             appellant gave evidence of communal involvement and friends in
             the UK.  She had  property  and  land  in  Pakistan  and  gave
             evidence of being a teacher all of her life  and  running  her
             own school.  I have not accepted  that  the  second  appellant
             would be at risk on return to Pakistan and she  has  given  no
             evidence as why the private life that she had before she  came
             to the UK could not resume on her return.  She stated that she
             was involved in the community in Pakistan.  Her  own  evidence
             was that she only intended visiting the UK  for  a  period  of
             three to four weeks.  I find that  the  second  appellant  has
             failed to demonstrate that she has established a private  life
             in the UK, in the last 18 months, to the  extent  which  would
             engage article 8 ECHR.


         20.  With regard to the family life of the second appellant, I have
             found that she has not met the requirements of the Immigration
             Rules as a dependant relative.  I have not accepted the  first
             appellant's claims to remain in the UK on  any  grounds.   The
             current position is therefore that she has two children living
             in the UK and one would be living  with  her  in  Pakistan  on
             return.  This was the position  before  the  second  appellant
             travelled to the UK for a visit in  2012.   The  two  children
             living in the UK are neither UK citizens and neither  do  they
             have indefinite leave to remain.  One  considers  that  he  is
             eligible to apply for ILR in 2016 and  the  other  is  yet  to
             apply for settlement.  They both currently have limited  leave
             only.  I fully accept that the second appellant my  find  life
             more convenient to be nearer to her two children with  limited
             leave, which amounts to a limited family life,  but  she  gave
             evidence of living in Pakistan  for  a  number  of  years  and
             visiting the UK on a yearly basis.  The second appellant is  a
             teacher of many years experience and she is aged 69, she  gave
             her evidence clearly and cogently.  She was able to live  with
             her youngest son only, with occasional visits to the UK for  a
             number of years.  The second appellant's children  in  the  UK
             have sought to persuade the Tribunal that the second appellant
             is dependant on them as she is a widow and  has  hypertension.
             The second appellant has submitted no evidence of evidence  of
             clinical depression or being unable to cope, and she was  able
             to manage form 2008 until 2012,  when  she  came  to  the  UK.
             Hypertension is a condition which effects a  large  proportion
             of the population and  is  managed  by  tablets.   The  second
             appellant gave no evidence that she would be  unable  to  take
             her tablets without her children in the UK  or  that  she  was
             otherwise effected by the condition.  The second appellant had
             not lived in a family unit with her children in the  UK  prior
             to 2012 and she gave no evidence  as  to  why  she  could  not
             continue to visit her family in the UK  and  keep  in  contact
             with modern means of communication.   The  family  in  the  UK
             could keep contact as previously and there would be no  breach
             of their rights to family life and remain in contact with  the
             second appellant.  I  find  that  the  interference  with  the
             limited family life which the second appellant has in  the  UK
             with two of her children would not be  of  such  magnitude  to
             engage article 8 if she was to be removed from the UK.  I find
             that her removal would be proportionate to the need for proper
             and effective immigration control."

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

9.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that the Judge erred  in
    relation to Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  ("the  2004  Act")  and  the  decision  was
    contrary to the guidance in JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878
    because the word "potentially" should be read into Section 8.   Section
    8 was not cited in the Reasons for Refusal Letter and  it  was  not  an
    issue that was raised by the Presenting Officer at the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge did not  raise  the  issue  at  the
    hearing and did not give the appellants the opportunity to address  the
    issue, which results in a breach of the principles of  natural  justice
    and resulted in unfairness.

10.  The grounds argue that the Judge erred in failing to consider the  best
    interests of the children. The Judge erred in finding  that  the  first
    appellant did not enjoy family life in the UK.   The  Judge  failed  to
    give any adequate justification for the inconsistency having found that
    the second appellant has family life which would engage the Convention,
    but not the  first  appellant.   The  Judge  failed  to  apply  anxious
    scrutiny to the appellants' claim to be at risk on return to  Pakistan.
    The Judge did not make a finding as to the credibility or otherwise  of
    the appellants' accounts.

11.  Both Mr Canter and Ms Holmes made oral submissions.  Mr  Canter's  oral
    submissions were in the context of the grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal and Ms Holmes' were in the context of the response under Rule 24
    of the 2008 Procedure Rules.

Conclusions

12.  Contrary to the assertion made in the grounds, the First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellants were not credible  witnesses.  Their  account
    was not accepted by the Judge. At [17] the Judge  refers  to  the  2004
    Act.  He went on to find the  appellants'  complete  failure  to  claim
    asylum or humanitarian protection in  the  UK  as  seriously  adversely
    affecting  their  credibility.  He  found  that  delay  in  making  the
    application was an additional adverse indicator of the  credibility  of
    their claim. In my view the delay in the appellants making a claim  was
    always an obvious issue whether in the context of Section 8 of the 2004
    Act or not. Those representing the appellants must have  been  of  this
    view because the issue is touched  upon  by  the  appellants  in  their
    evidence.   In the first appellant's witness  statement  he  refers  to
    this at [17] when he stated that he has now been informed by neighbours
    that the house in Pakistan has been  broken  into  and  they  had  seen
    suspicious people around the house.  The second appellant  referred  to
    this at [7] of her witness statement.  Her evidence is that she did not
    want to make a formal claim for asylum as she did not  intend  to  stay
    here longer than the time period of her visa.  She wanted to return  to
    Pakistan, however, the situation has deteriorated. The appellants  were
    represented by experienced Counsel,  and  the  Judge  in  my  view  was
    entitled to attach weight to the fact that there had been  a  delay  in
    making a claim.  I disagree that this was the  Judge's  starting  point
    for credibility  and  not  in  accordance  with  the  judgement  in  JT
    (Cameroon).  I do not regard the positioning of Section  8  within  the
    determination to be an error in  this  case.   It  is  clear  from  the
    Judge's findings that delay was  not  a  determinative  factor  in  the
    credibility assessment.

13.   The Judge in my view made a global assessment  of  credibility.  There
    were a number of  reasons  why  the  appellants'  credibility  was  not
    accepted including the following:

    (1)  The delay in making the application.


    (2)  The appellants' evidence that they felt that they could  not  rely
         on the police was not consistent with their evidence that they  had
         attended the police station in order to report the incident.


    (3)  The alleged shooting at the appellants' house was not mentioned in
         the incident report submitted by the appellants in evidence.


    (4)  There was no independent evidence that the Pakistani Police  Force
         may not be able to cope with such  an  investigation  or  would  be
         unwilling to do so.


    (5)  The appellants complained that the police had  not  been  able  to
         prevent further attacks but they have not been able to provide  the
         police  with  any  names  of  the  attackers  or   their   possible
         identities.


    (6)  The appellants think that the attackers may have connections  with
         family but have been unable to state which members  of  the  family
         may be involved.


    (7)  The appellants did not provide the  police  with  any  information
         that could lead to the identity of the assailants. They provided no
         evidence of lack of cooperation by the police.


    (8)  The police report notes that the first telephone call made by  the
         assailants to the appellants was on 4 October  2012  but  the  only
         evidence that they provided that the appellants  had  reported  the
         matter to the police is dated 14 October 2012, which is three  days
         before the appellants left Pakistan. There was no evidence of prior
         notification to the police.


    (9)  The appellants  left  the  country  within  giving  the  police  a
         reasonable opportunity to investigate.


    (10) The appellants' claim to be at risk is speculative.




14       In oral submissions Mr Canter submitted that  the  Judge  erred  in
    concluding that the appellants had failed to provide  evidence  of  the
    lack of availability of police protection (see [17]) and that they gave
    no evidence that they would be unable to approach the police or  expect
    them to assist (see  [17]),  because  the  appellants  had  given  oral
    evidence about this. In my view the Judge  understood  the  appellants'
    evidence in relation to sufficiency of protection, but did  not  accept
    it noting that they attended the police station to report the  incident
    and that there was no independent evidence that the police in  Pakistan
    would not be able to cope with such an investigation or that they would
    be unwilling to (see [17]). It was open to the Judge to  conclude  that
    there was sufficiency of protection.

15.  The Judge made an error because he did not make a finding  in  relation
    to the best interests of the children of Usman Sheikh, namely Esa (date
    of birth 24 August 2008), Inaam (date of birth 13 May  2012)  and  Ahad
    (date of birth 19 January 2014). The two youngest  children  live  with
    their parents and they have  lived  with  the  appellants  since  their
    arrival in the UK or, in the case of the youngest child,  since  birth.
    The eldest child lives with his mother.

16.  It is likely that the children enjoy the company  of  their  uncle  and
    grandmother.  However, in my view there  was  no  suggestion  that  the
    decision to remove the appellants  would  be  contrary  to  their  best
    interests in the context of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  It is the best interests of the children  to  be
    with both their parents and there is no suggestion  that  the  decision
    would interfere with this.   The status of the children in the  UK  was
    not entirely clear but their father has discretionary leave and  he  is
    not a British citizen.  The error is not material because  it  did  not
    infect the subsequent balancing exercise under Article 8.

17.      The Judge was entitled in my view to find that the first  appellant
    did not enjoy family life in the context of Article 8.  He is an  adult
    and his family life is with his adult siblings and mother and niece and
    nephew.  The Judge seems to find that the second  appellant  does  have
    family life in the UK but this in my view  is  not  at  odds  with  the
    decision in relation to the  first  appellant.   The  Judge  took  into
    account the second appellant's involvement with her  grandchildren  and
    dependency on her adult children.   In any event, the  overall  finding
    that the decision is proportionate is not flawed.

18.  The appellants could not satisfy the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  They would be returning together to Pakistan  where  the  Judge
    found they would not be at risk on return.  The members of  the  family
    who are in the UK are not British citizens and there has been a history
    of visits which presumably could continue.

19.  In my view there is no merit in the argument that  the  Judge  did  not
    apply anxious scrutiny to the evidence.   He  properly  identified  the
    standard of proof in relation to Article 3.   It  is  obvious  that  he
    found both appellants to be lacking  in  credibility  and  he  rejected
    their evidence.  His findings in my view are adequately reasoned.

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  appeal  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights stands.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 25 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


