
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18087/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 30th April 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             Secretary of State
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                kanya savage

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Harrison, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Cox made following a hearing at Bradford on 7th November 2013.



Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Thailand born on 9th December 1969.   She
    came to the UK on 22nd October 2010 with leave as a spouse valid  until
    6th January 2013.  She made an in time application for indefinite leave
    but was refused on 8th May 2013 because she had not provided an English
    language test certificate.

 3. It was conceded at the hearing that the test certificate had  not  been
    produced and accordingly the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Rules.

 4. With respect to the human rights appeal, the judge cited  the  relevant
    case law before turning his attention to the fact  of  the  case.   The
    sponsor has a history of poor health and is in  receipt  of  incapacity
    benefit.  The judge considered Mr Savage's medical records, which  were
    produced, and said that, whilst he would have liked  a  medical  report
    explicitly addressing the issue, there was sufficient information  from
    the GP's notes to demonstrate that Mr Savage became ill in Thailand and
    that he suffers from endogenous depression and hypertension.  The judge
    concluded on the basis of the evidence  that  Mr  Savage's  health  had
    deteriorated on his penultimate visit to Thailand.   The  records  were
    consistent with the claimant's evidence that her husband finds it  very
    difficult there especially during the Thai summer.

 5. The judge chronicled  the  history  of  the  relationship  between  the
    claimant and her husband, which he found to be subsisting and which  is
    not disputed by the Secretary of State.   Accordingly,  unsurprisingly,
    he found that she enjoys family life in the UK with her husband.

 6. The judge cited the claimant's  explanation  as  to  why  she  had  not
    provided an English language certificate and her attempts to  take  the
    Cambridge ESOL test which had been cancelled  for  reasons  beyond  her
    control.

 7. The judge stated that he attached significant weight to the  fact  that
    the claimant does not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and  that  the  government's  intentions  behind  the  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules seek to reflect the public interest.  There were very
    limited circumstances when an applicant could succeed under Article  8.



 8. He then wrote as follows:

         "On the other hand  the  Appellant  is  in  a  loving  and  genuine
         relationship with a British citizen.  Mr  Savage  has  a  right  of
         abode in the UK which  he  is  free  to  exercise  without  let  or
         hindrance.  Nevertheless,  and  in  my  view  significantly,  I  am
         satisfied that Mr Savage tried to live in  Thailand  and  I  accept
         that his health deteriorated as a result of  the  intense  heat  in
         Thailand.  In these circumstances I am  satisfied  that  he  cannot
         reasonably  be  expected  to  live  in   Thailand.   ...A   further
         significant  factor  is  the   medical   evidence   which   clearly
         demonstrates that when  the  couple  are  separated  the  Sponsor's
         health deteriorates and he becomes a burden  on  his  local  health
         services.  I have also attached significant weight to the fact that
         the Respondent was satisfied that the Appellant could be adequately
         maintained in the UK without recourse to additional  public  funds.
         Finally, I have also had regard to my findings that  the  Appellant
         had to return to Thailand for compassionate reasons and  note  that
         having spent a year out of the UK this has inevitably  impacted  on
         her ability to speak and listen to English."

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the appeal should only have been  allowed  on  a  basis  where  it  was
    exceptional in some way,  i.e  circumstances  in  which,  although  the
    requirements of the Rules had not been met, refusal would result in  an
    unjustifiably harsh outcome.

10. The judge considered that the sponsor would  be  unable  to  travel  to
    Thailand with his wife on account of the hot summers and his  inability
    to deal with the heat which is not an exceptional circumstance and  not
    supported by independent medical evidence.  The couple could  not  have
    had a legitimate expectation to  remain  together  if  the  Immigration
    Rules were not met, and it would have been clear that the claimant  was
    required to satisfy the English language requirement in making any such
    application.  Article 8 is a qualified  right  and  one  that  must  be
    weighed against the public interest in an  appropriate  proportionality
    assessment.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McDade on 3rd  February  2014
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

The Hearing

12. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds.  Ms Harrison submitted that the judge
    had considered Article 8 in a fair and  proper  manner  and  reached  a
    decision open to him.

Findings and Conclusions

13. It is disingenuous for the author of the grounds  to  characterise  the
    main reason for the appeal having been allowed on Article 8 grounds  as
    the sponsor's dislike of hot  summers.   The  judge  accepted  that  Mr
    Savage's health deteriorated in Thailand as a  result  of  the  intense
    heat, which presumably led the author of the grounds to  consider  that
    this was the main reason behind his decision.  However, had the  author
    considered the decision as a whole, it is clear that the  decision  was
    based upon the medical evidence of  the  sponsor's  illness,  which  is
    severe enough for him to require incapacity benefit, and not simply his
    preference for a cooler climate.  This is a couple  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship who have spent considerable  time  together  in
    her home country which has exacerbated the sponsor's condition.

14. The judge considered all of the matters in the round as he was required
    to do.  He found that there was a proper explanation for the claimant's
    failure to provide an English language certificate, a  relevant  factor
    so far as the Article 8 assessment was concerned.  This is  a  decision
    which was open to him.  The grounds amount to a disagreement  with  the
    decision and nothing more.

Decision

15. The Secretary of State's challenge fails.  The decision  of  the  judge
    stands.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

