
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18751/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London      |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 4 November 2014                |On 16 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               OTOBONG AMAOWOH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ramzan, Great James Street Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Judge Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
    under the Points Based System and to remove him from the UK. First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kempton dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant  now
    appeal with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. In a decision dated 7 April 2012 the respondent said that the appellant
    failed to  achieve  any  points  under  Appendix  A,  B  or  C  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The main reason  for  the  failure  to  achieve  the
    relevant points is that the appellant  submitted  a  copy  letter  from
    Zenith Bank, Appendix A requires  that  such  a  letter  should  be  an
    original, and that letter did not, as required, confirm that  the  bank
    is regulated and confirm that the funds were transferable  to  the  UK.
    Further, the appellant failed to submit the appropriate Companies House
    Current Opportunities Report. He also  did  not  produce  the  required
    evidence to achieve points for English language.

 3. The appellant submitted further evidence to the First-tier Tribunal for
    the purposes of the appeal. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said that she
    could not consider the evidence from Companies House as  it  post-dated
    the decision. The correspondence from Zenith Bank also  post-dated  the
    decision and in any event the Judge  said  that  the  letters  did  not
    contain the information required by paragraph 41-SD of  Appendix  A  of
    the Rules. The Judge went on to say [20];

         "There was mention in the grounds of appeal of ECHR. However, there
         was no cogent argument before me to demonstrate that there  is  any
         real claim in terms of Article 8. I have insufficient  evidence  to
         consider such an issue."

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in excluding the new material and that she  should
    have had regard to all of the evidence. It is  further  contended  that
    she erred in giving no reason for dismissing the appeal on human rights
    grounds of appeal. Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM  Hollingworth  on  the  ground
    that it was arguable that the  Judge  should  have  considered  whether
    there were arguably good grounds to go on to consider Article 8 and  if
    there were the extent to which the factors advanced in the case  should
    be weighed in the proportionality exercise.

Error of Law

 5. Mr Ramzan  submitted  that  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  Judge
    asserted that the appellant had established a private life  in  the  UK
    since  2010.  However  Mr  Parkinson  submitted  that  apart  from  the
    assertion in the skeleton argument there was nothing before  the  Judge
    as to the appellant's private life. He  submitted  that  there  was  no
    evidence as to the nature, depth and scope of the  appellant's  private
    life and nothing to show that any private life was of such significance
    as to engage Article 8. He submitted that in  those  circumstances  the
    Judge was entitled to conclude as she did.

 6. The thrust of the contention in the skeleton argument before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  that
    the appellant could show, at the date of the hearing, that he  met  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  However  the  Judge  rightly
    excluded the new evidence as she was bound to do under section  85A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. In considering the question as to whether  the  appellant  can  benefit
    from a 'near miss' I have taken account of the guidance  given  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)
    where the Tribunal said;

         "23. We addressed the issue of "near-miss" at [42] to [46] of Nasim
         and Others. So far as concerns its relevance to Article  8,  it  is
         unnecessary to say more than the following. What Lord Carnwath held
         at [55] and [56] of Patel and others was that certain  "near-miss"
         arguments are, on analysis, appeals to  core  Article  8  elements,
         such as  "family  values",  which  underpin  the  criteria  of  the
         particular Rule that the appellant has narrowly failed to meet.  In
         other words, the focus in such cases is not on the "near-miss" but,
         rather, on the significance of the relevant Article 8 element."

 8. This means that a near miss is  not  of  itself  enough  to  justify  a
    favourable outcome for the appellant in  a  proportionality  assessment
    under Article 8. There must be an impact on a core element  of  Article
    8.

 9. The appellant's witness statement talks about his immigration  history,
    the evidence he was submitting and his plans for his business. There is
    no other evidence in the appellant's bundle as to the nature and extent
    of any private life. There  is  nothing  in  the  Judge's  decision  to
    indicate that the appellant gave oral evidence as  to  the  nature  and
    extent of any private life. It has not  been  claimed  that  the  Judge
    failed to take account of any evidence before her.

10. In these circumstances the only factors  which  could  have  taken  the
    Judge into a full assessment of Article 8  were  the  appellant's  four
    year stay in the UK as a student and post-study work  migrant  and  the
    fact  that  he  had  produced  further  evidence  in  relation  to  his
    application under the Immigration Rules. The Judge in any event did not
    accept that this evidence demonstrated that he would have  met  all  of
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

11. Recent case law including R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640 (IAC), Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)  and
    R (MM & Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 make it clear that there  is
    a need to look at the evidence to see if there is  anything  which  has
    not  already  been  adequately  considered  in  the  context   of   the
    Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.



12. The only feature which had not been  adequately  considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules in this case was the fact that the appellant did  not
    provide the specified evidence  at  the  date  of  the  application  to
    demonstrate that the met the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However the Judge was fully aware of  this  and  recommended  that  the
    appellant make a new application.  There  were  no  other  factors  not
    considered by the Judge. There was no evidence as  to  the  nature  and
    extent of the appellant's private life. There was insufficient evidence
    that the  appellant  has  established  a  private  life  and  that  the
    respondent's decision will interfere with any private life.

13. Whilst the Judge did not  expressly  say  that  all  matters  had  been
    considered by her it is clear that they were. There was clearly nothing
    in the evidence before her which could lead to a successful  Article  8
    claim. I am satisfied that the Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that
    there was no good reason in these circumstances to go on to  conduct  a
    full Article 8 assessment.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.



Signed      Date: 15 December 2014

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


