
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/18119/2015
                                                         Extempore judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 July 2017                           | On 7 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     ZS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra of Counsel, instructed by Britain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and her  date  of  birth  is  13
    February 1969.  Her daughter, SF, is a dependant and her date of  birth
    is 10 December 1996.

2.   The Appellant made an application on human rights  grounds  on  4  July
    2014 and this application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  24
    April 2015.  The Appellant appealed the decision  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan, in a decision that was
    promulgated on 12 August 2016 following a  hearing  on  26  July  2016.
    Permission to appeal was granted to the  Appellant  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul on 14 February 2017.   Judge  Rintoul  in  the  grant  of
    permission referred to the case of SB and ABD v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 400.

3.   Ms Holmes conceded that the judge made a material error of law  and  in
    these consequently it is not necessary for set out the judge's decision
    in in any detail or the grounds of appeal. The judge did not  make  any
    findings in relation to the Appellant's mental health and therefore the
    proportionality assessment is flawed. The  judge  simply  recorded  the
    Appellant's oral evidence on the issue.  She was  diagnosed  as  having
    schizophrenia and there are medical reports dating back to  2009  which
    confirm the diagnosis (although these do not appear to have been before
    the judge, there was a medical report before him dated 2013).

4.   Discretionary leave (DL) was granted to the Appellant in 2011,  on  the
    basis of family life, contrary to the  judge's  finding.  The  decision
    letter granting DL does not explain the reasons  for  the  grant  other
    than stating that it was granted on family life grounds.  Neither party
    was of assistance on the issue. However, from the papers before me,  it
    seems that the Appellant's daughter was, at some stage in 2011, in care
    here in the  UK,  perhaps  during  a  period  when  the  Appellant  was
    suffering mental ill health.  It is likely that this was, at least, one
    reason for the grant of DL.  In terms of the transitional  arrangements
    referred to in the grant of permission, Ms Malhotra conceded that there
    had been a significant change in circumstances since 2011 insofar  that
    the Appellant's daughter is now an adult and she is no longer in  care.
    In fact, there was a letter before  the  judge  from  a  social  worker
    indicating that she has not been in care since  December  2011.  It  is
    likely that, if leave was granted on this basis, any argument under the
    transitional  arrangements  would  be  hopeless  in  the  light  of  Ms
    Malhotra's concession. However, it is not clear whether the Appellant's
    mental health was a factor in the grant of DL. It is expected that  the
    parties are both in a position at the next hearing to  explain  to  the
    Tribunal the full reasons for the grant of DL in 2011. There is a  more
    recent supplementary decision on which  the  Respondent  relies,  of  7
    April 2017, but this does not explain the full reasons for the grant of
    discretionary leave in 2011.

5.    The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   As   I
    communicated to the parties at the hearing, the matter is  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. The Tribunal will determine the  appeal  under
    Article 8 after making full findings of fact. There may be an issue  in
    respect of the transitional arrangements (see above).  I do not  intend
    to tie the hands of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is  uncertain  what
    findings will be made in respect of the Appellant's mental  health  and
    whether or not the judge considers it to impact on the  evidence  given
    by her. However, the judge may consider it  appropriate  to  have  full
    regard to the evidence given by the  Appellant  and  witnesses  at  the
    hearing before Judge Khan. The  only  challenge  to  the  evidence,  as
    recorded by Judge Khan, related to the Appellant's  mental  health  and
    her ability to give evidence.






Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 5 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam











