
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18614/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                tilak sapkota
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel, instructed on Public Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Veloso, promulgated on 11 September 2015, in  which  she
    dismissed his appeal both under the Immigration Rules and in respect of
    Article 8 ECHR.  That appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was against the
    Respondent's decision of 7  May  2015,  refusing  his  application  for
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  Student  and
    also to remove him by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Following the Respondent's refusal of  his  application  the  Appellant
    asked for a determination of his case on the papers alone.  However, on
    his case, the Appellant thereafter wrote  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    requesting that he could after all have an oral  hearing  and  that  he
    would pay the requisite additional fee.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge decided the  Appellant's  appeal  without  an  oral  hearing.
    Based upon the evidence on file the judge found that at the time of the
    Respondent's decision the Appellant had no valid CAS.  As a result  the
    application was bound to fail, as was the appeal.  The judge went on to
    find that there had been no procedural unfairness by the Respondent and
    that the decision to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  not
    breach Article 8.  The appeal was duly dismissed on all grounds.



The grounds and permission to appeal

 4. The grounds of appeal argued that the Appellant had asked for  an  oral
    hearing of his appeal but this had not been acted  upon.  As  a  result
    there  had  been  procedural  unfairness  in  respect  of  the  judge's
    decision.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 15
    February 2016.




My decision on error of law

 5. Having looked through the Tribunal's file in detail  I  have  seen  the
    Appellant's written request for an oral hearing, dated  16  July  2015.
    It is addressed to the First-tier Tribunal hearing centre in Manchester
    and was sent to the fax number ending  4164.   I  have  also  seen  the
    standard directions notice (IA35) issued to the  Appellant  on  2  July
    2015.  The fax number at the top of this form is the same  as  that  to
    which the faxed letter of 16 July was sent.  I am satisfied  that  both
    numbers are one and the same, and that they relate  to  the  Manchester
    hearing centre.  I am also satisfied that the fax  letter  of  16  July
    2015 was in fact received by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  seems  as
    though the Appellant's request was simply not acted upon.

 6. It follows from the above that through no fault of her  own  the  judge
    was wrong to have determined the Appellant's  appeal  without  an  oral
    hearing.  There has been an obvious procedural unfairness.

 7. In light of this the judge's decision is set aside.




Disposal

 8. In respect of what should happen next, Mr Khan submitted  that  it  was
    probable that the Appellant's CAS had been withdrawn by the college  as
    a result of its licence being suspended by the Respondent.  That  being
    the case, the  Respondent  should  have  contacted  the  Appellant  and
    offered him the sixty-day day period for him to seek a new CAS  from  a
    different institution and, as Mr Khan submitted, this had not occurred.
    Therefore the Respondent had acted unfairly.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's appeal should therefore be allowed to  the  limited  extent
    that the Respondent's decision of 7  May  2015  was  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law and that a fresh decision must now be made.

 9. Mr Kotas submitted  that  it  was  unclear  as  to  why  and  when  the
    Appellant's CAS had been withdrawn.  The burden was on the Appellant to
    show that it was  withdrawn  only  as  a  result  of  the  Respondent's
    actions, and the Appellant had not  in  fact  adduced  any  significant
    evidence to discharge that burden.

10. Initially, I was of the view that I could deal with this matter on  the
    evidence before me. However, on reflection I have decided to remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. My reasons for this are as follows.

11. First,  where  there  has  been  clear  procedural  unfairness  and  an
    appellant has effectively been deprived of a hearing, the normal course
    would be  to  remit  the  matter  (see  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice
    Statements).

12. Second, in this  case  it  is  true  that  the  college's  licence  was
    suspended by the Respondent at some unknown point in time. However,  it
    is unclear to me when the CAS  was  in  fact  withdrawn  and  for  what
    reason. I note from the CAS printout at C1 of the  Respondent's  bundle
    that the expiry date of the CAS is stated to be 28 August 2014.

13. Third, in light of the above, the answers to relevant questions are not
    as readily discernable as I had originally thought. The balance tips in
    favour of remittal.

14. At the remitted hearing the CAS issue can be  fully  argued  out,  with
    relevant evidence being  adduced  as  to  when  and  why  the  CAS  was
    withdrawn. Article 8 has been relied  on.  This  remains  open  to  the
    Appellant, although the prospects of success must be slight.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties:

   1. The parties are to comply with any directions issued by the First-tier
      Tribunal;

   2. In any event, any further evidence relied upon by either  party  shall
      be filed and served on the First-tier Tribunal and the other  side  no
      later than 10 working days prior to the remitted hearing.



Directions to listings

   1. The appeal is remitted to the Hatton Cross hearing centre, to be heard
      on a date to be fixed by that centre;

   2. The remitted hearing shall not be  conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Veloso;

   3. There will be a one hour time estimate

   4. No interpreter is required.




No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 26 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


