
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/18475/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 21 December 2015                      |             On 20 January 2016     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR AHSAN UDDIN AFSAR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Berkleys
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (hereafter the  Respondent,
    as she was before the First-tier  Tribunal)  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane (the judge),  promulgated  on  25  June
    2015, in which he  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Afsar  (hereafter  the
    Appellant, as he was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  on  Article  8
    grounds outside of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's  appeal  had
    been brought against the Respondent's decision, dated  17  March  2014,
    refusing to vary his leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    remove him by way of directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant had initially applied to the Respondent on 2  April  2013
    on the basis that he was the spouse of a British citizen to whom he was
    married on 13 September 2012.  That application was  initially  refused
    on 6 June 2013.  That decision was said to be a refusal to grant  leave
    to remain and therefore did not carry a right of appeal.  The Appellant
    challenged the lawfulness of this decision by way of  judicial  review.
    In due course a Consent Order was agreed and then sealed by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 25 January 2014.   It  is  said  in  this  Order  that  the
    Respondent would reconsider the Appellant's case and issue him with  an
    appealable immigration decision.  As I have already mentioned, this was
    done on 17 March 2014.

 3. At the hearing before the judge, at which a Presenting Officer did  not
    appear on behalf of  the  Respondent,  the  Appellant's  representative
    conceded that he could not meet the provisions of the relevant  Article
    8 Immigration Rules, in particular Appendix  FM.   On  that  basis  the
    judge proceeded  to  consider  the  Article  8  claim  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In doing so he made a number of favourable findings
    of fact in respect of the relationship between the  Appellant  and  his
    wife, Ms Ahmed.  The judge found  that  there  was  family  life,  that
    removal would constitute an interference with that life, and, coming on
    to the  fifth  question  in  the  Razgar  approach,  that  in  all  the
    circumstances of this case removal would be a  disproportionate  breach
    of the family life. On this basis the appeal was allowed.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal, her grounds asserting  that
    the judge had failed to take into account the relevant  fact  that  the
    Appellant had not met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    now well-known decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 was cited  in
    the grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew on 21 September 2015.

The hearing before me

 5. At the outset of the hearing Mr Biggs brought to my attention a  bundle
    apparently served by those instructing him on the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    the Presenting Officers' Unit on 1 December of this year.  This  bundle
    included what are termed to be  grounds  of  appeal  but  what  are  in
    reality an extended Rule 24 notice including a "cross-appeal".   It  is
    said in this document that the judge was wrong not to  have  considered
    the Article 8 case within the  context  of  the  Rules,  in  particular
    Appendix FM.  This was because the Appellant had never in fact been  in
    this country unlawfully and  he  could  therefore  satisfy  a  relevant
    eligibility criteria within Appendix FM.  On this  basis  it  was  said
    that the concession by the Appellant's representative before the  judge
    (not Mr Biggs) was wrongly made.  Mr Clarke had not seen this  document
    and so I gave him time to read and consider his position.

 6. When the hearing resumed I asked both representatives whether they  had
    discussed the issues and whether any views could be taken as to how  to
    proceed.  For his part Mr Biggs agreed, on a pragmatic basis,  that  it
    seemed as though the judge had indeed erred  in  his  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules as alleged in the  Respondent's
    grounds of appeal.  Mr Clarke could see the force in the point that  if
    indeed the Appellant had been in this country  lawfully  throughout  he
    may potentially have been able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. If the decision of the judge was to be set aside  on
    the basis of the error of law  already  identified  then  he  would  be
    content for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  where
    all the relevant matters could be fully addressed in due course.

Decision on error of law

 7. In my view the judge did materially err in law in his consideration  of
    the Article 8 claim  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Whilst  he
    clearly made reference to section 117B of  the  2002  Act  and  various
    other relevant factors, unfortunately he said nothing whatsoever to the
    significant fact  that  on  the  concession  as  made  before  him  the
    Appellant had  not  been  able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules,  in  particular  Appendix  FM,  but  also  paragraph
    276ADE. It is well-settled that a failure to meet the Immigration Rules
    in Article 8 cases is  a  significant  point  and  one  which  must  be
    addressed (see, for example, Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA  Civ  558  and  SS
    (Congo).  Given the significant weight which ought to be attached to  a
    failure to meet the Immigration Rules, in my  view  the  error  of  the
    judge was material: it cannot be said that the outcome would inevitably
    have been the same had the error not been committed.

 8.  Therefore I set aside the decision of the Judge.

Disposal

 9. There was a discussion with  the  representatives  as  to  what  should
    happen next with this appeal.  The usual course of action is to  retain
    the matter within the Upper Tribunal and to remake the decision on  the
    basis of the evidence already  before  me.   However  in  this  case  I
    propose to take the unusual step, having full regard to paragraph 7  of
    the Practice Statements, of  remitting  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Article 8 claim needs to be considered again both  under
    the Immigration Rules and  potentially  without.   It  is  likely  that
    additional documentary and oral evidence will be required, particularly
    as specific requirements of Appendix FM were not of  course  considered
    by the judge, given the concession made before him.

10. In respect of preserved findings, the judge has made a number of  clear
    findings of fact favourable to the Appellant.  Mr Clarke  confirmed  at
    the hearing before me that the  genuineness  of  the  relationship  had
    never been in dispute.  Therefore I preserve the findings of fact  made
    by the judge at paragraphs 7, 17 and 18 of his decision.  There is  one
    specific factual issue  that  remains  at  large  and  required  to  be
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal on remittal.  It is contained  at
    the very end of paragraph 13 of the judge's decision.  It is said there
    that the Appellant had been unlawfully in this country since 20 January
    2013.  Now on the face of it that finding would appear (and I put it no
    higher) to be wrong given the nature of the judicial review proceedings
    in this case, the Consent Order,  and  the  fact  that  the  Respondent
    thereafter issued an appealable immigration decision on the basis of  a
    refusal to vary leave. Such a decision could  not  have  been  properly
    made unless there was extant leave to vary in the first  place.   I  do
    not make a finding of fact on this particular point and it will be left
    to the First-tier Tribunal to resolve the matter.

11. The ability of the Appellant  to  satisfy  the  financial  requirements
    under Appendix FM (and with reference to Appendix FM-SE) also needs  to
    be addressed on remittal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties

    1. The findings of fact in paragraphs  7,  17,  and  18  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Keane's decision are expressly preserved;
    2. The question of the Appellant's lawful status in the United  Kingdom
       from 2013 is to be resolved on remittal;
    3. The Appellant's ability to satisfy  the  financial  requirements  of
       Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules must be considered;
    4. Further evidence may be adduced by either party in  accordance  with
       standard directions issued by the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to Administration
    1. This appeal is remitted to the Taylor House hearing  centre,  to  be
       listed on a date arranged by that centre;
    2. The remitted hearing shall not be  reheard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Keane.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 18 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

