
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18763/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2016                  |On 06 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 HAFIZ AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Elliott-Kelly, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  24  August
    1949.  He came to the UK as a visitor with leave valid  from  25  March
    2010 to 25 September 2010.  He overstayed.

 2. On 4 April 2014 the appellant was  encountered  during  an  enforcement
    visit at a restaurant in Pewsey, Wiltshire.   He  was  arrested  as  an
    overstayer.  He was granted temporary release and was served,  on  that
    day with form IS.151A Part 2 which was a decision to remove him  as  an
    overstayer under s.10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
    notice of decision indicated that the appellant was entitled to  appeal
    but only after he had left the United Kingdom.

 3. Nevertheless, on 23 April 2014, a notice of appeal was lodged with  the
    First-tier Tribunal on behalf of the appellant whilst  he  remained  in
    the UK.

 4. The appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Page)  on  29
    October 2015 on the preliminary issue of whether the appellant  had  an
    in-country right of appeal.  Before Judge  Page  it  was  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant that he  had  an  in-country  right  of  appeal
    against the decision to remove him  by  virtue  of  s.92(4)(a)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA  Act  2002")  on
    the basis that he had made a "human rights claim" during his  interview
    by an Immigration Officer following his arrest on 4 April 2014.

 5. Judge Page rejected that submission and concluded  that  there  was  no
    valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  on  9  May
    2016 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Plimmer) granted the appellant  permission
    to appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the appellant had made
    a "human rights claim" when he had asserted at his interview  with  the
    Immigration Officer that he had to remain in the UK to look  after  his
    father.

 7. On 30 June 2016, the Secretary of  State  served  a  rule  24  response
    arguing that the judge was right to conclude that what had been said by
    the appellant in his interview with the  Immigration  Officer  did  not
    amount to a "human rights claim".

 8. Thus the appeal came before me.

 9. The applicable legislative framework is not  a  matter  of  contention.
    This appeal is governed  by  the  provisions  in  force  prior  to  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

10. There is no doubt that the appellant had a right of appeal by virtue of
    s.82(1) and (2)(g) of the NIA Act 2002.  That is because  the  decision
    to remove the appellant as an overstayer under s.10 of the IA Act  1999
    made on 4 April  2014  is  an  "immigration  decision"  falling  within
    s.82(2)(g).

11. Whether or not that right of appeal is exercisable in-country  or  only
    out-country turns on the application of s.92 of the NIA Act 2002.  Only
    if s.92 applies can an appeal be brought whilst an individual is in the
    UK (see s.92(1)).

12. The removal decision made against the  appellant  is  not  one  of  the
    immigration decision set out in s.92(2) such  that  s.92  automatically
    applies and any appeal may be brought in-country.  However,  s.92(4)(a)
    states that:

         "This section also applies to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision if the appellant -

         (a)  has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim,  while  in
             the United Kingdom ..."

13. The phrase "human rights claim" is defined in s.113 of the NIA Act 2002
    as follows:

         "... a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State at a  place
         designated by the Secretary of State that to remove the person from
         or require him to leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful  under
         Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not
         to act contrary to  Convention)  as  being  incompatible  with  his
         Convention rights."

14. That is the definition currently in force even though it was amended by
    s.12 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, in effect  to
    remove the need for the claim to be made to the Secretary  at  a  place
    designated by the Secretary of State.  However, that amendment has  not
    been brought into force.

15. In this appeal, Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that what had been  said  by
    the appellant to the Immigration Officer amounted  to  a  human  rights
    claim.  It was, she submitted, a claim that he had family life with his
    father and, as his carer, he needed to remain in the UK to  look  after
    him.  Ms Elliott-Kelly  relied  upon  the  appellant's  second  witness
    statement (signed at the hearing) where in para 4 he said this:

         "During the interview, I was asked about my personal  circumstances
         and reasons why I was in the UK over the time limit of my visa.   I
         told the officers about my father and said I needed to  look  after
         him because he is old and not well.  I  explained  that  I  am  the
         carer for my father and I needed to stay in the UK  to  look  after
         him."

16. Ms Elliott-Kelly accepted that the appellant had said that  his  father
    was currently in Bangladesh on a visit but that he would return and, as
    set out in para 6 of the appellant's statement, he would do so in a few
    weeks.

17. Ms Elliott-Kelly relied upon the decision of  R  (Alighanbari  v  SSHD)
    [2013] EWHC 1818 (Admin) in which Mr Stephen Morris QC (as he then was)
    sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge analysed the  requirements  for  a
    "human rights claim".  In particular, what the  Deputy  Judge  said  at
    [70], applying the statutory definition in s.113 of the NIA Act 2002:

         "70.     Thirdly, as to what constitutes  a  'human  rights  claim'
             within the statutory definition, in my judgment, the following
             elements must be present on the facts: (a) a claim not  to  be
             removed from the UK; (b) an  assertion  of  facts  that  could
             constitute an existing or prospective  private  and/or  family
             life, the interference with which Article 8 ECHR protects; (c)
             an assertion that removal will  interfere  with  that  private
             and/or family life (i.e. that the, or a, basis upon which  the
             claimant wishes to remain in the UK is the desire to  maintain
             or build a private and/or family life).  It is  also  arguable
             that there should also be a  further  element:  namely,  that,
             given the  requirement  of  a  claim  that  removal  would  be
             'unlawful', there should be an assertion that the interference
             is  in  some  way  'wrongful'  or  an  interference  with   an
             'entitlement', even if this need not be an  express  reference
             to a breach of rights under the HRA.  However, on the facts of
             the present case, I do not need to decide this issue. "

18. Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted  that  what  was  said  to  the  Immigration
    Officer was a human rights claim made to the Secretary of State falling
    within  s.113  as  it  asserted  a  factual  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his father potentially falling within Art  8  as  "family
    life" and asserted, in effect, that his removal  would  interfere  with
    it.  Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted  that  that  was  sufficient  and  that
    whether the relationship was, in  fact,  established  and  whether  any
    interference with it would be proportionate or not was a factual  issue
    for a judge to decide in the in-country appeal against the s.10 removal
    decision.

19. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards accepted that a  claim
    made to an Immigration Officer could  fall  within  the  definition  in
    s.113.  He took no point on the "designated place" requirement  and  he
    did not seek to argue that an Immigration Officer was  not,  for  these
    purposes, an agent of the Secretary of  State.   That  latter  position
    finds support in, and is entirely consistent with, the House of  Lord's
    decision in R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  ex  p
    Oladehinde [1991] 1 AC 254.

20. However, Mr Richards submitted that what had been said by the appellant
    did not amount to a human rights claim under Art 8.  In particular,  Mr
    Richards relied upon the fact that the appellant did not claim that his
    father was then in  the  UK.   The  appellant's  words  could  not,  he
    submitted, be understood as asserting that there  was  an  interference
    with his family life in the United Kingdom.

21. Finally, Mr Richards did not seek to challenge the appellant's evidence
    as to what he said to the Immigration Officer.  Mr Richards agreed that
    if I accepted Ms Elliott-Kelly's submissions that the words  spoken  by
    the appellant, as set out in his witness statement, to the  Immigration
    Officer amounted to a human rights claim  then  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the merits on  the
    basis that the appellant did, in fact, have an in-country appeal.

22. In Alighanbari, the Deputy Judge accepted that  whether  a  person  had
    advanced a human rights claim falling within s.113 was "a  question  of
    substance, and not form" [69].  He further accepted  that  it  was  not
    necessary for an individual to refer expressly to the provisions of the
    ECHR or the Human Rights Act nor to advance his claim in  formal  legal
    terms.  The correct approach was:

         "In considering whether such a claim has been made, the  court  can
         and should take account of all relevant  particular  circumstances,
         including, for example whether or  not  the  Claimant  was  legally
         represented at the relevant time, and  including  everything  which
         was said by or on behalf of the Claimant."

23. The appellant was, of course, not legally represented at the  interview
    with the Immigration Officer on 4 April 2014.  I would add that  it  is
    not necessary for an individual to show he has a 'good' or  a  'strong'
    Art 8 claim; merely that he is making one.  The strength of  the  claim
    is a matter for assessment at the appeal.

24. In my judgment, what was said by the appellant, applying  the  approach
    in Alighanbari at [70], amounted to a "human rights claim" under Art 8.

25. First, the appellant clearly asserted that he needed to stay in the  UK
    to look after his father.  That  was  implicitly  a  claim  not  to  be
    removed from the UK.

26. Secondly, the appellant asserted a relationship with his  father,  whom
    he said was old and not well, and that he was his carer and  needed  to
    look after him.  Whilst a relationship between an adult offspring and a
    parent  will  not  automatically  amount  to  "family  life",  a  close
    relationship of emotional ties and dependency is capable  of  amounting
    to "family life" for the purposes of Art 8 (see, for  example  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ  31).   That  was  precisely  what  the  appellant  was
    asserting, albeit in brief terms, when he claimed that because  of  his
    father's age and health he was needed to care for him.

27. I do not accept  Mr  Richards's  submission  that  it  was  necessarily
    destructive of a  claim  of  "family  life"  on  this  basis  that  the
    appellant's father was currently  in  Bangladesh.   That  was,  as  the
    appellant made clear, only temporary and his father was  to  return  to
    the UK where the appellant's words clearly import that he will continue
    to care for him.

28. Thirdly, the appellant's words clearly  import  that  if  he  were  not
    allowed to stay in the UK (i.e. if removed) that would  interfere  with
    his ability to care for his father and  therefore  interfere  with  his
    family life with his father.

29. In Alighanbari,  the  deputy  judge  left  open  whether  it  was  also
    necessary, in order for there to be a "human  rights  claim"  that  the
    individual had asserted that his removal would  be  "unlawful"  in  the
    sense that he asserted that any  interference  would  be  in  some  way
    "wrongful" or an interference with an entitlement (see [70]).

30. In order to succeed in establishing a breach of Art  8,  an  individual
    must, of course, show that any interference was "not in accordance with
    the  law".   However,  if  an  individual  were  required   to   assert
    specifically that his removal would not only breach his protected right
    to family or private life but also that  it  would  be  unlawful,  that
    would come close to requiring an individual to make the very  assertion
    which the deputy judge  in  [69]  considered  was  unnecessary,  namely
    expressly identifying the legal basis upon which his removal  would  be
    unlawful, in particular by virtue of s.6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.
    In my judgment it suffices if  an  individual  expressly  or  impliedly
    asserts that his removal would  interfere  with  his  protected  rights
    under Art 8 and that, as a result, he should be allowed to remain.   To
    require  otherwise  would,  in  my  judgment,  essentially  require  an
    individual (perhaps unrepresented) to  have  a  legal  knowledge  which
    cannot realistically or reasonably be expected of him.  To  require  an
    individual to both positively assert that he should not be removed on a
    basis falling within Art 8 but also that to do  so  would  be  unlawful
    would, in my judgment, wrongly elevate "form" over "substance".

31. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the appellant made  a
    "human rights claim" on 4 April 2014.   As  a  consequence,  s.92(4)(a)
    applied and the appellant had an in-country right of appeal against the
    decision to remove him made on the same day.

Decision

32. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in concluding that there was
    not a valid in-country appeal before it. That decision is set aside.

33. As I have already indicated, Mr Richards accepted that, if that were my
    decision, the appeal should properly  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing on the merits of the appellant's appeal.

34. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that  it
    is established that the appellant has an in-country right of appeal  in
    order that the appeal can be heard and dealt with on its  merits.   The
    appeal should be listed before a judge other than Judge Page.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date 06 December 2016


