
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18553/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2015                  |On 2 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE pinkerton


                                   Between

               The secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR SANGAMKUMAR PATEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding
For the Respondent:    Mr P Saini


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant it is more  convenient
    to refer to the parties as they were in the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
    that Mr Patel is  hereafter  referred  to  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 26  February  1991.
    On 3 April 2014 a decision was made to refuse to vary his leave and  to
    remove him by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  He had applied on  28  November  2013
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
    points-based system.  The reason for refusal was that he had claimed 30
    points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules for a Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies (CAS) but the respondent was not satisfied  that
    the appellant had a valid CAS and therefore he was not entitled to  the
    points claimed.   The Secretary of State was not so  satisfied  because
    the reference number submitted with the application had been  withdrawn
    by the sponsor.

 3. The  appellant,  whether  by  himself  or  with  the  help  of  unnamed
    representatives, appealed that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The grounds of appeal are  in  the  most  general  terms  and  make  no
    reference whatever to the respondent not  having  acted  in  accordance
    with its own policy in a situation where a  sponsor  licence  has  been
    revoked or withdrawn by the Secretary of State  and  the  applicant  is
    both unaware of the revocation and not party  to  any  reason  why  the
    licence has been  revoked.   In  essence  in  those  circumstances  the
    Secretary of State should afford an applicant a reasonable  opportunity
    to vary the  application  by  identifying  a  new  sponsor  before  the
    original application was determined.

 4. This was an appeal dealt with "on the papers".  The appellant  filed  a
    statement in support of his appeal and  for  the  first  time  in  that
    statement at paragraph 7 wrote:

         "(7) I also have a strong argument that Home Office  should  inform
             me or give us 60 days to  find  another  sponsor  if  previous
             sponsor withdraw the sponsorship."

    The judge set out in the determination that  he  was  provided  by  the
    respondent with a paper copy of the CAS relied upon. It appears that he
    assumed that this was the printout of the CAS as it  was  when  it  was
    checked on 3 April 2014 and that this was supposedly the document  that
    showed that the CAS had been withdrawn. In fact the document before him
    did not show any such withdrawal. Subsequently it transpired  that  the
    incorrect CAS had been put before the judge and the  later  document  -
    only produced following the decision having been made in favour of  the
    appellant - showed that the CAS  was  indeed  withdrawn  and  that  the
    appellant was not therefore entitled to the 30 points that he needed to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent produced the evidence with the application seeking leave
    to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  a  renewed  application  such
    permission was granted.

 6. On any view it cannot have been the fault of the  judge  that  relevant
    evidence was not put before him.  However, the fact is that at the time
    the application was decided and unbeknown to the appellant, the CAS had
    been withdrawn and he could therefore not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules.  Perhaps of just  as  much  importance  is  the  fact  that  the
    original grounds of appeal should have made reference to the respondent
    not having acted in accordance with her own  policy.  She  should  have
    allowed the appellant a period of time to find  a  substitute  sponsor.
    The application should not have been determined until after that period
    had expired.  The judge made no  reference  to  it  and  again  can  be
    forgiven for not doing so in that the policy issue did  not  appear  in
    the grounds of appeal.  The appellant did refer to it  in  his  witness
    statement that was before the judge but no doubt the judge did not feel
    he needed to deal with that aspect because he allowed the appeal on the
    CAS point to which I have already referred.

 7. Before me both representatives agreed that the decision  of  the  judge
    should not stand although they were uncertain as how best to proceed to
    enable the unsatisfactory situation to be remedied.

 8. Having considered the matter and having  heard  submissions  from  both
    parties I have decided that there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision because there is accepted evidence that  at  the  time
    the application was decided the appellant was not entitled  to  the  30
    points that he claimed and to which the judge found he was entitled.  I
    therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge.

 9. I thereafter proceeded straightaway to re-make the decision.

Re-making the Decision

10. The case of Patel (Revocation of  sponsor  licence  -  fairness)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) sets out the law and procedure to  be  followed
    where such a situation has arisen.  There is no suggestion as far as  I
    am aware that the appellant is anything  other  than  innocent  of  any
    practice that led to loss of the sponsorship status  and  there  is  no
    suggestion either that he was aware of the fact of such loss of  status
    prior to the refusal of his application.

11. What should have happened therefore is that the appellant  should  have
    been afforded an opportunity to vary his application by  giving  him  a
    reasonable time in which to find a substitute college on which to  base
    his application for  an  extension  of  stay  to  obtain  the  relevant
    qualification.  I do not think it is in  issue  that  the  Home  Office
    policy is to afford 60 days for such an application to be  made.   That
    procedure has not been followed. The result is that I am only  able  to
    allow the appeal to the extent that I find that the decision is not  in
    accordance with the law.  No lawful  decision  has  been  made  on  the
    application and it remains to be determined by the Secretary  of  State
    and leave to remain that was originally granted continues uninterrupted
    in the meantime as per s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

12. I was not addressed on the point but following Patel I  direct  that  a
    fresh decision is not to be made for a period of 60 days from the  date
    of this reasoned decision being transmitted to the  parties  to  enable
    the appellant to obtain a fresh sponsorship letter, if he is able to do
    so, which sponsorship letter must be current and this would then enable
    his existing application to be varied to include study at the place set
    out in the new  sponsorship  letter.   Should  the  applicant  fail  to
    respond to the invitation to provide such  a  sponsorship  letter  then
    there would have been no breach of the duty of fairness to him and  the
    respondent doubtless would then make a decision on the application.


Decision

13. For the above reasons I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal  to
    the  limited  extent  that  the  original  decision  was  not  made  in
    accordance with the law and I give the direction set out  in  paragraph
    12 set out above.

14. I see no need for an anonymity direction in the circumstances  of  this
    case and therefore do not make one.



Signed   Date 24 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

