
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/18375/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August 2013                             |On 8th October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                        mohamed nabi zahirjali mengal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hussain, Counsel instructed by French and
Company
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 1st March 1983.   He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    panel (Judge Colyer and Mrs Greenwood) who dismissed his appeal against
    the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  9th  June  2011  to  make  a
    deportation order by virtue of Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  In this case the Respondent states that Section 3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 applies, upon  the  grounds  that  the  Respondent
    deemed it to be conducive to the public  good  to  make  a  deportation
    order against him.

The procedural history:

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  30th  April  2002  and
    claimed asylum.  That application was refused on  11th  September  2003
    after it  transpired  the  Appellant  had  already  claimed  asylum  in
    Australia.  Arrangements were made for his removal to that country  but
    he absconded prior  to  that  and  made  an  appearance  in  Birmingham
    Magistrates' Court for an offence of affray for which he was ordered to
    pay a �200 fine and �250 in costs.

 3. On 10th July 2009 the  Appellant  made  an  application  to  return  to
    Afghanistan voluntarily via the Assisted Voluntary Return Scheme.   The
    application was approved on 13th July 2009.  However,  on  18th  August
    2009 the Appellant was convicted of two counts of battery for which  he
    received a twelve month community order with an  80  hour  unpaid  work
    requirement.  On  20th  October  2009  his  application  for  voluntary
    removal was cancelled by the Home Office as he had not  been  in  touch
    with the relevant international organisation.

 4. On 14th December 2009 the Appellant appeared at Birmingham Magistrates'
    Court where he was convicted of failing to comply with the requirements
    of his community order.  The order  was  varied  so  as  to  include  a
    further ten hours' unpaid work.

 5. On 2nd February 2010 the Appellant appeared at Birmingham  Magistrates'
    Court where he was convicted of harassment.  He was  sentenced  to  six
    weeks' imprisonment and made the subject of a restraining order for two
    years until 1st February 2012.

 6. On 23rd February 2010 the Appellant made a further appearance in court,
    this time before Birmingham Crown  Court  where  he  was  convicted  of
    breach of a restraining order and harassment.  He was sentenced on 23rd
    March 2010 to a total of 30 weeks' imprisonment for both offences.  His
    Honour Judge Mayo sitting at the Crown Court  at  Birmingham  sentenced
    the Appellant for two  offences  both  of  which  were  breaches  of  a
    restraining order imposed on him by the magistrates in February of 2010
    when he had been sentenced to a period of six weeks'  imprisonment  for
    pursuing a course of  harassment.   The  sentencing  remarks  state  as
    follows:-

         "You were released from that sentence within three  days  of  being
         sentenced and within three days of your release from  custody,  you
         were pestering your former wife or your wife in Smethwick and  then
         embarked on a series of harassing telephone calls on 18th February,
         19th February and 20th February of this year.  You were arrested on
         22nd February and that obviously brought the contact to an end.   I
         have read your pre-sentence report and I think, now,  you  probably
         have more insight into the importance of this order  than  you  did
         before and I take  into  account,  in  fixing  the  length  of  the
         sentence, your pleas of guilty and the fact that no actual violence
         was used against your former wife.  However, there are  aggravating
         features here; the most important one is  that  you  breached  this
         order very shortly after it was imposed on you.   It  was  a  court
         order and court orders are not there to be disobeyed.  You  have  a
         history of violence towards Rafia Begum going back some years  and,
         in my judgment, what you did was persistent and calculated to cause
         psychological harm and indeed did cause Ms Begum some psychological
         harm.  These offences are so serious that only a custodial sentence
         can be justified on the first offence, namely the Section 5 breach;
         there will be a sentence of twelve  weeks'  imprisonment.   On  the
         second offence, namely Section 4 offence, there will be a  sentence
         of 30 weeks' imprisonment.  Those sentences will  run  concurrently
         and I direct that no time shall be taken off any sentence you serve
         because I anticipate that you will return to custody as  breach  of
         your licence."

 7. The judge also took the decision that the days that he had served would
    not count towards his sentence.  The reason being that he had  breached
    his order very quickly after it had passed and that he was the  subject
    of a restraining order.  The judge  also  issued  a  fresh  restraining
    order and that from release from prison until 1st August 2012 it  would
    remain in force.

 8. On 15th April 2010 whilst serving his custodial sentence the  Appellant
    informed an Immigration Officer that he  wished  to  proceed  with  his
    asylum claim.  He therefore completed a screening interview and on 24th
    June 2010 that interview was concluded.

 9. On 11th October 2010 the Appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, exceptionally, outside the Immigration Rules due to his  length
    of residence in the UK.  However, on 14th April 2011 he  was  convicted
    by Birmingham Magistrates' Court of a breach of his  restraining  order
    and sentenced to eighteen weeks' imprisonment.

10. The Respondent served him with a notice informing him of his  liability
    to deportation.  On 31st May  2011  the  Appellant  responded  to  that
    notice.  He made a further claim for asylum on 1st June 2011.   On  9th
    June 2011 he was served with  a  notice  of  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order.

11. The decision to make a deportation order reads as follows:-

         "On 14th April 2011  at  Birmingham  Magistrates  Court,  you  were
         convicted of a breach of a restraining  order.   In  view  of  this
         conviction the Secretary of State deems it to be conducive  to  the
         public good to make a deportation order against you.  The Secretary
         of State has therefore decided  to  make  an  order  by  virtue  of
         section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  (as  amended  by  the
         Immigration Act 1999).

         This order requires you to leave the United Kingdom  and  prohibits
         you from re-entering while the order is in force.

         She proposes to give directions for your removal to Afghanistan the
         country of which you are a national or which most recently provided
         you with a travel document.

         Right of Appeal

         You are entitled to appeal this decision under Section 82(1) of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

12. An Explanatory Statement for  this  decision  was  given  in  a  letter
    setting out the reasons for the deportation dated 14th June 2011.  That
    letter sets out the following matters:-

         "Liability to deportation

         1.   On  23rd May 2011, the UK Border Agency wrote seeking  reasons
             why you  should  not  be  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom
             following your conviction for breach of a  restraining  order.
             The representations received have been considered but for  the
             reasons  set  out  below  it  has  been  concluded  that  your
             deportation will be conducive to the public good.

         Background

         2.   The background history and reasons are outlined as follows:

         You  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  30th  April  2002   and
         subsequently claimed asylum.  On 11th September  2003  your  asylum
         application was refused and certified on third country  grounds  as
         it transpired that you  had  already  claimed  asylum  in  Austria.
         Arrangements were initially  made  for  your  removal  to  Austria.
         However, the removal did not go  ahead  as  scheduled  because  you
         absconded.

         On 10th July 2009 you made an application for return to Afghanistan
         via the Assistant Voluntary Return (AVR) Scheme.  On 13th July 2009
         your application for AVR was approved.

         On 20th October 2009 your application for AVR was cancelled as  you
         had not been in contact with  the  International  Organisation  for
         Migration (IOM) regarding your return to Afghanistan.

         You next came to the attention of the UK Border  Agency  after  you
         were  convicted  for  harassing  your  partner  and   breaching   a
         restraining order for which you were sentenced on 23rd  March  2010
         at Birmingham Crown Court to 30 months' imprisonment.

         On 15th April 2010 whilst being held at HMP Liverpool you  informed
         an Immigration Officer that you wished to proceed with your  asylum
         claim.  On the same day you completed a screening interview and  on
         24th June 2010 an asylum interview was completed.

         On 11th October 2010 you were granted indefinite  leave  to  remain
         exceptionally, outside the Immigration Rules due to your length  of
         residence in the United Kingdom.

         On 14th April  2011  at  Birmingham  Magistrates'  Court  you  were
         convicted of breach of a restraining order.  You were sentenced  to
         eighteen weeks' imprisonment.

         In light of the fact that you received  three  custodial  sentences
         amounting to 54 weeks' imprisonment within the last five years,  on
         25th May you were served  with  a  notice  informing  you  of  your
         liability to deportation.

         Circumstances of the offence

         The Secretary of State regards breaches  of  the  United  Kingdom's
         laws by a  person  subject  to  immigration  control  as  extremely
         serious as it shows that, the person has no regard for the laws  of
         the  United  Kingdom.   Criminal  behaviour  which  results  in   a
         custodial sentence of twelve months or more, or a  total  aggregate
         sentence of twelve months or more over a period of five  years,  or
         cases where the court recommends deportation, is serious enough  to
         initiate deportation action.  In making this decision, the type and
         frequency of the offending is an important consideration,  together
         with the need to protect the public.  In addition to these factors,
         the circumstances of the offence, the sentencing  court's  view  of
         the offending (as reflected in the sentence imposed) together  with
         the effect and  extent  of  the  criminal  activity  on  the  wider
         community are considered.   In  addition  to  these  factors,  your
         personal circumstances together  with  the  circumstances  of  your
         offences have been carefully looked at.

         As stated above you have been convicted of four  separate  offences
         since  February  2010  for  which  you  have  received  54   weeks'
         imprisonment.   In  regards  to  your  most  recent   offence   the
         memorandum  of  an  entry  in  the  register  of   the   Birmingham
         Magistrates' Court states,

             'On 6th December 2010 at Birmingham in  the  country  of  West
             Midlands  without  reasonable  excuse,   you   breached   your
             restraining order by contacting a Rafia Begum which  you  were
             prohibited  from  doing  by  restraining  order   imposed   by
             Birmingham Magistrates' Court on 2nd February 2010.'

         You pleaded not guilty to this offence on 15th March 2011,  however
         you were found guilty by a jury  on  23rd  March  2011.   All  four
         offences relate to the  harassment  of  your  wife  and  subsequent
         breaches of a restraining order taken out against you in  order  to
         protect  your  wife  from  you.   By   repeatedly   breaching   the
         restraining order you have demonstrated that  you  have  a  blatant
         disregard for the United Kingdom's laws."

    The refusal letter also set out details of consideration under  Article
    8.  It was noted in relation to Article 8, that he was 28 years of age,
    married and believed to be in good health.  He had been resident in the
    United Kingdom for nine years and two months including some time  spent
    in prison.  The  letter  set  out  and  paid  regard  to  his  previous
    convictions and noted  that  the  sentences  added  together  with  the
    current sentence aggregate to a custodial sentence of more than  twelve
    months' imprisonment over a period of five years which fit the criteria
    to be considered for deportation.  In respect of his family  life,  the
    Respondent made reference to his claim to be married to Rafia Begum,  a
    British citizen.  However it was noted that he  had  not  provided  any
    evidence to support the claim  and  that  it  had  been  noted  that  a
    restraining order was currently in  force  against  him  which  he  had
    breached on a  number  of  occasions  which  prevented  him  from  both
    indirect and direct contact with Rafia Begum and visiting her place  of
    residence.  In respect of the representations that he had made that his
    life was with his wife in the United  Kingdom,  in  the  light  of  the
    restraining order it was not accepted that the marriage was subsisting.
     Thus it was not considered that he had a family life.

    As regards  his  private  life,  it  was  accepted  that  he  may  have
    established a private life given that he entered the United Kingdom  on
    30th April 2002.  It was accepted that he may have  made  some  friends
    and formed relationships that constituted a  private  life  however  if
    deported from the United Kingdom it was noted that there were "no known
    issues preventing him continuing any relationships using  modern  forms
    of communication such as email and telephone."  As to interference with
    his private life, it was not accepted that the decision to deport  gave
    any rise to any interference with  his  private  life  as  it  was  not
    considered  unreasonable  to  expect  private  life  to  be   continued
    elsewhere.  It was noted that he was  prohibited  from  contacting  his
    wife by way of a restraining order imposed on him on 2nd February  2010
    which he had persistently failed  to  comply  with  which  resulted  in
    convictions on 23rd February 2010 and most recently on 14th April 2011.
     The court commented that he had a "flagrant disregard for court orders
    and you do not think you have done anything wrong".  In the event  that
    there was an interference, it would be in accordance with the  relevant
    legislation and the policies in pursuit  of  the  permissible  aims  of
    prevention of disorder and crime and the protection of the  rights  and
    freedoms of others.  In respect of proportionality, it was stated  that
    it was a proportionate decision on the circumstances of his case.   The
    Appellant had spent his youth and formative years in Afghanistan and it
    would not be considered unreasonable to expect him to readjust to  life
    in Afghanistan.

13. In relation to paragraph 364,  it  was  noted  that  full  and  careful
    consideration had been given to all the known  factors  in  respect  of
    paragraph 364.  It had been concluded that it would not be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under the ECHR to deport him and in this case  all
    the relevant factors have been considered and that there  would  be  no
    exceptional circumstances to outweigh the public  interest  presumption
    and therefore it was concluded that in his case it was  appropriate  to
    deport him to Afghanistan.

14.  The  Appellant  appealed  this  decision  under  Section  82  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The grounds  state  that
    the decision was not in accordance with Article 8 of the  ECHR  on  the
    grounds of the Appellant's private and family life  established  whilst
    in the United Kingdom, on the  basis  of  his  marriage  to  a  British
    citizen.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal:

15. His appeal against the decision to make a deportation order and against
    the  refusal  of  the  Respondent  to  accept  the  Appellant's  asylum
    application came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  (Immigration
    Judge D E Colyer  and  Mrs  Greenwood,  a  non-legal  member)  on  22nd
    November 2011 sitting at Nottingham Magistrates' Court.   It  is  clear
    from  the  determination  prepared  on  22nd  November  2011  that  the
    Appellant had appeared before the Tribunal unrepresented  although  his
    previous representatives Hassan Solicitors had  produced  a  bundle  of
    documentation.  In that determination the panel dismissed the appeal on
    both grounds having regard to the Appellant's immigration and  criminal
    offending history.

16. The findings of the panel  at  paragraphs  31  to  42  dealt  with  the
    Appellant's background and the chronology of his  immigration  history.
    His life in the United Kingdom was set  out  at  paragraphs  43  to  44
    noting that he claimed to have been married in 2008 to Rafia  Begum,  a
    British citizen who was born on 5th February 1982.  They had married in
    a religious ceremony at a friend's house in Birmingham.  At that  stage
    he contended that the marriage was still subsisting and that  his  wife
    lived with her mother in Birmingham.  He stated before the  panel  that
    he last saw his wife in mid-February 2010.  The panel found that  there
    was  no  marriage  certificate  and  from  the   description   of   the
    circumstances of  the  alleged  ceremony,  it  would  appear  that  the
    marriage was not officially registered  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    panel found that whatever the circumstances it was  apparent  that  the
    relationship  with  his  "wife"  quickly  deteriorated  and  that   the
    relationship with that woman formed the background to  the  Appellant's
    criminal behaviour.  The panel were satisfied that the relationship was
    no longer in existence.  At paragraphs 45 to 48 the  panel  dealt  with
    the Appellant's criminal activities setting out the details of  all  of
    those convictions and noting that it was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant the victim of all of his crimes was his wife.   At  paragraph
    46 they set out the evidence that the Appellant  had  given  concerning
    those offences.  At paragraph 47 the  panel  gave  due  regard  to  the
    sentencing comments of His Honour Judge Mayo on 23rd  March  2010.   At
    paragraphs 49 to 52 the  panel  summarised  the  Appellant's  claim  to
    asylum and considered the general security  situation  in  Afghanistan.
    They did not accept that the  Appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the basis of his fear of the Taliban and that even if it
    were right that he would be at risk in his  home  area  that  he  could
    relocate  to  Kabul.   The  panel  found  that  having  regard  to  the
    circumstances of this particular Appellant it was not  considered  that
    the indiscriminate violence in the Appellant's home area  would  be  at
    such a high level that there existed "substantial grounds for believing
    that he would face a real risk which threatens  his  life  or  person".
    The panel considered the issue of internal relocation and at  paragraph
    63 found that the Appellant, even if his claims were credible,  has  an
    alleged fear of persecution which was "relatively local".  They found

         "The perpetrators living in their own province.  I find that  there
         is no evidence that those persons  have  any  power,  influence  or
         intelligence outside of that province.  We therefore find there are
         other parts of Afghanistan  that  the  Appellant  could  travel  to
         without any fear of persecution."

    The panel found that he could live in any other  part  of  the  country
    most  particularly  Kabul  without  any  fear  and  that  it  was   not
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for  him  to  relocate.   They  considered
    relocation to Kabul extensively at paragraph 66 onwards and reached the
    conclusion at paragraph 74

         "We find that the Appellant has failed to establish that his family
         history, his ethnicity, his  implied  political  opinion  or  other
         characteristics will cause him to be the subject of harm in  Kabul.
         Kabul is clearly a difficult place for the  vast  majority  of  its
         citizens to live in - ravaged as it has  been  by  years  of  harsh
         Taliban authoritarian government and the recent war.   We  have  no
         doubt that quality of life  is  far  from  good  for  many  of  its
         citizens and such services are available are  basic.   However  the
         available evidence regarding the current situation there  does  not
         persuade us that there is a  real  risk  of  this  Appellant  being
         subject  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
         punishment on his return there."

    At paragraph 75 the panel said this:-

         "75. The Appellant has shown that he has been able to relocate to a
             completely different country and culture.  We find  that  this
             shows resilience on his part.  We find  that  it  is  probable
             that when he reaches Afghanistan he will be able  to  use  his
             resilience and his skills acquired during  his  stay  in  this
             country  to  facilitate  his   return   to   anywhere   within
             Afghanistan.  It is however to Kabul that  he  will  first  be
             returned and we find that there are state resources  available
             for him to use should he so wish on his return."

17.  The  panel  dealt  with  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant  between
    paragraphs 78 and 80 noting that they did not find the Appellant to  be
    a  "credible  witness  and  we  have  significant  doubts   about   the
    truthfulness of many of the details of the Appellant's accounts".  Thus
    they concluded that he had not established to the lower  standard  that
    he has in the past  or  would  in  the  future  suffer  persecution  in
    Afghanistan  if  returned.   Consequently  they  concluded   that   the
    Appellant's removal would not cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach
    of its obligations under the 1951 Convention.  As to Articles 2  and  3
    they found that there was no evidence that the  Appellant  was  in  bad
    health or is unable to work to support himself.  They found that it was
    not unduly harsh to return him to Afghanistan and that the  Appellant's
    experience of relocating, having left his home district a  considerable
    time ago and having spent time in the UK that whilst it  would  not  be
    easy to establish life in Afghanistan  it  would  no  doubt  involve  a
    degree of hardship and discomfort but it had not been shown that it was
    unduly harsh.  Consequently they did not find that  there  was  a  real
    risk that on removal that he would suffer a breach of Articles 2 and 3.



18. They then turned to Article 8.  They found that the deportation of  the
    Appellant would be an interference  by  a  public  authority  with  his
    exercise of his right to his private life.  They found that  he  had  a
    limited private life and that his  family  life  with  his  "wife"  had
    ended.  They took into account that the Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally and not under the provisions of the Immigration Rules
    and that it was the Respondent's intention that he should  leave  under
    the current UK and European laws concerning the control of immigration.
     They found that the action in deporting him was in accordance with the
    law and had the  legitimate  aim  of  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control in respect of those who had entered the  UK  illegally  and  to
    ensure the prevention of disorder or crime  in  respect  of  those  who
    commit criminal offences.  The panel set  out  the  law  at  length  at
    paragraphs 94 onwards including consideration of the  decision  of  the
    European  Court  in  Boultif  v  Switzerland  and  the  Uner   criteria
    (paragraph 98).  At paragraph 101 the panel said this:-

         "From the Appellant's history of offending  we  find  that  he  has
         shown that he has a propensity to commit criminal offences  and  to
         engage in a criminal lifestyle.  His pattern of offending shows the
         seriousness of the crimes he is  prepared  to  undertake.   He  now
         states that prison has taught him a lesson but we are not persuaded
         that he will change his ways.  He has been given  opportunities  in
         the past and these have not succeeded.  We find that as a  risk  of
         harm to the community the Appellant will pose a realistic  prospect
         and that he is a danger to society through his criminal activities.
          We find that the Appellant will remain a risk of  further  serious
         criminal behaviour if he remains in  the  United  Kingdom.   Having
         taken all those matters into account we reach  the  conclusion  the
         decision  to  deport  the  Appellant   back   to   Afghanistan   is
         proportionate."

19. The panel at paragraph 102 noted that they did  not  underestimate  the
    practical difficulties  entailed  for  the  Appellant  to  relocate  to
    Afghanistan but that no significant evidence  had  been  adduced  which
    would indicate that it would be impossible, exceptionally difficult  or
    unreasonable for him to do so.  They found that the Appellant's private
    life could be resumed in Afghanistan and that he was

         "mature enough to be able to adapt to life in his home country  and
         that his needs are not  exceptional.   The  facts  of  this  appeal
         reveal no particularly exceptional health or welfare issues, either
         here or in his home country.  The situation in Afghanistan  may  be
         materially less good for the Appellant than in the UK and there may
         be  a  relative  disadvantage.   However  we  find  that  any  such
         difference is not in itself a sufficient  basis  for  allowing  his
         human rights appeal."

20. The panel then went on to consider the appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision to make a deportation order noting  the  criminal  convictions
    that the Appellant had and the Secretary of State's view who deemed  it
    to be conducive to the public good  to  make  a  deportation  order  by
    virtue of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.   The  panel  at
    paragraph  107  set  out  that  they  agreed  with   the   Respondent's
    submissions regarding the circumstances of his offending as set out  in
    the supplementary refusal letter of 22nd July 2011.   They  found  that
    the Appellant had been convicted of  four  separate  criminal  offences
    since February 2010 for which he had received  a  total  of  54  weeks'
    imprisonment.  The panel then reached the conclusion at  paragraph  112
    that after considering his immigration and criminal  offending  history
    the  Respondent  had  appropriately  applied  for  the  procedure   for
    deportation of the Appellant  given  the  number  of  serious  criminal
    offences committed during his time in the United Kingdom.   They  found
    that he had been given an opportunity to amend  his  ways  but  he  had
    continued with criminal offending and his relationship problems were an
    explanation but not a defence.  They found the Secretary of  State  had
    considered all the relevant factors in considering whether there is  an
    exception to the automatic deportation in this particular  case.   They
    found  it  had  not  been  established  that  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances in this Appellant's case and that the public interest  in
    his deportation is not outweighed by the claim by  the  Appellant  that
    the Human  Rights  Convention  and  the  Refugee  Convention  would  be
    breached by the decision to deport.  Thus they dismissed his appeal  on
    all grounds.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

21. The Appellant then instructing his solicitors to  appeal  the  decision
    the Appellant appeared to have drafted his own Grounds of Appeal.   The
    first ground was based on his lack of representation at the hearing and
    that he did not have any legal  guidance  and  struggled  to  represent
    himself.  The second ground advanced related to  his  claim  under  the
    Refugee  Convention  and  that  he  would  be  killed  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan as a result of problems with  Shia  and  the  Taliban.   In
    respect of Article 8, he made reference to the length of  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.

22. Permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  the  panel  was  granted  by
    Designated Judge Garratt on 4th January 2012.  The judge noted that the
    panel acknowledged the Appellant was unrepresented and  took  steps  to
    assist him in presenting his case.  The judge noted however:-

         "It is arguable, from a study of the copious self directions  which
         the determination contains, that the  Tribunal  adopted  the  wrong
         approach to the deportation issue.  The  refusal  letters  make  it
         clear that the Respondent proposed deportation on conducive grounds
         applying the provisions of paragraph 364 of the  Immigration  Rules
         yet the panel of the Tribunal directed  itself  on  the  provisions
         covering automatic deportation under Section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007.  The arguable error is obvious  from  the  two  pages  of
         quotes from that Act set out at paragraph 30 of  the  determination
         and also from the final paragraph where  automatic  deportation  is
         again  mentioned  as  the  basis  for  the  Respondent's  decision.
         Automatic  deportation  provisions  are  not  appropriate  as   the
         Appellant had not been sentenced to  imprisonment  of  over  twelve
         months.  Permission is therefore granted."

23. Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman,  in  a  note  and  directions  following
    permission being granted set out the following:-

         "The next hearing will be submissions on whether the  determination
         of the First-tier Tribunal should set aside for legal error; if so,
         to what extent; and the further procedure  required,  if  any.   If
         error is found, the UT may proceed without any further  hearing  to
         substitute a fresh decision, if satisfied that it can  be  done  on
         the basis of the evidence already given."

24. Thus the matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury on 15th
    May 2012.  In a written decision dated 12th  June  2012,  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanbury reached the conclusion that the determination of
    the panel disclosed a material error of law.  The reasons given were as
    follows:-

         "14. Unfortunately, the Immigration Judge demonstrated a degree  of
             confusion between  the  two  distinct  types  of  deportation;
             automatic deportation under Sections 32 - 39 of the UK Borders
             Act 2007 and deportation pursuant to Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
             Immigration Act 1971.  The latter type of deportation requires
             the Secretary of State to apply those factors in paragraph 364
             of HC 395.

         15.  Paragraph 30 of the  determination  may  be  explained  by  an
             unfortunate   use   of    standard    paragraphs.     However,
             unfortunately, the Immigration Judge returned to the theme  of
             the  automatic   deportation   in   paragraph   110   of   his
             determination and refers to case law decided under Section 33.
              There is also a reference to 'the automatic  deportation'  in
             paragraph 112 of his  decision.   Unfortunately,  I  was  left
             confused as to what the Immigration Judge intended to  say  at
             the end of reading the determination and  plainly  that  is  a
             material error of  law.   The  overall  conclusion  cannot  be
             regarded as necessarily sound if the analysis is so flawed.

         16.  For these reasons I have concluded that it is  appropriate  to
             set aside the Immigration Judge's decision in relation to  the
             deportation order but leave the Immigration  Judge's  decision
             in place in relation  to  all  other  matters,  including  his
             findings in  relation  to  the  application  of  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights and the facts of this case.  It  is
             necessary to remake the decision and in order to justly do  so
             a hearing will be required which the Appellant can  attend  if
             he wishes.  At that hearing the Appellant should be at liberty
             to provide an updated witness statement with any  developments
             since the hearing of 22nd  November  2011  but  otherwise  the
             Immigration Judge's fact-finding will stand.  As I have  said,
             I see no reason to  interfere  with  the  Immigration  Judge's
             findings in all other respects."

25. The judge then issued directions before himself at a  venue  convenient
    to the parties and to the  Tribunal  listing.   Thus  the  hearing  was
    reserved to Deputy Judge Hanbury who had heard the  parties  concerning
    the error of law.  It appears from the Tribunal  file  that  thereafter
    there appeared problems in listing the case before the Deputy Judge and
    on 25th July 2013 a transfer order was made and a  panel  to  hear  the
    appeal was authorised to include Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury if
    available to hear the case.

26. It was on that basis that the case was listed before the Upper Tribunal
    on 14th August 2013.

The Re-making of the decision:

27. At the hearing before the Tribunal, the Appellant was represented by Mr
    T. Hussain (Counsel) and the Respondent by Ms R. Petterson (Home Office
    Presenting Officer).  Despite the directions given by the Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge that had been served on the parties, no further evidence
    had been filed on behalf of  the  Appellant  nor  had  there  been  any
    witness statement taken from him.  Mr  Hussain  informed  the  Tribunal
    that it was not his  intention  to  call  the  Appellant  to  give  any
    evidence and that the case would proceed on submissions only.  Thus the
    Tribunal had before it the  original  material  that  had  been  placed
    before the First-tier Tribunal and set out in the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal panel.

28.  Ms  Petterson  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  made   the   following
    submissions.  She relied upon the material in the  Respondent's  bundle
    which comprised of three refusals, 14th June 2011, 20th July  2011  and
    22nd July 2011 including the reasons for deportation as set out in  the
    accompanying documentation.  She invited the  Tribunal  when  assessing
    his criminal convictions to note that he had been convicted of a number
    of offences which gave a total of 54 weeks  of  imprisonment  over  the
    last five years which culminated in the most recent conviction on  14th
    April 2011 when he was sentenced to eighteen weeks' imprisonment.   The
    Secretary of State took the view  that  this  was  of  importance  when
    considering whether it was conducive to deport the Appellant.

29. Ms Petterson made reference to the skeleton  argument  produced  by  Mr
    Hussain and in particular the matters  set  out  at  paragraph  3  that
    referred to the historical grant of indefinite leave  to  remain.   She
    noted that the skeleton argument appeared to refer to an  inconsistency
    between the Secretary of State granting indefinite leave to  remain  in
    2010 but deciding to deport him in 2011.  She submitted  there  was  no
    such  consistency  and  that  he  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    deportation because he had hit a "trigger point" of an amount  of  time
    since he had been granted indefinite leave to remain.  The  Appellant's
    background had been clear.  He committed another offence after  he  had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain which was why the Secretary  of
    State took the view that the trigger  point  had  been  breached.   The
    seriousness of the last offence is highly relevant.  The Appellant  had
    breached the restraining order yet again and had  been  given  eighteen
    weeks' imprisonment.  Whilst the skeleton  argument  at  paragraph  4.2
    made reference to the fact that the offence was committed  against  the
    same individual namely his former partner rather  than  the  public  at
    large, that was only one matter for the Secretary of State to take into
    account.  In this particular  case  the  Appellant  had  continued  his
    offending behaviour and it was sufficient to say that that  was  enough
    that he had continued to commit offences  whilst  not  a  risk  to  the
    general public and that was a matter to take into account.

30. As regards the asylum, the First-tier Tribunal panel  dealt  with  that
    and in the light of the directions given concerning the  error  of  law
    those facts were to be preserved.  That has not been challenged by  any
    further evidence.

31. As to Article 8, those findings of fact  were  also  preserved  and  no
    further evidence has been  placed  before  the  Tribunal  to  make  any
    further assessment.  The Appellant  has  had  the  opportunity  to  put
    further evidence or reasons before the Tribunal as to why he should not
    be deported.  From the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and  now
    the Appellant has not demonstrated that he has any significant  private
    life.  Whilst it was acknowledged that  he  developed  a  private  life
    there is no recent evidence nor was there any evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal panel to suggest that it had been widely  developed.   He
    may have friends and been resident in the United Kingdom for  a  period
    of time but there was nothing on the basis of the Appellant's situation
    which would outweigh the need  for  deportation  given  the  number  of
    offences that he had committed.

32. She submitted that the scope of the hearing was a narrow one  and  that
    by applying the applicable law to the history and the facts as found by
    the First-tier Tribunal would demonstrate that the Secretary  of  State
    had demonstrated that they  were  justified  in  making  a  deportation
    order.  She made reference to the Appellant's  criminal  activities  at
    paragraph 45, the sentencing remarks set out at paragraph  47  and  the
    reasons for his offending at paragraph 46.  At paragraph 101 the  panel
    reached the conclusion that he had  a  propensity  to  commit  criminal
    offences and they did not accept the Appellant had changed his ways and
    that he remained a risk to the community as a result of his activities.
     This had not been challenged.  Looking at his age, length of residence
    he was now 31 years of age and had been in the United Kingdom just over
    ten years.  Whilst the Secretary  of  State  had  been  criticised  for
    granting him indefinite leave to remain it is clear why deportation was
    then thought appropriate was a  result  of  the  Appellant's  offending
    which had taken place post the decision to grant  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  She submitted that there was no evidence of any close ties and
    the panel did not accept his remorse.  Overall there was nothing in his
    history that was sufficient to  outweigh  deportation.   She  therefore
    invited the Tribunal to remake the decision by dismissing his appeal.

33. Mr Hussain  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  relied  upon  his  skeleton
    argument. He submitted that in this case the Appellant had been granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 11th October 2010 based on the length  of
    residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  reaching  a  decision,   the
    Respondent had given consideration to all of his  previous  convictions
    save for the last one on 14th April 2011 which had led to a sentence of
    eighteen weeks' imprisonment for breach of a restraining order.  It was
    clear that prior to the grant of the indefinite  leave  to  remain  the
    factors  set  out  in  Section  395C  must  have  formed  part  of  the
    assessment.  In those circumstances it was disproportionate and  unfair
    to consider it conducive to deport the Appellant on the strength  of  a
    most recent conviction.

34. He submitted that the  seriousness  of  the  last  offence  was  highly
    relevant to the assessment and that it  did  not  justify  deportation.
    The judge's sentencing remarks which had been recorded at paragraph  47
    of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal acknowledged  that  the
    Appellant had developed a far greater insight into  the  importance  of
    abiding by a restraining order.  The pre-sentence report was not in the
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.

35. He submitted that the Tribunal erred in making an assessment as to  his
    propensity to offend and failed to take into account  the  pre-sentence
    report and the sentencing remarks.  This was  an  offence  against  one
    individual  and  not  against  specific  individuals.   There  was   no
    suggestion of any further offending behaviour and that was relevant  to
    an assessment as to his propensity.  The previous convictions,  it  was
    submitted were relatively minor and in this case it was  not  necessary
    to deport the Appellant because there was no members of the  public  to
    protect.

36. In respect of the public interest, Mr Hussain relied upon the  decision
    of Peart [2012] EWCA Civ 568 and particular relevance at paragraphs  20
    to 22.  He submitted that the Tribunal was  required  to  consider  the
    individual circumstances of the offences and not  to  apply  N  (Kenya)
    which was a wholly different case dealing with serious convictions  and
    criminal activity.  In this case the Appellant  had  no  propensity  to
    reoffend and thus absent this factor the Appellant's Article  8  rights
    were worthy of respect.  Mr Hussain invited the  Tribunal  to  consider
    his offending history and the passage of time and  that  there  was  no
    suggestion that he had committed any further offences and that  he  was
    now law-abiding and that there had been no  risk  to  the  public.   In
    those circumstances it would be disproportionate use of  the  Secretary
    of State's powers to deport him now.  He invited the Tribunal to remake
    the decision allowing the appeal.

37.  Ms Petterson on behalf of the panel confirmed that there was  no  pre-
    sentencing report available to the panel nor is there one available  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

38. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my determination.

The findings of fact:

39. The starting point are the findings of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel which were preserved by order of Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanbury who found an error of law in the legal  approach  by  the
    panel but not in respect of the facts that they found.

40. The Appellant has been  given  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  those
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal and preserved by Judge
    Hanbury, however no further evidence of any kind has been  produced  on
    the  Appellant's  behalf.   Nor  has  he  given  evidence  before  this
    Tribunal.  They are therefore unchallenged findings of fact  and  there
    are no reasons to depart from them.  The only element is that time  has
    moved on.  There has been no attempt on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  to
    produce any evidence to  demonstrate  what  has  happened  during  that
    intervening period.  Those  findings  of  fact  are  set  out  in  this
    determination at paragraphs 16-20.

41. Neither advocate has made any submissions as to the law that should  be
    applied and the legal questions that require to  be  answered  in  this
    appeal. I shall therefore summarise those provisions below.

 The Law


42. Section 3(5) of the 1971 Act provides:-

        "3(5).    A person who is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
             deportation from the United Kingdom if

        (a)  the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
             to the public good; or ..."

43. In making a deportation order the Respondent is required to have regard
    to paragraph 364 of HC 395.  That Rule was amended on  19th  July  2006
    and now reads:-

              "364.        Subject to paragraph 380, while each  case  would
                  be considered on its merits, where a person is  liable  to
                  deportation the  presumption  shall  be  that  the  public
                  interest requires deportation.   The  Secretary  of  State
                  will consider all relevant factors in considering  whether
                  the presumption is  outweighed  in  any  particular  case,
                  although it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
                  the public interest in deportation will be outweighed in a
                  case where it would not be contrary to  the  Human  Rights
                  Convention and the Convention and Protocol relating to the
                  Status of Refugees to deport.  The aim is an  exercise  of
                  the power of deportation which is consistent and  fair  as
                  between one person and another,  although  one  case  will
                  rarely be identical with another in all material respects.
                   In the cases detailed in paragraph 363A deportation  will
                  normally be the proper course where a person has failed to
                  comply with or has contravened a condition or has remained
                  without authority."

44. It can be seen from paragraph 364 that the decision has  to  take  into
    account paragraph 380 of HC 395 which provides:-

         "380.    A deportation order will not be made  against  any  person
                 if his removal in pursuance of the order would be  contrary
                 to the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Convention
                 and Protocol relating to the  Status  of  Refugees  or  the
                 Human Rights Convention."

45.  The  Tribunal  in  EO  (Turkey)  provided  guidance  in  dealing  with
    deportation  decisions.   In  determining   an   appeal   against   the
    deportation decision made on "conducive" grounds on or after  July  20,
    2006 the Tribunal should:

          a)      "confirm that the  Appellant  is  liable  to  deportation
             (either because the sentencing judge  recommended  deportation
             or because the Secretary of State has deemed deportation to be
             conducive to the public good);


          b)      if so, consider  whether  deportation  would  breach  the
             Appellant's rights under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR;


          c)      if not, consider paragraph 364 HC 395."


46. In   Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012]  UKUT  00196  (IAC)
    The Tribunal held:

         "In a deportation appeal not falling within section 32  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007, the sequence of decision making  set  out  in  EO
         (deportation appeals: scope and process)  Turkey  [2007]  UKAIT  62
         still applies but the first step is expanded as follows:

         i)   Consider whether the person is liable to be  deported  on  the
             grounds set out by the Secretary of State. This will  normally
             involve the judge examining:-

             a.   Whether the material facts alleged by  the  Secretary  of
                  State are accepted     and if not whether  they  are  made
                  out to the civil standard flexibly applied;

             b.   Whether on the facts established viewed as  a  whole  the
                  conduct character or associations reach such  a  level  of
                  seriousness as to justify a decision to deport;

             c.   In considering b) the judge  will  take  account  of  any
                  lawful policy of the Secretary of State  relevant  to  the
                  exercise of the  discretion  to  deport  and  whether  the
                  discretion has been  exercised  in  accordance  with  that
                  policy;

         ii)  If the person is liable to deportation, then the next question
             to consider is whether a  human  rights  or  protection  claim
             precludes deportation. In cases of  private  or  family  life,
             this will require an assessment of the proportionality of  the
             measures against the family or private life in question, and a
             weighing of all relevant factors.

         iii)      If  the  two  previous  steps  are  decided  against  the
             appellant, then the question whether the discretion to  deport
             has been exercised in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules
             applicable is the third  step  in  the  process.  The  present
             wording of the rules assumes that a person who  is  liable  to
             deportation and whose deportation would not be contrary to the
             law and in breach of human rights should normally be  deported
             absent exceptional circumstances to be assessed in  the  light
             of all relevant information placed before the Tribunal"

47. Paragraph 364 is only in issue if the Appellant fails  to  establish  a
    claim under either Convention and if an appeal is to be  allowed  under
    paragraph 364 the Tribunal must identify the reasons,  state  why  they
    amount to "exceptional circumstances", and why they are so strong  that
    the Appellant is able to establish that his own circumstances  displace
    the public interest".

48. Neither advocate made any submissions concerning the test set out in EO
    (Turkey) or the decision in Bah (as cited). Further  it  has  not  been
    argued on behalf of the Appellant that the Appellant is not  liable  to
    deportation in the  light  of  the  nature  of  his  offences  and  his
    offending history.  Thus I find that on the particular  factual  matrix
    of this  Appellant  that  he  is  liable  to  deportation  because  the
    Secretary of State has properly deemed  deportation  conducive  to  the
    public good in the light of his offending history and the nature of the
    offences he has committed whilst in the United Kingdom. Those  offences
    are set out earlier in the pr�cis  of  the  evidence  and  comprise  of
    offences of battery and harassment and history of  non-compliance  with
    orders made by the courts, including  the  imposition  of  a  community
    order and breaches of a restraining order. As noted by the Secretary of
    State the sentences of  imprisonment  added  together  aggregate  to  a
    custodial sentence of more than  twelve  months'  imprisonment  over  a
    period of five years.

49. As regards any protections claims, the findings  of  fact  relating  to
    this are set out at paragraphs 33-38, paragraphs 49-58,  paragraphs  59
    -75 and  78-80.  The  panel  found  in  summary  that  the  Appellant's
    immigration history demonstrated that he arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in  2002  claiming  asylum,  however  on  11th  September   2003   that
    application was refused and certified on third country  grounds  as  it
    transpired he had already claimed asylum in Austria.  Before  he  could
    be removed to Austria, the removal did not go ahead  as  the  Appellant
    had absconded. A further application was made for  asylum.   The  panel
    dealt with that  in  their  determination  making  general  credibility
    findings within the determination at paragraphs 78 to 80.   They  found
    the Appellant's account to be at risk of harm on return to  Afghanistan
    to be an account which they did not find to be a credible one and  they
    found that they had "significant doubts about the truthfulness of  many
    of the details of the Appellant's accounts."  Thus,  having  regard  to
    the factual circumstances  of  his  appeal  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk of harm in his home area on account  of  his
    father's alleged involvement with the Hezbi-Islami nor that he would be
    at risk of any harm from his or his family's alleged  involvement  with
    the Taliban by the authorities or the Taliban themselves.

50.   The panel considered the general security  situation  in  Afghanistan
    but found at paragraph 58  that  the  indiscriminate  violence  in  the
    Appellant's home area was not of such a high level that  there  existed
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face a real risk.   The
    panel found at paragraph 63 that even if his claim was credible and had
    a fear of persecution it would be local and that there was no  evidence
    that those people had any power, influence or intelligence outside  the
    province and therefore the  Appellant  could  relocate  to  Kabul  (see
    paragraph 63-64).


51.   As to  resettlement  in  Kabul,  the  panel  took  into  account  the
    background evidence at paragraph 67 onwards and reached the  conclusion
    at paragraph 74 that the Appellant had failed  to  establish  that  his
    family history, his ethnicity, his implied political opinion  or  other
    characteristics would cause him to be the subject  of  harm  in  Kabul.
    Whilst they found Kabul was a difficult place for the majority  of  its
    citizens to live in, ravaged as it has been by years of  harsh  Taliban
    authoritarian government and the recent war, the evidence  before  them
    did not demonstrate that there was a real risk of the  Appellant  being
    subject to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  They
    found that he had shown by  his  conduct  that  he  had  been  able  to
    relocate to  a  completely  different  country  and  culture  and  this
    demonstrated  resilience  on  his  part  and  that  when   he   reached
    Afghanistan he could use his resilience and skills acquired during  his
    stay in the United Kingdom to  facilitate  his  return.   Further  they
    found there would be state resources available for him.  Whilst in  the
    skeleton argument produced by Mr Hussain at paragraph 3.2 it is  stated
    that it  is  "arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    assessment of sufficiency of protection and that there is  none",  this
    was not pursued by Mr Hussain at the hearing, he did not refer  to  any
    background material or make any submissions on this  point.   Thus  the
    findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  preserved  by  Judge
    Hanbury, remain as set out above.

52. It cannot be said that the Appellant has any claim  to  remain  on  the
    basis of asylum or protection grounds under Article 2 or 3 on the above
    facts.

53. Thus the advocates agree that the central issue  in  this  matter  will
    revolve around the Appellant's rights secured by Article 8 of the  ECHR
    and the issue of the public interest:-

         "Article 8 of the ECHR provides that:-


         8.1  Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.


          2.      There shall be no interference by a public authority with
             the exercise of this right except such as in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             wellbeing of the country, for the prevention  of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

54. I remind myself of  the  questions  addressed  by  Lord  Bingham  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2002] UKHL 27 at paragraph 17.  His questions  are  as
    follows:

         "(i) Would the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority where the  exercise  of  the  Appellant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (ii) If so, will such an interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially as to engage the operation  of  Article
             8?

         (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interest of national security,  public  safety  or  the
             economic wellbeing of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          v) If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             end sought to be achieved?"



55. As noted in the refusal  letter,  originally  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that there had been no family life established in this case.
     The panel dealt with the issue of his family life at paragraphs  43-44
    and at paragraph 92 noting that he last saw his "wife" in  mid-February
    2010 and found that from the description given by  the  Appellant,  the
    marriage was not officially registered in the UK and that "whatever the
    circumstances, it is quite apparent  that  his  relationship  with  his
    "wife" quickly deteriorated. It  would  appear  that  his  relationship
    forms the background to the  Appellant's  criminal  behaviour.  We  are
    satisfied that  this  relationship  no  longer  exists."  There  is  no
    evidence before this Tribunal to change that finding.

56. There is no  issue  between  the  parties  and  considering  the  well-
    established five stage test  under  Razgar  and  the  questions  to  be
    addressed and that in respect of the first question, that the  decision
    in this case to deport the Appellant  from the  United  Kingdom  is  an
    interference with his Article 8  rights  to  respect  for  his  private
    life., the Appellant having resided in the UK since 2002.   Considering
    the second issue of Razgar "will the interference have consequences  of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8",  it
    has not been in dispute before us that the refusal decision amounts  to
    an interference with that life and that it crosses the minimum level of
    severity to engage Article 8(1).

57. Article 8(2) which deals with proportionality, states that there should
    be no interference by a public authority with the  exercise  of  family
    rights under Article 8(1) except such as in  accordance  with  the  law
    and:

         "... is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interest  of
         national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing  of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals or for the protection of the  rights
         and freedoms of others."



58. As noted, once Article 8 is engaged, the focus moves to the process  of
    justification under Article 8(2).  It  is  common  ground  between  the
    parties that the decision here was in accordance with the  law  and  it
    has not been suggested that the Respondent's decision does not  further
    a legitimate aim, namely the prevention of crime and disorder. In  this
    case past criminal conduct is the basis of the decision  and  thus  the
    legitimate aim is the prevention of disorder or crime. Where  a  person
    poses a particular risk to the safety of others, the protection of  the
    health or rights of others may be of importance.  The  issue  therefore
    concerns the proportionality of that decision.

59. The Strasbourg court has repeatedly recognised  that  states  have  the
    right to control the entry and residence of non nationals.  Further any
    serious interference with Article 8  rights  must  be  a  proportionate
    response to the objective  sought,  in  this  case  the  prevention  of
    serious crime and the safety of the population generally.

60. The core principles for evaluating  Article  8  claims  in  deportation
    cases are to be found in the judgment of the Grand Chamber in Boultif v
    Switzerland (no.54273/00)[2001] ECHR 479. The Court set out a  list  of
    factors to be considered.   Boultif  criteria  have  been  adopted  and
    augmented  in  subsequent  judgments  in  this  field  including    the
    decisions of  the Grand Chamber in Uner v  Netherlands  (no.  46410/99)
    [2006] ECHR 873 and Maslov v Austria  (no. 1638/03)  [2008] ECHR 546.

61.  The  relevant  considerations  were   very   clearly,   and   possibly
    exhaustively, set out at paragraphs 57 and 58 of the  decision  of  the
    Grand Chamber of the European Court of  Human  rights  in  Uner  v  The
    Netherlands (2007) 45 EHRR 14, which I quote in full -
         "[57]    Even if Article 8 of the  Convention  does  not  therefore
                contain an absolute right for any category of alien  not  to
                be expelled, the Court's case law amply  demonstrates  that
                there are circumstances where the expulsion of an alien will
                give rise  to  a  violation  of  that  provision  (see,  for
                example, the judgments in Moustaquim v.  Belgium,  Beldjoudi
                v. France and Boultif v. Switzerland, cited above; see  also
                Amrollahi v. Denmark, no. 56811/00, 11 July 2002; Y?lmaz v.
                Germany, no. 52853/99, 17 April 2003; and Keles v.  Germany,
                32231/02, 27 October 2005). In the case of Boultif the Court
                elaborated the relevant criteria which it would use in order
                to assess whether an expulsion measure was  necessary  in  a
                democratic society and proportionate to the  legitimate  aim
                pursued. These criteria, as reproduced in  paragraph  40  of
                the Chamber judgment in the present case, are the following:


                -      the nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed
                    by the applicant;
                -      the length of the applicant's  stay  in  the  country
                    from which he or she is to be expelled;
                -      the time elapsed since the offence was committed  and
                    the applicant's conduct during that period;
                -      the nationalities of the various persons concerned;
                -      the applicant's family situation, such as the  length
                    of  the  marriage,  and  other  factors  expressing  the
                    effectiveness of a couple's family life;
                -      whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time
                    when he or she entered into a family relationship;
                -      whether there are children of the  marriage,  and  if
                    so, their age; and
                -      the seriousness of the difficulties which the  spouse
                    is likely to encounter  in  the  country  to  which  the
                    applicant is to be expelled.
         [58]     The Court would wish to make explicit two criteria which
                may already be implicit in those identified in the Boultif
                judgment:
                -      the best interests and well-being of the children, in
                    particular the seriousness of the difficulties which any
                    children of the applicant are likely to encounter in the
                    country to which the applicant is to be expelled; and
                -      the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with
                    the host country and with the country of destination."
Conclusions:

62. I have therefore considered those criteria by reference to the findings
    of fact that the First-tier Tribunal have made and  their  analysis  of
    the evidence.

63. I shall deal with the nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed
    by the Appellant.  The circumstances of the offences committed  by  him
    are as follows:

    On 14th December 2009 the Appellant appeared at Birmingham Magistrates'
    Court where he was convicted of failing to comply with the requirements
    of his community order.  The order  was  varied  so  as  to  include  a
    further ten hours' unpaid work.

    On 2nd February 2010 the Appellant appeared at Birmingham  Magistrates'
    Court where he was convicted of harassment.  He was  sentenced  to  six
    weeks' imprisonment and made the subject of a restraining order for two
    years until 1st February 2012.

    On 23rd February 2010 the Appellant made a further appearance in court,
    this time before Birmingham Crown  Court  where  he  was  convicted  of
    breach of a restraining order and harassment.  He was sentenced on 23rd
    March 2010 to a total of 30 weeks' imprisonment for both offences.  His
    Honour Judge Mayo sitting at the Crown Court  at  Birmingham  sentenced
    the Appellant for two  offences  both  of  which  were  breaches  of  a
    restraining order imposed on him by the magistrates in February of 2010
    when he had been sentenced to a period of six weeks'  imprisonment  for
    pursuing a course of  harassment.   The  sentencing  remarks  state  as
    follows:-

         "You were released from that sentence within three  days  of  being
         sentenced and within three days of your release from  custody,  you
         were pestering your former wife or your wife in Smethwick and  then
         embarked on a series of harassing telephone calls on 18th February,
         19th February and 20th February of this year.  You were arrested on
         22nd February and that obviously brought the contact to an end.   I
         have read your pre-sentence report and I think, now,  you  probably
         have more insight into the importance of this order  than  you  did
         before and I take  into  account,  in  fixing  the  length  of  the
         sentence, your pleas of guilty and the fact that no actual violence
         was used against your former wife.  However, there are  aggravating
         features here; the most important one is  that  you  breached  this
         order very shortly after it was imposed on you.   It  was  a  court
         order and court orders are not there to be disobeyed.  You  have  a
         history of violence towards Rafia Begum going back some years  and,
         in my judgment, what you did was persistent and calculated to cause
         psychological harm and indeed did cause Ms Begum some psychological
         harm.  These offences are so serious that only a custodial sentence
         can be justified on the first offence, namely the Section 5 breach;
         there will be a sentence of twelve  weeks'  imprisonment.   On  the
         second offence, namely Section 4 offence, there will be a  sentence
         of 30 weeks' imprisonment.  Those sentences will  run  concurrently
         and I direct that no time shall be taken off any sentence you serve
         because I anticipate that you will return to custody as  breach  of
         your licence."

    The judge also took the decision that the days that he had served would
    not count towards his sentence.  The reason being that he had  breached
    his order very quickly after it had passed and that he was the  subject
    of a restraining order.  The judge  also  issued  a  fresh  restraining
    order and that from release from prison until 1st August 2012 it  would
    remain in force.

64. The factual circumstances  of  these  offences  relate  to  his  former
    partner as the victim of the crimes.   There  are  no  details  of  the
    circumstances of the offence of affray for which he  was  convicted  in
    August 2006 nor for the two offences of battery for which he received a
    sentence of a twelve month community order with an 80 hours unpaid work
    requirement (it was subsequently varied following his failure to comply
    with the requirements of the community order six months later).   There
    is some suggestion by the Appellant that it related to his partner  but
    there is no document in respect of that.

65.  In respect of  the  offences  committed  on  2nd  February  2010,  the
    circumstances are referred to in the judge's  sentencing  remarks  when
    passing sentence for the breach of the restraining order. It  is  plain
    that the magistrate imposed  a  sentence  of  six  weeks'  imprisonment
    having pursued a course of harassment against his  former  partner.   A
    restraining order for two years was also made.  Within eleven  days  of
    his release from custody he began  to  pester  and  harass  his  former
    partner embarking on a number of harassing telephone calls.  The  judge
    made reference to the "history of violence towards  Rafia  Begum  going
    back some years" and that the course of conduct he  embarked  upon  was
    "persistent and calculated to cause  psychological  harm"  and  as  the
    judge observed, did cause  her  some  psychological  harm.   Whilst  no
    actual physical violence was used, it is  plain  that  this  persistent
    course of conduct led to his victim suffering some psychological  harm.



66. The history demonstrates that on 14th April 2011 he  was  convicted  by
    Birmingham Magistrate's Court of a breach of his restraining order  and
    sentenced to eighteen weeks' imprisonment.  The circumstances  of  this
    offence are not set out in the papers.  Thus  the  Appellant  had  been
    convicted of four separate criminal offences and received a total of 54
    weeks' imprisonment.

67. Mr Hussain on behalf of  the  Appellant  has  submitted  that  on  11th
    October 2010 the Secretary of State granted  the  Appellant  indefinite
    leave to remain and  did  so  after  consideration  of  paragraph  395C
    factors which included matters such as length of residence, strength of
    connections, character and conduct and  criminal  convictions.   It  is
    further submitted that the Respondent must have given consideration  to
    all of his previous convictions (save for 14th April 2011) when  making
    a decision to grant him indefinite leave to  remain  and  therefore  it
    would be unfair and disproportionate for the Secretary of State to  now
    consider it conducive to deport the Appellant on the  strength  of  his
    most recent conviction.  It is further submitted that the  offence  was
    committed against the same individual rather than the public, it was at
    the lower end of the  scale  and  he  has  not  committed  any  further
    offences.

68. It is common ground that the Secretary of State did grant the Appellant
    indefinite leave to remain on 11th October 2010 after he had  committed
    criminal offences.  Whilst Mr  Hussain  submits  that  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain after  the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    paragraph  395C  factors,  which  included  criminal  convictions   and
    character and conduct, I find such a submission to be speculative.   It
    is not known what factors the Secretary of State took into account when
    reaching that decision and there has been  no  evidence  placed  before
    this Tribunal concerning that decision.  At its highest, the panel made
    a reference to this in  their  determination  of  the  Appellant  being
    granted such leave on the basis of his length of residence outside  the
    Immigration  Rules  (see  paragraph   40   of   their   determination).
    Nonetheless the reasons given by the Secretary of State  have not  been
    put in evidence before this Tribunal.

69. Nonetheless the only logical explanation for the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain was that notwithstanding  his  offending  history,  the
    Secretary of State was prepared to accept that his offending  had  come
    to an end.  However, as the history demonstrates that was not  in  fact
    the case.  The Appellant continued  to  breach  the  restraining  order
    against the same victim, who had previously been found to have suffered
    psychological harm from his course of conduct  and  that  such  conduct
    resulted in yet another period of imprisonment.   In  my  judgment  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to  respond  to  the  conduct  of  this
    Appellant by deportation measures.

70. As to the seriousness of the  offences,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to take into account the Appellant's conduct and  his  refusal
    and lack of compliance of court orders; not only his  breaches  of  the
    restraining order but also his failure to comply with community orders.
     This demonstrates in my judgment a persistent refusal to  respect  the
    authority of the court and the state.  Whilst Mr Hussain  submits  that
    the facts of the offences were not serious, that would be ignoring  the
    course of  conduct  embarked  upon  by  this  Appellant  and  that  its
    seriousness does not necessarily come from the  actual  conduct  itself
    but by his persistent failure to comply with court orders and  breaches
    of those orders showing a  lack  of  respect  for  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities.

71. Even if the Secretary of State took a generous view in respect  of  the
    Appellant's desire for leave to  remain,  the  Appellant  responded  by
    committing further offences and failed to observe  his  obligations  to
    abide by court orders.  Whilst there has been no offending since  2011,
    in my view, the persistence of his previous record and  his  propensity
    to breach orders, the Tribunal is entitled to take  that  into  account
    concerning offending in the future.  There has been  no  OASy's  Report
    produced nor has there been a pre-sentence report indicating whether or
    not he has undergone any courses whilst in custody relating to offences
    towards females or in  the  context  of  relationships  with  partners.
    There is no information  before  the  Tribunal  forthcoming  from  this
    Appellant whatsoever despite being given  the  opportunity  to  provide
    evidence concerning his position.  Whilst the skeleton  argument  makes
    reference to the fact that the Appellant has "developed a  far  greater
    insight into the  importance  of  abiding  by  restraining  orders"  by
    reference to the sentencing remarks, that fails to  take  into  account
    that after those sentencing remarks, the Appellant went on yet again to
    breach  the  restraining  order  which  led  to  a  further  period  of
    imprisonment.  Furthermore, to that end, there is  no  evidence  before
    this Tribunal to suggest that he would behave any  differently  in  the
    future should he find himself in a relationship with a female  partner.



72. When considering the length of stay  the  Appellant  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2002 having entered illegally and claiming asylum.
     His claim was refused by 2003 and then he absconded.  He  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in 2010 thus much of his time in the  United
    Kingdom has not been by way of lawful leave.  Any lawful leave has been
    a relatively short period.

73. I have dealt with earlier  the  time  elapsed  since  the  offence  was
    committed and his conduct during that period. There is nothing known of
    his conduct save from the bare assertion that he has not committed  any
    offences.  No assessment of risk has been placed  before  the  Tribunal
    bearing in mind the type of offending for which he has been dealt  with
    in the past.

74. As to the nationality of the Appellant, he is an  Afghan  national  and
    the matters set out earlier  in  this  determination  relating  to  the
    panel's findings of fact which demonstrated that he  would  not  be  at
    risk of harm  upon  return  to  Afghanistan  is  of  relevance.   Their
    findings  as  to  his  resilience  to  re-establishing  his   life   in
    Afghanistan is set out in their findings of fact and  whilst  they  did
    not doubt the quality of life would be far from good for  many  of  its
    citizens and the services available are basic, the Appellant had  shown
    that he had been able to relocate to a completely different country and
    culture, therefore showing a resilience.  He was found to be a man  who
    was in good health and there was no evidence that he would be unable to
    work to support himself (see paragraph 88) and whilst  it  may  not  be
    easy to establish life in his country of origin it would not  be  shown
    that it would be unduly harsh for him to do so.  By way of  comparison,
    the panel found that he had limited social and  cultural  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom.

75. In drawing together all of those factors in the light of the assessment
    I have made, I remind myself that the assessment of proportionality for
    me to consider having regard to the strength  and  the  nature  of  the
    private life on the one hand and the legitimate aim identified in  this
    case and to the strength for deportation as a fair balance and as being
    necessary in support of that aim.

76. The legitimate aim of the prevention of crime is not confined to  those
    who are likely to reoffend  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the  case  law
    indicates that in serious cases  affecting  public  confidence  in  the
    criminal justice and immigration systems, deportation of offenders  has
    a legitimate role of play in the deterrence  of  others  who  might  be
    minded to offend (I refer to N Kenya [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 and OH Serbia
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694).  I remind myself  that  I  have  to  balance  the
    private interests of this Appellant against the public interests of the
    state, which Judge LJ (as he then was) summarised in N (Kenya) as being
    "broad  issues  of  social  cohesion  and  public  confidence  in   the
    administration of the system by which control is  exercised  over  non-
    British citizens who enter and remain in the  United  Kingdom".   Cases
    decided by the Court of Appeal including Samaroo v SSHD [2001] EWCA Civ
    1139, N (Kenya) and OH (Serbia) identified particular public policy  or
    public interest considerations that had to be taken into account at two
    stages.  First they were factors that the SSHD  was  entitled  to  take
    into account when deciding whether or not to make a deportation  order.
    Secondly, they were factors going to  the  public  interest,  to  which
    appropriate weight had to be given by the Tribunal when considering the
    balance between  public  interests  and  the  private  interests  of  a
    potential deportee if he demonstrated that his removal  pursuant  to  a
    deportation order would infringe his Article  8  rights,  so  that  the
    "proportionality" balance had to be struck in accordance  with  Article
    8(2) of the ECHR .

77.   I take into account the remarks of  Wilson  LJ  in  OH  (Serbia)  who
    summarised three important "facets" of the public interest that had  to
    be considered in deportation cases involving non-British  citizens  who
    had been convicted of offences  in  the  UK  and  where  the  SSHD  had
    concluded that the deportation of the person concerned was conducive to
    the public good.  Those  "facets"  he  identified  were,  the  risk  of
    reoffending by the person concerned which I  have  dealt  with  in  the
    preceding  paragraph,  the  need  to  deter  foreign   nationals   from
    committing serious crimes by leading them to understand that,  whatever
    the  other  circumstances,  one  consequence  of  them  may   well   be
    deportation; and the rule of deportation as a expression  of  society's
    revulsion at serious crimes and in building public confidence  and  the
    treatment of foreign citizens who have committed serious crimes.

78. In this appeal the sentence passed  was  a  short  custodial  sentence.
    Thus as identified by Mr Hussain the question  remains  as  to  whether
    deportation is proportionate, giving  due  and  proper  weight  to  the
    public interest which I have identified earlier and  to  the  right  to
    respect for this Appellant's private life.

79. In the light of the facts set out, whilst it has been demonstrated that
    the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2002 the  period  of
    lawful leave has been a relatively short one since  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in 2010 after which time, despite that  generous  grant
    of leave the Appellant  responded  by  committing  a  further  criminal
    offence of the same type that he had done before.  The  nature  of  the
    private life found by the panel was  weak;  he  did  not  identify  any
    significant relationships with others, any  work  carried  out  in  the
    community, any course of study that he has undertaken either  prior  to
    being granted leave or since granted leave.  He has then been given the
    opportunity  to  provide  further  evidence  before  this  Tribunal  to
    demonstrate that his private life is of such  significance.   The  only
    factor  is  the  length  of  residence  which  has  been  since   2002.
    Consequently the Appellant's claim to have established a  private  life
    is a weak one factually.

80. On the other side of the balance, whilst the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to take the view that the Appellant  has  shown  a  persistent
    course of conduct, which has resulted in short custodial sentences,  in
    my judgment it demonstrates a  more  fundamental  seriousness  by  this
    Appellant and his failure to comply with the orders of  the  court  and
    the persistent refusal to respect the authority of the  court  and  the
    state.  Whilst he has not committed an offence since  April  2011,  the
    legitimate aim of the prevention of crime is not confined to those  who
    are likely to reoffend and I must  have  regard  to  the  broad  social
    issues relating to deterrents as set out earlier (see  OH  Serbia)  (as
    cited).  Therefore having weighed the relevant factors in the  balance,
    having found and paid regard to the length of residence he has  had  in
    the UK since 2002, but that he has put forward only a weak private life
    that has been unsubstantiated by any  significant  relationships,  work
    within the community, courses  of  study,  this  balanced  against  the
    public interest demonstrates in my judgment for the reasons  given,  it
    has not been demonstrated that it would  be  disproportionate  for  the
    Appellant to be deported.

81. I now move to the next issue.  As demonstrated by the decision  of  the
    Tribunal in Bah (as cited), if  the  two  previous  steps  are  decided
    against the Appellant then  the  question  whether  the  discretion  to
    deport has been exercised in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules
    applicable is the third step in the process.  Paragraph 364 is only  in
    issue if  the  Appellant  fails  to  establish  a  claim  under  either
    Convention and if an appeal is allowed under paragraph 364 the Tribunal
    must identify the  reasons,  state  why  they  amount  to  "exceptional
    circumstances and why they are so strong that the Appellant is able  to
    establish that his own circumstances displace the public interest."  As
    noted in Bah the present wording of the Rules assumes that a person who
    is liable to deportation (as in this case) and  whose  deportation  was
    not contrary to the law and in breach of  human  rights  (as  found  in
    relation to this Appellant  for  the  reasons  set  out  above)  should
    normally be deported absent exceptional circumstances to being assessed
    in the light of all relevant information placed before the Tribunal.

82.   In the light of the  matters  set  out  above,  Mr  Hussain  has  not
    identified any exceptional factors relevant to this  Appellant's  case.
    Those that he has relied upon have been taken into account earlier  for
    the reasons I have given but none of them  have  been  demonstrated  to
    show that they amount to "exceptional circumstances" nor  has  it  been
    demonstrated that they are so strong that  the  Appellant  is  able  to
    establish that they displace the public interest that I have identified
    in this case.  For those reasons, I find the  decision  to  deport  the
    Appellant to be a proportionate one and is otherwise in accordance with
    the law.

Decision

83. The original Tribunal made an error of law.  The decision is set aside.
     The decision is re-made as follows.  The appeal is dismissed.







Signed                                  Date 8th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
