
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18796/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)



                                   Between

                                    o r s
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Owens Stevens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson promulgated on 15  February  2016.   There  are  grounds  of
    appeal under Rules 33  and  21  which  should  be  read  together.  The
    Secretary of State  opposes  the  appeal  and  has  lodged  a  Rule  24
    response.

2.   The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 27 January 2016. He made a motion to adjourn the hearing so
    that he could be represented. This was opposed by  the  respondent  and
    refused by the Immigration Judge.  The first issue for me to decide  is
    whether or not that refusal was procedurally unfair to the appellant.

3.   The history of the case  and  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the
    motion to adjourn together with the reasons for refusal are set out  in
    detail at paragraphs 5 to 22. From some time in the latter  quarter  of
    2014 the appellant had been represented by a firm of  solicitors  Owens
    Stevens, instructing Miss V Easty, Counsel, on a pro bono basis.  There
    were a number of adjournments throughout the process at the instance of
    both the appellant and the respondent resulting in what  are  described
    as significant delays.

4.   At the adjourned hearing on 30 September 2015 the date  of  27  January
    2016 had apparently been obtained for a new hearing.  Judge  Hodgkinson
    records that the date had been communicated to both parties  and  their
    representatives. The formal notice was sent out on 19 January.  In  two
    subsequent letters the solicitors  wrote  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    seeking a  further  adjournment  on  the  basis  that  Miss  Easty  was
    unavailable as she had been instructed to appear at another hearing  on
    that date. The solicitors offered alternative dates.  The  applications
    were considered by a judge other than Judge Hodgkinson and refused  and
    notices dispatched on 22 and 25 January 2016.

5.   As noted above, on 27 January 2016 the appellant was unrepresented.  Mr
    Williams representing the respondent informed the Tribunal that he  had
    spoken to Miss Easty a couple of days before,  she  was  aware  of  the
    hearing but that she would not be attending as she had been  instructed
    to represent somebody else in another case.

6.    Against  that  background  the  Immigration  Judge  decided  that   an
    adjournment  would  achieve  nothing  useful.   The  appeal  had   been
    outstanding for some time. The First-tier Tribunal had all the relevant
    documentation  and  witnesses  were  present  from  both  sides.    The
    Immigration Judge also had a copy of  Miss  Easty's  skeleton  argument
    prepared for an earlier hearing.

7.   At the  hearing  today  Miss  Brown  appeared  for  the  appellant  and
    referred me to the grounds  of  appeal  already  lodged.   The  central
    argument, she said, was  whether  or  not  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness. If so there should be a fresh hearing as had been indicated
    by Judge Freeman in the reasons for granting permission.

8.   In Miss Brown's submission the Immigration  Judge  should  have  called
    previous Counsel and solicitors to account for what  had  happened  and
    allowed them to explain their conduct in the case either in writing  or
    by appearing in person. In refusing  the  adjournment  the  failure  of
    Counsel and solicitors had been allowed to prejudice the appellant.

9.   Miss Brown referred me to the allegations that were  made  against  the
    appellant and the evidence of the  police  officer  PC  Dady  which  is
    recorded at paragraph 69.  She emphasised that the evidence  was  given
    with no cross-examination on behalf of the appellant and the  appellant
    is simply recorded as denying pretty much everything.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge then goes on to find as a fact  that  the
    appellant, although not convicted of anything other than one offence of
    possession of cannabis, had committed all of the offences of  which  he
    has been suspected or accused. These included serious acts of  domestic
    violence against two former partners, some of which are  said  to  have
    occurred in front of children.  He goes on to say  that  he  finds  the
    evidence overwhelming. He makes findings in respect of the  credibility
    of two witnesses, Miss Thompson and Miss Mattas.

11.  The other leg of the submissions made  by  Miss  Brown  refers  to  the
    ongoing Family Court proceedings.  One of the issues was  contact  with
    one of the appellant's children, Triston.  These  proceedings  had  not
    concluded by the time of the hearing in January  2016.  Although  on  a
    previous  occasion  Judge  Hodgkinson  had  adjourned  the  proceedings
    because he considered that the outcome of the Family Court  proceedings
    was potentially material to the outcome of the appellant's  appeal,  he
    nevertheless set out to determine the issue.  Miss Brown submitted that
    this was a further error of law.

12.  Miss Brown said that the evidence that Judge Hodgkinson relied upon  on
    came from a social worker report from Miss Segar for the  Family  Court
    proceedings.  There was  no  one  there  to  assist  the  appellant  in
    challenging this report which appears to have been largely accepted.

13.  Miss Brown submitted that even if there  had  been  representation  the
    proceedings should have been adjourned pending the  conclusion  of  the
    Family Court proceedings.

14.  Mr Tarlow for the respondent relied on his Rule 24 response.   The  key
    to this he said lay in paragraphs 21 and 22 of the determination.  Miss
    Easty had known of the adjourned diet but had failed to attend  because
    she was instructed elsewhere.

15.  All the evidence was before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  this  was  a
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State  based  on  the  conduct  of  the
    appellant. It was not conducive to the public good for him to remain in
    this country and the Immigration Judge was  well  entitled  to  proceed
    with a hearing.  He submitted that this was merely a disagreement  with
    the First-tier Tribunal's findings.

16.  One must have considerable sympathy  for  the  position  in  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal found itself given the long delays and the  absence
    of Counsel or a solicitor for the  appellant.   The  Immigration  Judge
    might well have assumed from the information placed before him that the
    reason the  non-appearance  was  Counsel's  instructions  to  represent
    someone else in another case, but that did not cover the solicitors.

17.  It is of course right to point out that the reason for  the  length  of
    the proceedings cannot be wholly attributed to the appellant.  On three
    occasions the  proceedings  were  adjourned  at  the  instance  of  the
    respondent and on the last occasion they were adjourned  because  Judge
    Hodgkinson  was  persuaded  that  the  outcome  of  the  Family   Court
    proceedings were potentially material to the outcome of the appeal.

18.  If the test  was  whether  or  not  the  Immigration  Judge  had  acted
    reasonably it is difficult to see how he might be faulted.  However the
    test to be applied in such a situation is not whether  the  Immigration
    Judge acted in a manner which was perverse, irrational or  unreasonable
    in the Wednesbury sense, but whether the  refusal  of  the  adjournment
    caused unfairness to the appellant.

19.  Miss Brown  placed  before  me  a  bundle  of  papers  which  contained
    statements from the solicitor, Miss Stevens,  and  from  Counsel,  Miss
    Easty, concerning their non-appearance.  I  have  read  these.   It  is
    clear that on the occasion Miss Easty was indeed  engaged  representing
    another client elsewhere and Miss Stevens was out of the country.

20.  Given the information contained in the statements I am  satisfied  that
    what occurred was more muddle than a wilful disregard of the  Tribunal.
    Nevertheless the basic courtesies of informing the First-tier  Tribunal
    of why the appellant was unrepresented were not observed and that was a
    serious professional misjudgement by both of them.

21.  I am however satisfied that the refusal did cause unfairness.   In  the
    first place the appellant made it clear to the First-tier Tribunal that
    he wished to be represented. That of course is not the test and in many
    situations the fact that a person who wishes to be represented  is  not
    will not of  itself  cause  unfairness.   However  where  an  appellant
    indicates to a Tribunal that he or she wishes  to  be  represented,  it
    must  be  a  factor   in   considering   whether   proceeding   without
    representation runs the risk of unfairness flowing from that  decision.
    That might come from a lack of confidence in speaking to a judge or  in
    public, from nervousness or from unfamiliarity with legal  jargon  even
    where there is assistance from the presiding judge.  It might also flow
    from the nature of the evidence and the issues to be determined.

22.  The Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain in the UK was on the basis of conduct centred on allegations  of
    criminality which, except for  one  minor  conviction,  were  unproven.
    These allegations were spoken to by police  reports  and  by  a  police
    officer who gave evidence.  There  was  no  cross-examination  of  that
    officer and no opportunity to fully test that officer's evidence.

23.  The evidence of PC Dady went to the heart  of  the  decision  that  was
    being made by the Secretary of State.   While  the  appellant  had  the
    right to cross examine  PC  Dady  I  find  that  given  the  range  and
    importance of the evidence it did not afford the appellant a  realistic
    opportunity to challenge and test his evidence. I was informed by  Miss
    Brown that the  judge  in  the  Family  Court  had  reached,  different
    conclusions in relation to some of the allegations

24.   The  hearing  on  30  September  2015  was  adjourned  because   Judge
    Hodgkinson considered that the outcome of the Family Court  proceedings
    would be material to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   They
    were not concluded by the hearing on 27 January. However  there  was  a
    social work report from Miss Segar. The appellant had  apparently  seen
    it before the hearing but he had not seen the bundle  from  the  Family
    Court which was given to him on the day.

25.  Judge Hodgkinson gave reasons why he felt he could deal with  the  case
    before the conclusion of the Family Court proceedings. He was  entitled
    to do that.  However he relied for his conclusions in relation  to  the
    appellant's contact with his child on the report of  Miss  Segar.  That
    report was not accepted by  the  appellant.  I  am  told  that  it  was
    subsequently challenged in the Family Court and the main part had  been
    put to one side. In my  opinion  the  lack  of  representation  at  the
    hearing resulted in the appellant not being able to fully challenge the
    report in that process.

Notice of Decision

26.  For these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  there  has  been  procedural
    unfairness in the way in which this matter has proceeded.  It  is  very
    unfortunate that this matter has occurred but I see no  option  but  to
    allow the appeal on the basis of procedural unfairness. The parties are
    agreed that this  case  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing and that is what I will do.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:
