
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/18961/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 September 2015                     |On 30 September 2015      |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Mr H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, Counsel
      (instructed by Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors LLP)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  on  17  June  2015
           against the decision and reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Farmer who had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the
           Appellant's decision dated 10 April 2014 to refuse to grant  the
           Respondent leave to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
           276ADE of the Immigration Rules and/or under Article 8 ECHR  and
           to remove him from the United Kingdom. The decision and  reasons
           was promulgated on 23 April 2015.


      2.    The Respondent is a  national  of  Nigeria,  born  there  on  23
           September 1965.  He became an overstayer in  2005,  subsequently
           forming a relationship with his British  Citizen  wife  whom  he
           married on 18 December 2012 and with whom he  lives.   His  wife
           has an adult daughter whose circumstances are set out at [6]  of
           Judge Farmer's decision and which in view of the anonymity order
           made need not be repeated here. The judge found that there  were
           insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of family  life  in
           Nigeria.   Paragraph  EX.1(b)  of  Appendix   FM   applied   and
           accordingly allowed the appeal.  Judge Farmer considered section
           117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  when
           reaching her findings and decision.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted by Judge Parkes because he considered that
           it was arguable that the judge had conflated broader  Article  8
           ECHR issues with those applicable under paragraph  EX.1(b),  had
           given excessive weight to the social worker's report relied upon
           by  the  Respondent  as  well  as  insufficient  weight  to  the
           Respondent's overstay.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal,  indicating
           that the appeal would be reheard and remade immediately  in  the
           event that a material error of law were found.  A rule 24 notice
           opposing the appeal was filed on behalf of the Respondent, dated
           19 June 2015.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Bramble for the Secretary of State relied on the  grounds  of
           onwards appeal served earlier and the  grant  of  permission  to
           appeal, where a material misdirection of law had been  asserted.
           The findings the judge reached had been inadequate.  The  issues
           had been conflated, an inadequate analysis  had  been  performed
           and the reasoning was inadequate.  There was a brief and helpful
           dialogue with the tribunal.


      6.    Mr Turner for the Respondent submitted in summary that there was
           no error of law in the decision and reasons.   Contrary  to  the
           onwards grounds, the judge had conducted a careful  analysis  of
           the evidence, and had for example been critical  of  the  social
           worker's report.  Clearly that had been factored in by the judge
           when reaching her findings.  The appeal had been fact  sensitive
           and the grounds  were  only  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
           decision.




      The error of law finding


      7.    At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
           found that the judge had not fallen into material error of  law.
           It is important to recognise  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  cannot
           lightly  interfere  with  decisions  made  by   the   First-tier
           Tribunal.  There is no scope for a mere difference of opinion in
           areas where a range of reasonable opinions consistent  with  the
           current law exists, which can  so  easily  be  seen  in  appeals
           raising  Article  8  ECHR  issues  which  are  invariably   fact
           sensitive: Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, at [20].  Here, however, it is
           a  question  of  the  substance  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
           reasoning and the  application  of  the  text  of  the  relevant
           Immigration Rules, i.e., Appendix FM and paragraph EX.1 thereof.
            At [9] of her decision Judge Farmer recorded that the Secretary
           of  State  accepted  that  the  Appellant  met  the  Suitability
           requirements and also the Eligibility  requirements  (in  part).
           There  were  no  maintenance  or  accommodation  issues.   Those
           findings were not challenged.


      8.    The  analysis  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  which  the  judge
           conducted  was  thorough.   The  judge  identified   significant
           sections of his evidence relating to  his  Nigerian  connections
           and  his  immigration  history  which  she  could  not   accept.
           Nevertheless,   the   judge   accepted   the   United    Kingdom
           relationships on which he relied, finding that they were genuine
           but not parental in character: see [14] of  the  decision.   The
           Appellant's marital relationship was  not  in  dispute.   As  Mr
           Turner pointed out, the judge had been critical  of  the  social
           worker's  report,  which  had  informed  her  decision.  In  the
           tribunal's judgment,  following  that  careful  sifting  of  the
           evidence, Judge Farmer went on to give  proper  and  sustainable
           reasons for finding that there were insurmountable obstacles  to
           the continuation of family life in Nigeria.  The  reasons  given
           in the decision and reasons amounted to far more than  temporary
           inconvenience or very serious hardship, as of course they needed
           to do.


      9.    The Judge set out  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
           Immigration Rules,  which  is  in  the  following  terms,  (with
           emphasis supplied by the tribunal):


            Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility  requirements  for
           leave to remain as a partner or parent


            EX.1 This paragraph applies if ...


            (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK.


            EX.2. For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner.


      10.   In the  tribunal's  judgment,  Judge  Farmer  applied  the  text
           correctly.  There was no  conflation  with  Article  8  ECHR  as
           consideration of Article 8 ECHR on a free-standing  basis  as  a
           second stage (see, e.g. SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387)  was
           never reached.  The judge's focus  was  not  on  the  Appellant,
           whose evidence she discounted, but on the  particular  situation
           and  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's  partner,  his  British
           Citizen wife, who had lived and worked in the United Kingdom for
           some 25 years, and had an adult daughter and grandchild here.


      11.   The tribunal finds no error of law and dismisses  the  Secretary
           of State's appeal.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The original decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                 Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




