
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/18508/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14 May 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                             MISS THI HUONG TRAN
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Singer of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr A Fujiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national  of  Vietnam,  born  on  6  June  1985
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 1 April  2014  to
    refuse to issue her a Derivative Residence Card under Regulation 15A of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (hereinafter
    the 2006 Regulations)  and  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn  dismissed
    her appeal in a determination promulgated on 10 February 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    9 April 2015 stating that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material error of  law  in  respect  of  his  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child. The appellant's child was  a  qualifying  child
    under section 117B (6) and  yet  there  was  no  proper  assessment  of
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. The
    Judge's use of the words (strong reasons) when assessing Article  8  on
    Conventional grounds makes it difficult to know what standard of  proof
    was actually applied.

    The First-Tier Tribunal Judge's Findings

 3. The Judge gave the following reasons  for  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal which I summarise. The judge stated that he  has  listened  very
    carefully to the evidence of the appellant and did not find her to be a
    credible witness. Evidence about how her friend took  her  daughter  to
    Vietnam and left her there with the appellant's mother is not credible.
    The core of the claim relates to the involvement of the father  of  the
    appellant's child. She claimed that she had no contact with her  former
    partner apart from his assistance  with  registering  their  daughter's
    birth and obtaining a passport. However she acknowledged that  she  had
    not tried to make any contact with him after this.

 4. "Given my conclusions about the lack of credibility that  the  daughter
    has no contact with the child's father. I have taken note  of  the  GPs
    letter (A8). Whilst it  states  that  the  appellant  looks  after  her
    daughter  "round-the-clock",  I  do  not  regard   this   evidence   as
    independent: it is clearly based on what the appellant told the doctor.
    I accept that the appellant has taken her daughter to the surgery and I
    find it more likely than not that they live together. However, I do not
    accept that doctor is able to  provide  any  details  of  their  living
    arrangements. I have also considered the letter  of  12  November  2014
    from Dr Hossein. This states that  the  appellant  is  a  single-parent
    family and I am satisfied that this statement  is  also  based  on  the
    appellant's account  of  the  circumstances  and  cannot  therefore  be
    regarded as independent".

 5. "There is no evidence as to the circumstances of the child's father and
    I am not satisfied on a balance  of  probabilities  that  he  would  be
    unable to look after the child if the appellant were to be removed from
    the UK. I appreciate that it is generally very  damaging  for  a  young
    girl to be separated from her mother but, as this has already occurred,
    I do not consider there is any basis upon which  I  can  conclude  that
    such a separation would breach Section 55, particularly as there is  no
    evidence as to the child's welfare".

 6. "For all the  reasons,  I  find  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    properly based on the evidence and in accordance with the law I dismiss
    the appeal. I have  also  considered  the  appeal  in  accordance  Miss
    Radford submissions regarding Article 8. I  agree  with  Miss  McCreath
    that the appellant did  not  provide  the  respondent  with  sufficient
    evidence to show that her removal  would  be  contrary  to  the  U.K.'s
    obligations in respect of her and her child. There is a similar lack of
    evidence before me. I am unable  to  conclude  that  there  are  strong
    reasons for believing that removal would  give  rise  to  a  breach  of
    Article 8." The  judge  also  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

    Appellant's Grounds of Appeal

 7. The appellants' grounds of appeal state the following. The first ground
    of appeal states that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  materially
    erred in law by failing to properly or adequately assess Article  8  of
    the ECHR with reference  to  the  best  interests  of  the  child.  The
    appellant's child is a British citizen and that should have been  taken
    into account. The comments made at paragraph 47 of the determination do
    not amount to a proper assessment of the best interests  of  a  British
    citizen child. The Judge just made a bald assertion that there would be
    no breach of s55 without proper reasoning.

 8. In JO and others (section 55 duties) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) it
    was held  that  the  duty  imposed  by  section  55  of  the  Boarder's
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires "the decision maker to be
    properly informed of the position of a child affected by the  discharge
    of an immigration etc function. Thus equipped, the decision maker  must
    conduct a careful examination  of  all  the  relevant  information  and
    factors". It continues in the headnote of  JO  that  "being  adequately
    informed  and  conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  of  the  elementary
    prerequisites to the inter-related tasks  of  identifying  the  child's
    best  interest  and   then   balancing   them   with   other   material
    considerations. The question whether the duties  imposed  by  s55  have
    been duly performed in any given case will inevitably be  an  intensely
    fact sensitive and a contextual one. In the real world  of  litigation,
    the tools available to the Court or Tribunal considering this  question
    will frequently be confined to the application or submissions  made  to
    the Secretary of State and the ultimate letter of decision.  The  Judge
    did not conduct a careful examination of all relevant  information  and
    factors as required".

 9. The second grounds of appeal states that the judge did  not  conduct  a
    proper or adequate Article 8 ECHR  assessment  with  reference  to  the
    considerations in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.

10. The third  ground  of  appeal  states  that  at  paragraph  38  of  the
    determination the Judge correctly noted that the standard of proof  was
    on  a  balance  of  probabilities.  However  at  paragraph  49  of  the
    determination it appears that the Judge  did  not  apply  this  to  her
    factual findings on Article 8 of the EC HR. He assessed  the  case  and
    asked herself whether there were "strong  reasons  for  believing  that
    removal would give rise to a breach of Article  8".  The  Judge  should
    have considered whether it was more likely than not that the removal of
    the appellant would amount to  an  unjustified  interference  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 EC HR  rights.  For  the  Judge  to  require  the
    presence of "strong reasons for believing" in a  breach  of  Article  8
    case it appears that the judge has  imposed  a  different  and,  it  is
    submitted a stricter test.







    Findings on Error of Law

11. I have considered the submissions and the appeal made by the parties at
    the hearing the full notes of which are in my Record of proceedings.

12. The Judge has materially erred in his  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    case in every respect. I agree with  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    permission Judge that the Judge has failed to make a fact sensitive and
    contextual examination of the appellant's child's circumstances in this
    country who is a British citizen. The duty imposed by section 55 of the
    Boarder's Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  requires  the  decision
    maker to be properly informed of the position of a  child  affected  by
    the discharge of an immigration function. The Judge has not conducted a
    careful examination of all the relevant information and factors in this
    appeal.

13. The Judge did not take into account paragraph 117B  in  his  assessment
    and has failed to appreciate that the appellant's child is a qualifying
    child. There is no mention of paragraph 117B in the determination, much
    less an analysis of whether the appellant as  the  main  carer  of  the
    British citizen child should be given leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her child.

14. The Judge appeared to be  preoccupied  about  the  appellant's  child's
    father. Having said  that  it  is  there  is  no  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances of the child's father, he goes on to say that he  is  not
    satisfied on a balance of probabilities that he would be unable to look
    after the child, if the appellant were to be removed from the UK.  This
    is a perverse conclusion given that he said that there was no  evidence
    about the appellant's father  and  his  finding  that  the  appellant's
    child's father would be able to look after the child if her mother left
    the country, is not sustainable. This is a material  error  of  law  as
    there is a perversity in the conclusion of the Judge.

15. The Judge also stated that he appreciates that "it  is  generally  very
    damaging for a young girl to be separated from her mother but, as  this
    has already occurred, I do not consider there is any basis upon which I
    can conclude that such a separation would breach s55,  particularly  as
    there is no evidence as to the child's welfare. The judge after finding
    that it is very damaging for a young girl  to  be  separated  from  her
    mother concluded that the mother  can  leave  the  country.  The  judge
    failed to consider and analyse that the appellant  is  a  mother  of  a
    British citizen child who is  her  main  carer  in  this  country.  The
    evidence before the Judge was that the appellant  is  a  single  parent
    home and she is the one who takes the child to the doctor and with whom
    she lives. The Judge did not take into account all the evidence in this
    appeal and come to a sustainable conclusion.

16. The Judge has further applied the wrong standard of proof when he  said
    that he there are no "strong reasons for believing that  removal  would
    give rise to a breach  of  Article  8".  It  is  not  clear  from  this
    utterance, what standard of proof that the Judge did apply.

17. I find that the Judge fell into material error in his determination and
    I set it aside in its entirety and preserve no findings of fact.

18. I direct that the file be placed before the first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    with the exception of judge on the first available date for findings of
    fact to be made.



Signed by,
      Dated this 9th day of July 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

.............................................

Mrs S Chana

