
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18101/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 March 2015                             |On 17 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               miss xinrong gu
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss V Lovejoy, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Miss Xinrong
    Gu as "the appellant".

 2. No anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and no
    such application was made before me today.  There is no need  for  such
    an order.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of China who made  an  application  to  vary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present
    and settled under paragraph 284 of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended).  Her application was refused and a decision  made  to  remove
    her pursuant to paragraph 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
    Act 2006.  The appellant appealed against that decision and following a
    hearing at Hatton Cross Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ian Howard, in
    a decision promulgated on 10 December  2014,  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal the judge's  decision  which
    was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Foudy  on  30  January
    2015.

 5. The respondent had argued that the award  certificate  of  an  approved
    English language test taken by the appellant was not a  qualifying  one
    as prescribed in Appendix O of the above-mentioned Immigration Rules.

 6. However, at the hearing today Mr Walker confirmed that  the  respondent
    had now re-visited the appellant's documentation that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and having reconsidered it and in  particular
    a "Training Connect Certificate of Achievement in English for  Speakers
    of Other Languages" dated 28 January 2014 the  respondent  now  accepts
    that there  was  a  prescribed  certificate  before  the  Tribunal  and
    accordingly no material error in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 7. By consent of both parties I was invited to dismiss the  appeal  before
    me and to allow the First-tier Tribunal's decision to stand.

 8. Having considered the evidence and the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  I
    find that course is the correct one.

Conclusion

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed        Date 15 April 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
