
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18641/2013
                                                               IA/22598/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                              |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  Syed Shah Khalid Hassan (first appellant)
                      Muhammad Awais (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Ahmed, instructed by Lex Immigration Specialists


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants,  Syed  Shah  Khalid  Hassan  and  Muhammad  Awais,  are
    citizens of Pakistan.  They  sought  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as part of  an  entrepreneurial  team  under  the  points-based
    system.  Their applications were refused by decisions of the respondent
    dated 28 May 2013.  The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (the late Judge Upson) which, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  23
    October 2013 allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of  State  appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal  (Deputy  Judge  Pickup)  set  aside  Judge  Upson's
    decision and remade the decision dismissing the appeal.  The appellants
    appealed to the Court of Appeal where by consent order dated 15 January
    2016, it was directed that the appeal should be remitted to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing, Deputy Judge Pickup's  decision  having
    been set aside.

 2. Granting permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  on  28  January
    2015, Underhill LJ wrote [21]:

         However, I would certainly not allow the case to  proceed  on  that
         basis unless I believe there was a good prospect of its  success  -
         one that satisfied the second appeals test -  in  relation  to  the
         error  actually  made  -  that  is  the  omission  of  Mr  Hassan's
         signature.  ... I frankly do not understand  the  reason  given  by
         Judge Upson for that being 'overcome': see paragraph 8 above.  But,
         on reflection, I do  accept  that  there  was  real  force  in  the
         argument based on Section 245AA(b)(ii).  At first blush the absence
         of a signature would not seem to come under the rubric 'format' but
         I am not sure that first impressions are reliable here. ... Against
         that background it seems to me that  the  term  may  well  be  wide
         enough to cover such things as the absence of a signature;  and  it
         seems to me that it would arguably be within the  general  mischief
         of the provision if it did so.  I note that paragraph 245AA(b) does
         no  more  than  say  the  border  agency  'may'  require  corrected
         documents but Mr Ahmed  submits  that  it  is  arguable  that  that
         discretion should generally be exercised unless  there  is  a  good
         reason not to [do so].

 3. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Ahmed, for the appellant Mr  Hassan  (the
    appellant Mr Awais did not attend and was not  represented),  submitted
    that the matter should have been remitted to the Secretary of State  so
    that she might consider the discretion conferred by paragraph  245AA(b)
    as regards the omission of Mr Hassan's  signature.   In  the  light  of
    Underhill LJ's comments, it  is  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should not have allowed the appeals outright but it should  have  found
    (as I do) that the decisions  were  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    because the Secretary of State had not considered  the  exercise  of  a
    discretion under  paragraph  245AA  and  that  the  matters  should  be
    remitted to the Secretary  of  State  so  that  she  may  consider  the
    exercise of that discretion.  I make the decision in  respect  of  both
    appellants  though  I  fully  acknowledge  that  Mr  Ahmed  and   those
    instructing him appear only for Mr Hassan.  I am aware also that  there
    is now no entrepreneurial relationship between the appellants  in  this
    case but I do not see  that  that  affects  the  consideration  of  the
    Secretary of State as to how she should exercise her discretion.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was  promulgated  on  23
October 2013, is set aside.  I have remade the decision.   The  decision  of
the Secretary of State to refuse  the  appellants'  decisions  were  not  in
accordance with the law.  The appeals are  allowed  to  the  limited  extent
that the matters are returned to the Secretary of  State  so  that  she  may
consider the exercise of the discretion  conferred  upon  her  by  paragraph
245AA of HC 395 (as amended).

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 20 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
