
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18382/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House (Field House)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                        miss Alison Caroline Solomon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:     Mr P Nath,  a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of South Africa, born on 23 May 1984.

2.   This is an appeal by the respondent in the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT).
    I will continue to refer to her as the respondent even  though  she  is
    the appellant in this Tribunal.

3.   The hearing is to consider whether there was a material  error  of  law
    in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Flynn  (the  Immigration
    Judge) who in a determination promulgated on 19 May  2015  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal to remain under the Immigration Rules.

Background

4.   The appellant entered the UK on 24 March  2005  as  a  student  with  a
    valid visa until 23 March 2007.  On 29  December  2006  she  sought  a
    certificate of approval to marry a Hungarian national by  the  name  of
    Sandor Tamash Szekszardi which was issued on 2 February  2007.   On  26
    March 2007 the appellant sought family member residence status  as  his
    spouse.  This was issued and was valid  until  5  September  2007.   On
    4 September 2007 the appellant sought a residence card as the spouse of
    Mr Szekszardi which was issued until 27 November 2017.   The  appellant
    last entered the UK on 11 November 2010.  On 29 October 2013 she sought
    a derivative residence card under the decision in the case of Zambrano.



5.   The respondent considered her application under Regulation 18A  of  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("EEA
    Regulations") but decided that in order to issue her with a  derivative
    residence card she had to establish that she was the primary carer of a
    British citizen and that the citizen in question was  residing  in  the
    UK.

6.   On 1 April 2014 the respondent decided that the appellant was  not  the
    primary carer of Romeo Lucas John Goonewardena ("Romeo"),  the  son  of
    Robert Stephen Goonewardena.   The  respondent  pointed  out  that  the
    requirements of Regulation  15(7)  (ii)  include  sharing  equally  the
    responsibility for the person's care.  Romeo  had  been  given  British
    nationality on the basis that his father was "an exempt  person"  which
    meant the appellant could not share equally the responsibility for  his
    care.  This meant that she did not qualify as "primary carer"  for  the
    purposes of Regulation 15A (7) (ii) of the EEA Regulations.

7.   As the respondent pointed out, the burden rested on  the  appellant  to
    show on a balance of probabilities that she was the primary carer of  a
    British citizen who did not share the care of that British citizen with
    an "exempt person". Because the appellant shared the responsibility for
    the child with an exempt person (Mr Goonewardena) the child  would  not
    be  required  to  leave  the  UK  with  the  appellant  in  any  event.
    Consequently, the principle in Zambrano was not engaged. There  was  no
    reason to suppose that the child would be required to leave the  UK  in
    the event that the appellant was required to return to South Africa.

8.   The respondent specifically  considered  the  appellant's  right  to  a
    family or private life under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE but noted
    that the appellant had not made  a  valid  application  for  Article  8
    consideration.  Nevertheless consideration was  given  to  whether  the
    removal  of  the  appellant  would  breach  her   Article   8   rights,
    particularly having regard to the duty on the Secretary of State  under
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  (the
    2009 Act) to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in  the  UK.
    The respondent considered her duty to protect the rights and  interests
    of Romeo under this and various other legislation in the light  of  the
    ruling of the Supreme Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4.   The
    respondent noted, however, that her decision not to issue a  derivative
    residence card to the appellant would not require her to leave  the  UK
    if she could otherwise demonstrate a right to reside in this country.

9.   The  appellant  had  no  alternative  basis  for  staying  in  the  UK.
    Accordingly, if she did not return to South Africa voluntarily, she was
    notified that her removal would be enforced.  She was advised, however,
    of her right to appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations.

The Appeal Proceedings

10.  The appellant appealed the decision to refuse  a  derivative  residence
    card by notice of appeal lodged on 16 April 2014.  She claimed in  that
    document that the decision was not in accordance with  the  Immigration
    Rules and that the decision breached her rights as an EEA national  and
    was not in accordance with the UK's obligations to her under  the  ECHR
    and specifically Article 8 thereof.

11.  This was the appeal that  came  before  Judge  Flynn  (the  Immigration
    Judge) on 26 November 2014.  It appears to have been the  evidence  of
    the appellant at the hearing on 24 April 2015.  She said that Romeo had
    formed a close relationship with  his  father  but  she  did  not  know
    whether her partner, Robert, would go with her if she returned to South
    Africa.  Robert gave evidence to say that he had not discussed with his
    partner (the appellant) what would happen if she  had  to  go  back  to
    South Africa.  However, he would support any new application  she  made
    for entry clearance.  He thought that his son would  have  to  go  with
    her.  He might go with her; he had not decided.  He  thought  he  would
    only get entry clearance for one month to do so if he decided to go  to
    South Africa.  His  son  would  be  upset  by  the  separation,  albeit
    temporary.

12.  Mr Nath, who appeared for the  respondent  at  the  hearing,  submitted
    that the basis for the appeal had changed completely  in  that  it  now
    rested "solely" on Article 8 and Appendix FM - EX1.  The question  was
    whether it would be reasonable in all the circumstances for  the  child
    to remain with his parent in the UK  if  his  mother  was  required  to
    leave.  He submitted that the best interests of a child were to  remain
    with one parent.  There were no exceptional circumstances and Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40 applied.  The appellant was not a refugee.  It would not
    be disproportionate for her to return to South Africa and  make  a  new
    application.  Her child and partner could go with her or  stay  in  the
    UK.  There was no appearance on behalf of the appellant but it had been
    submitted before the FTT  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  Romeo  and  that   it   was
    unreasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.

13.  As Mr  Nath  pointed  out  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  that  the
    Immigration Judge appears to have applied two  different  standards  of
    proof.  In paragraph 16 he referred to the "balance of  probabilities",
    the correct test.  However, later in his decision, at paragraph 20,  he
    referred to the appeal as being a "human  rights  appeal"  to  which  a
    "lower" (than the civil) standard of proof applied.

14.  In conclusion, the Immigration Judge decided  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to show that she met the requirements of Regulation 15A  of  the
    EEA Regulations but decided the appeal on an Article 8 ("freestanding")
    basis purporting to apply the guidance of the higher courts  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 and later cases.  At paragraph 22  of  his  decision  he
    referred to the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  in  which  Mr  Justice
    Cranston stated  that  there  had  to  be  arguably  good  reasons  for
    considering  Article  8  outside  the   Immigration   Rules.   Somewhat
    surprisingly, the Immigration Judge expressed himself to  be  satisfied
    that there were such reasons in that case.  Nevertheless he allowed the
    appeal "under the Immigration Rules", which contradicts this comment.

15.  Having concluded that there was insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate
    that the appellant was the child's primary carer, the Immigration Judge
    nevertheless thought she had a "more significant role in his life  than
    his father" and was satisfied that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her son.  Separating her from the child at
    such a young age would be "very disturbing" and a proper  consideration
    of a child's best interests and  the  application  of  the  duty  under
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act required the Immigration Judge to  interfere
    with the respondent's decision.  He purported to allow the appeal under
    Appendix FM.

16.  The respondent took fundamental issue with these conclusions,  pointing
    out that the requirements of Appendix FM under the "parent route"  were
    different from those the Immigration Judge appears to have thought they
    were.  The appellant was not the sole parent but shared  responsibility
    for the child with the child's father.  The Immigration Judge  made  no
    findings regarding the appellant's success or failure under the partner
    route.   She  pointed  out  in  her  grounds  that   the   relationship
    requirements under Appendix  FM  (parent  route)  are  set  out  in  E-
    LTRPT.2.3 which states that the applicant must have sole responsibility
    for the child or the child must live with the applicant and  not  their
    other parent.  Alternatively, the parent or carer with whom  the  child
    normally lives must be a British citizen or settled in the UK, not  the
    partner of the applicant and not eligible to apply for leave to  remain
    as the partner.  These requirements could not be satisfied.

17.  At the oral hearing fixed for consideration of these grounds there  was
    no attendance on the part of  the  appellant  or  her  representatives.
    This was despite notice having been sent  out  to  BIC  Limited  on  29
    September 2015, a full three weeks before the hearing.  I proceeded  to
    determine the appeal following brief oral submissions from Mr Nath.  Mr
    Nath had pointed out that the only basis on which the appeal to the FTT
    could  have  succeeded  was  on  "a  freestanding"  basis   given   the
    appellant's failure to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   He
    submitted it was not  proper  to  embark  on  a  freestanding  analysis
    without having  first  considered  the  requirements  of  those  Rules.
    Accordingly, the decision was fatally flawed and should be  set  aside.
    I was invited to substitute my own decision for that of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

18.  I gave brief oral reasons for concluding  that  Mr  Nath's  submissions
    had been correct.  I will set out my reasoning in fuller detail  below
    having analysed the Immigration Judge's decision in greater detail.

Discussion

19.  It appears that the appellant and  Mr  Goonewardena  cohabited  at  the
    time of the hearing before the FtT.  Their son, Romeo, who was born  on
    19 December 2011, was a British national.  The appellant claimed before
    the Immigration Judge that Romeo was "very  reliant"  on  her  and  the
    Immigration Judge  appears  to  have  accepted  the  closeness  of  the
    relationship  by  stating  in  paragraph  25  that  she  had  "a   more
    significant role in his life than his father" but then stated that  the
    relationship was a "genuine and subsisting one".

20.  However, a fundamental point was that the appellant had failed to  show
    that she met the requirements of Regulation 15A of the EEA  Regulations
    (paragraph 19).  This appears to  have  been  on  the  basis  that  the
    Immigration Judge rejected the appellant's evidence that  she  was  the
    primary carer for Romeo (see paragraph 25).  In the circumstances,  the
    appellant could not succeed under the  EEA  Regulations.   Furthermore,
    following the respondent's appeal, there has been no  cross  appeal  by
    the appellant against that conclusion.

21.  Neither party seems to have provided a full analysis of the law to  the
    FTT.  I note Mr Bonavero's analysis in his skeleton argument before the
    FtT did not quote the full requirements of Appendix FM.  These are  now
    set out by the respondent  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Mr Bonavero suggested that Appendix FM "codifies" Article 8.
     He suggested that an appellant was not required  to  raise  Article  8
    before it had to be considered as part of the appellant's  claim  under
    the EEA Regulations.

22.   However,  contrary  to  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument,  it  was
    incumbent on the appellant to show that she had sole responsibility for
    the child or was at least the partner or  carer  with  whom  the  child
    normally lived. She had to satisfy the requirements of  LTRPT2.3.  (b).
    It appears that she failed to satisfy those requirements because of her
    lack of "sole responsibility" for the "child".   An  exception  to  the
    requirements of LTRPT2.3 is EX1 under the "child route".  However,  the
    appellant would need to show to the ordinary civil  standard  of  proof
    that it "would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK".



Conclusions

23.  Unfortunately, the Immigration Judge became confused over  the  correct
    standard of proof to apply.  At paragraph 20 of  his  determination  he
    considered that the standard ought to be "lower than the  normal  civil
    standard" having regard to the fact  it  was  a  human  rights  appeal.
    However, earlier (in paragraph 16 of his decision) he referred  to  the
    "balance of probabilities" being the standard of  proof.   These  alone
    may not have been significant errors of law but his failure to properly
    consider the  Immigration  Rules  before  embarking  on  an  apparently
    "freestanding" Article 8 analysis appears to have been such  an  error.
    The Immigration  Judge  purported  to  "allow"  the  appeal  under  the
    "Immigration Rules" but his analysis  is  directed  at  a  freestanding
    discretion which he could  apply.   He  ought  to  have  asked  himself
    whether there were at least arguably good reasons  for  departing  from
    the requirements of the Rules.  Those reasons had to be exceptional  or
    compelling.   The  circumstances  here  were  neither  exceptional  nor
    compelling.  The Rules fully catered for the  situation  in  which  the
    appellant found herself.  The appellant was not the primary  carer  for
    Romeo but in any event, if EX1 of the Rules were applied to  the  facts
    of this appeal, there did not appear to be adequate evidence to support
    the conclusion that it was not "reasonable"  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK having regard to his young age.  He was not at the time of
    the hearing of school age.  If the "partner route" under EX1 were to be
    chosen instead, the appellant needed to show "insurmountable obstacles"
    to family life continuing outside the UK and this test appears  not  to
    have been met either.

24.  The burden rested on the  appellant  to  show  to  the  civil  standard
    either that she fell within EX1  or  that  there  were  exceptional  or
    compelling reasons for considering her appeal outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In the absence of any special features of  the  case,  such  as
    serious ill-health  affecting  her  child,  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances appear not to  have  existed.   The  child  can  probably
    continue to live with the father in Scotland, as has been the situation
    to date.  Respect for immigration control and the need for the economic
    wellbeing of the UK to be safeguarded were factors which needed  to  be
    taken into account  and  were  of  sufficient  weight  to  justify  the
    respondent's decision.

25.  Importantly, the  respondent  considered  her  duty  to  safeguard  the
    welfare of the appellant's child in the UK under Section 55 of the 2009
    Act before she reached her decision. However,  there  was  no  adequate
    basis for concluding that there would be a breach of Section 55  or  of
    the respondent's wider duties to the child on the facts of  this  case.
    Paragraph 27  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  is  inadequately
    reasoned and there appears to be no proper basis for his conclusion  to
    the contrary.

26.  Having carefully considered the  decision  of  the  FtT,  there  are  a
    number of errors within it.  Were the confusion over  the  standard  of
    proof to be the only error it may have been possible to have  concluded
    that the decision was one the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  come
    to.   However,  given  the  Immigration  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not the primary carer for the child, proper weight should
    have been given to the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   Plainly
    these were not met, despite the best efforts of the appellant's counsel
    to argue to the contrary.  I find that there were  material  errors  of
    law in the decision of the FtT which require that decision  to  be  set
    aside.

27.  It is not necessary or proportionate to hold a  further  hearing  given
    that  the  evidence  in  the  case  is  not  essentially  disputed.   I
    substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal for the  FtT's  decision,
    which is to dismiss the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse further leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the FtT contains a material error of law.  I set  aside
    that decision.  I remake that decision which is to dismiss the  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to refuse further leave to remain.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore the fee award made by the  FTT  is
set aside.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

