
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18465/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 25th October 2013                            |On 6th November 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                          George  Yeboah Acheampong

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Brooksbank, Counsel, instructed by Henry Hyams
                    and Company
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Reed  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd October 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  6th  September  1984.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent to refuse to grant  him
    an EEA residence card as confirmation of a right of residence in the UK
    as a family member of a qualified EEA national,  Mrs  Tutu-Adjei.   The
    Respondent stated that the Appellant's marriage certificate  could  not
    be verified  as  genuinely  issued  and  he  had  therefore  failed  to
    demonstrate that he was genuinely dependent upon his EEA family member.
     At the hearing before Judge Reed the Presenting  Officer  stated  that
    the Respondent's position was that even if the marriage certificate was
    genuine, the marriage was one of convenience.  Mrs Brooksbank said that
    she was in a position to deal with the issue.

 3. The judge directed himself to the relevant case law and concluded  that
    the Respondent had not discharged the burden of proof upon her to  show
    that the marriage certificate was  a  forgery.   He  then  went  on  to
    consider whether or not it was reliable evidence of a  marriage  having
    taken place.

 4. He had before him a previous appeal determination which  related  to  a
    claim made by the Appellant that he was dependent upon a  half  brother
    who held  German  nationality.   In  that  determination  the  previous
    immigration judge noted inconsistencies between the Appellant  and  his
    half brother about his family and he found that he was not  related  as
    claimed.

 5. The judge stated that the previous credibility findings had  a  bearing
    upon his own assessment of the credibility of the evidence given by the
    Appellant and also illustrated that official documents from  Ghana  may
    not necessarily be reliable evidence.  The previous judge had concluded
    that the Appellant and his witness were not brothers, in spite of  what
    was stated on the Ghanaian birth certificates produced to him.

 6. The judge noted that the marriage registration certificate bore no date
    of registration.  Neither the Appellant nor his witness was present  at
    any ceremony of marriage which meant that they could  not  give  direct
    evidence of what had taken place.  There was a statutory declaration by
    the Appellant's uncles, but he said that it was  significant  that  the
    Appellant had given contradictory evidence about  his  relationship  to
    them.

 7. He also considered  the  certificates  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign
    Affairs in Ghana but they did nothing to demonstrate  the  veracity  of
    the statements made in the statutory declaration.   There  was  also  a
    document from the Kumasi Metropolitan Assembly purporting to verify the
    marriage certificate as being genuine.  He said  that  the  certificate
    itself might be genuine  but  did  not  provide  reliable  evidence  of
    something which had taken place outside the  direct  knowledge  of  the
    registrar.  He observed that there was no  direct  evidence  or  record
    from any independent or official source that a customary  marriage  had
    actually taken place in the manner described by the Appellant's  uncles
    and no documentary evidence of  any  marriage  contract  or  any  other
    customary formalities having been completed.

 8. He noted from the face of the marriage certificate  itself  that  there
    was a box for the signature  or  thumbprint  of  the  husband  and  the
    Appellant's name had been written and underneath there was a signature.
     The Appellant said that someone else had written his name and he  then
    signed in the box when the certificate was received by him.  The  judge
    said that it was unclear on what  authority  someone  had  written  the
    Appellant's name in the space provided for his signature.

 9. He concluded, having considered all of the evidence in the round,  that
    there was no reliable evidence that the customary  marriage  had  taken
    place.

10. He then considered whether, if he was wrong about  this,  the  marriage
    was one of convenience.  He noted that the Appellant  and  the  witness
    had given a consistent account as to the circumstances of how they  met
    but said that they were vague and inconsistent about when they  started
    living together.  Neither could put a date  on  when  cohabitation  had
    actually started.  The Appellant in his oral evidence claimed  that  he
    lived with his brother for some of the time and with  the  witness  for
    the rest of the time before the marriage but the witness was clear that
    no cohabitation had taken place until afterwards.

11. There was documentary evidence from family members of the  witness  but
    they did not attend to give oral evidence in support of the appeal  and
    the judge attached no weight to it.  Neither did he  attach  weight  to
    the photographs and greeting cards and emails which he  said  had  been
    submitted in an attempt to bolster a false case.  There was no evidence
    of any celebration in the UK after the claimed marriage and no reliable
    documentary  evidence  from  any  official  sources  that   they   were
    cohabiting.

The grounds of application.

12. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant's uncles could not realistically be expected to  travel  from
    Ghana to attend Tribunal proceedings in the UK.  The judge should  have
    been satisfied that the declarations were reliable.

13. The immigration judge had referred to vague and  inconsistent  accounts
    but  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  were  not   satisfied   that   the
    interpretation at the proceedings was accurate.  The inconsistencies in
    the evidence were minor and too much weight had been placed on them.

14. Finally, there was an error with respect to Article 8.

15. On 6th August 2013 Designated Judge Murray stated that  the  judge  had
    dealt with the  evidence  in  relation  to  the  marriage  but  granted
    permission because there was nothing in  the  determination  about  the
    Appellant's or his wife's Article 8 rights.

16. On 21st August 2013,  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.





Submissions

17. Mrs Brooksbank stated that she wanted to make submissions  in  relation
    to the marriage issue and was not precluded from doing so by virtue  of
    the grant of permission.  I therefore heard her submissions which  were
    two-fold

18. She said that there were serious issues with  the  interpreter  at  the
    hearing and she had raised the issue with the judge, who had  made  his
    decision on the basis that the evidence had been inconsistent, but this
    confusion had arisen because of interpreter difficulties.

19. She also submitted that the judge's  views  had  been  tainted  by  the
    previous determination and he had  placed  too  much  weight  upon  it.
    Furthermore, he had made incorrect factual  findings,  criticising  the
    Appellant for describing his relative as an uncle  when  it  was  known
    that in other  cultures  this  was  not  descriptive  of  a  particular
    relationship but a more general term of respect.

Consideration of whether there is a Material Error of Law

20. Because Mrs Brooksbank was alleging that she had raised an  interpreter
    issue with the judge, which had not been recorded, it was necessary  to
    look both at the judge's Record of Proceedings and  the  notes  of  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing.

21. There is nothing in the judge's record to indicate that an  interpreter
    challenge was made.

22. By chance, Mr McBurney who represented  before  Mr  Reed,  was  in  the
    building.  He appeared before the Tribunal and looked at his notes  and
    confirmed that there was nothing in them that recorded a  challenge  to
    the interpretation being made.  I asked Mrs Brooksbank if she had  made
    submissions in relation to interpreter issues to Mr Reed and  she  said
    that she had no notes of her submissions.

23. I do not conclude that Mrs Brooksbank, as an officer of the  court,  is
    seeking to mislead the Tribunal in  any  way.   However,  there  is  no
    support for her recollection in either the  Presenting  Officer's  note
    nor that of the judge.  Had there  been  a  serious  problem  with  the
    interpreter I would have expected her to have made an  application  for
    an adjournment on the basis that it was  not  safe  to  rely  upon  the
    Appellant's evidence.  It is clear that no adjournment application  was
    made.  In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that  there  was  any
    confusion in the interpretation at the First-tier hearing such that the
    Appellant's evidence could not properly be relied upon.

24. The judge was plainly entitled to take account of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been found not to be truthful by a  previous  immigration
    judge in assessing the credibility of the evidence before him.  He  was
    also entitled to observe that, in that case, the Appellant relied  upon
    evidence from Ghana which was inconsistent with the judge's findings.

25. The weight which the judge put on the evidence was a  matter  for  him.
    So far as the comment regarding the uncle is concerned, it  appears  to
    have been the Appellant's evidence that the  uncle  concerned  was  his
    mother's brother.  That was in contrast with subsequent  evidence  that
    he had no  knowledge  of  how  he  was  really  related  to  him.   The
    inconsistency is clear and the judge was entitled to rely on it.

26. However, the judge did not make any findings with respect to Article  8
    and to that extent the decision has to be remade.

Further Submissions

27. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the Appellant was precluded from  relying  on
    any claim to have family life in the UK by the findings of  the  judge.
    He would have an element of private life, having been in the  UK  since
    2007, but there was nothing to stop him making  an  application  for  a
    family permit upon a return to Ghana.

28. Mrs Brooksbank submitted that the  Appellant  had  significant  private
    life in the UK having been here  since  2007,  both  in  terms  of  his
    involvement with his local church and the family with  whom  he  lives.
    He would have difficulty in making a successful application to  return.



Findings and Conclusions

29. The Appellant enjoys private life in the UK, having been here  for  six
    years, but no evidence of that private life  has  been  submitted.   He
    does not enjoy family life because, on the sustainable findings of  the
    judge, he has no valid marriage and indeed no sustainable  relationship
    with Mrs Tutu-Adjei.

30. Removal would be an interference with his private life in  the  UK  but
    lawful, since he has no  basis  of  stay  here  and  in  pursuit  of  a
    legitimate aim.

31. It would also be  proportionate.   The  Appellant  has  lived  for  the
    majority of his life in  Ghana  and  his  family  live  there.   If  he
    chooses, he can make an application to return to the UK on the basis of
    his claimed relationship.

Decision

There is no error of law with respect to  the  judge's  decision  under  the
Immigration Rules.  The appeal is dismissed with respect to Article 8.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


