
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18513/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 July 2014                                 |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                              Mr Maris Asekeme
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ikeh
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who was born on  28  July  1988.
    On 11 February 2013 he applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  In a decision dated 7 May 2013  the  application  was  refused
    under the Immigration Rules and a decision was made also for him to  be
    removed from the UK by way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   I  will  say  something
    shortly about the decision to remove.

 2. The appellant appealed the decision and at an oral  hearing,  in  which
    the appellant  was  not  represented,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dismissed the appeal.  On a renewed application to the  Upper  Tribunal
    the appellant was granted permission to appeal that decision  and  thus
    the matter came before me for an oral hearing at  which  the  appellant
    was represented.

 3.  The  reasons  for  refusal  of   the   application   reduce   to   one
    straightforward matter.  Appendix C of the Immigration  Rules,  at  1B,
    requires when proving sufficiency of availability  of  funds  that  the
    document or  documents  must  be  personal  bank  or  building  society
    statements satisfying certain criteria. Such document or documents must
    be provided with the application. The reason for refusal in  this  case
    is that the appellant submitted a  bank  statement  from  his  mother's
    business account with a bank called First City Monument  Bank  plc  and
    this was found not to be an acceptable form of evidence.  That being so
    the application was refused.

 4. It was only after the date of decision that an explanation was provided
    by or on behalf of the appellant that in fact the account referred  to,
    although stating "business savings account," was in fact  an  error  by
    the bank.  Evidence for this is provided in  a  letter  from  the  bank
    dated 16 May 2013 stating  that  the  appellant's  mother  maintains  a
    personal savings account as against a business savings  account  "which
    reflected in her statement of account earlier printed".  The error  was
    said to be due to the last merger of "our banks (FCMB  and  Fin  Bank).
    The account was wrongly migrated with the wrong code."  A statement was
    attached to that letter then referring to the  account  type  as  being
    "basic savings".

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge at the hearing clearly  asked  a  lot  of
    questions about the circumstances surrounding the application and noted
    various discrepancies including that the credit  balances  on  the  (by
    then) various statements did not "add up".  He noted that there  was  a
    substantial discrepancy  between  the  business  account  and  the  one
    provided with the notice of appeal.  He also commented  upon  the  fact
    that the appellant apparently used a friend's  Mastercard  to  pay  his
    fees and made particular note that the appellant had paid the  entirety
    of the fees for the course by the time of the appeal and other bills.

 6. The judge concluded that the documentation provided  by  the  appellant
    did not comply with the requirements set out in the Rules  relating  to
    Tier 4 Students and dismissed the  appeal.   He  did  not  mention  the
    Section 47 removal direction and it is unlikely that he was referred to
    it.

 7. In the grounds seeking leave to  appeal  the  appellant  went  to  some
    lengths to point out the reason why there appeared to be  discrepancies
    in the bank statements and one can accept that much  of  what  is  said
    there is correct, in  particular  that  the  bank  statements  provided
    showed differing cleared balances at different  dates  but  still  were
    consistent in providing  evidence  about  the  amount  in  the  account
    between 29 December 2012 and 29 January 2013. These were  the  relevant
    dates between which the requisite funds had to be shown to have been in
    the account.  However, that is not the  issue  here.   The  reason  for
    refusal of the application and the dismissal of the appeal is that  the
    statement produced clearly referred to the fact  that  the  funds  were
    held in a business  account  and  not  a  personal  one.   It  was  not
    incumbent upon the Secretary of State to make further  enquiries  about
    that since there could have been no expectation  that  making  such  an
    enquiry would have led to the answer that has now been given i.e.  that
    this was the bank's mistake and the account  was  in  fact  a  personal
    savings one in the name of the appellant's mother and  not  a  business
    account as it stated on its face.

 8. The outcome therefore is that the appellant  has  not  shown  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred.  The judge was entitled to come to the
    conclusions that he did for the reasons  given  because  the  appellant
    failed to comply with the relevant Rule.

The s.47 decision

 9. Section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act  2013  substituted  for  Section
    47(1) of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  the  ability
    for the Secretary of State to give written notice that the person is to
    be removed from the UK under that Section at the same time as a  person
    is given written notice of a pre-removal decision.  Up to that point it
    was not in accordance with the law to do so.  See Ahmadi v SSHD  [2012]
    UKAIT 147 (IAC).  Section 51 of the 2013 Act came into force on  8  May
    2013 under the Crime and  Courts  Act  2013  (Commencement  No.  1  and
    Transitional and Saving Provision) Order 2013.

10. I did not have my attention drawn to this  point  at  the  hearing  and
    nothing seems to have been noticed previously about it.   However,  the
    removal decision was made on 7 May 2013 and in the same document as the
    refusal decision. It follows from what is said above therefore that  it
    was not made in accordance with the law and must be set  aside  as  not
    being in accordance with  the  law.   It  will  be  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State to decide whether to issue removal directions in the
    future.

11. The judge did not err in dismissing this appeal and  this  is  for  the
    reasons set out above.  The  decision  that  the  appeal  is  dismissed
    therefore stands.

12. No  application  was  made  for  an  anonymity  direction  and  in  the
    circumstances of this appeal I see no need for any such direction to be
    made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

