
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19525/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th June 2015                        |On 26th June 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                              Mr Justice Green
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

                                   Between

                              Mr Adilet Abdazov

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
Association
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. In this appeal the Appellant challenges the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("the Tribunal") which held that in accepting an  unpaid  work
    placement the Appellant violated the conditions attached to his visa.

 2. The facts may be summarised shortly. The Appellant  is  a  student.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2009 in order to  study.  He  was
    granted a series of extensions of his stay as a Tier 4 general  student
    migrant.  Until 26th July 2013 his conditions contained a "remark" that
    he could work a maximum of  20  hours  during  the  academic  term.  He
    engaged in employed work with APECS Consult Limited  which  was  within
    the terms of the conditions attached to the visa.

 3. However, a residence permit (referred to by the UKBA as a BRP)  granted
    to him subsequently, on 26th July 2013 which was valid until 19th March
    2016, contained a different "remark". It stated: "No work  except  work
    placement".

 4. This particular work permit was  provided  to  him  under  cover  of  a
    standard form letter from the UK Border Agency dated  26th  July  2013.
    The letter contained the following:

             "Permission is given for the course of study detailed below:

             Sponsor:      London School of Business and Finance

             Address:      9 Holborn, London, EC1N 2LL

             Course title: CIMA

             The attached leaflet explains  the  conditions  of  your  stay
             whilst in the United Kingdom".

 5. The attached leaflet was entitled "Conditions Leaflet". It is stated to
    be for information purposes only but it provided that pursuant  to  the
    Immigration Rules the individual concerned was entitled  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom until the expiry  of  the  grant  of  leave  "...and
    subject to you complying with the conditions of that leave".

 6. Under a heading "Conditions attached to your leave" the  following  was
    stated:

             "Remarks on a BRP indicate the conditions attached to a  grant
             of leave. The meaning of these  remarks  is  explained  below,
             please consider these  carefully  and  ensure  you  understand
             those printed on your BRP as  it  is  a  criminal  offence  to
             breach the conditions attached to your leave and may also lead
             to  your  removal  from  the  UK   and   refusal   of   future
             applications".

 7. The leaflet then identifies five specific  variants  of  BRP  "remark".
    These are: "Work 20 hours max in term time"; "Work 10 hours max in term
    time"; "No work"; "Work 10 hours max from 16  only";  and,  "No  public
    funds".

 8. We observe at the outset that the remark contained upon the Appellant's
    BRP does not conform in its exact language  to  any  of  these  remarks
    which, according to the Conditions Leaflet, were apparently intended to
    refer definitively to the remarks that  would  be  found  on  residence
    permits.

 9. The concept of a "Work placement" is defined in three places within the
    Conditions Leaflet. In particular, under the BRP remark "Work 20  hours
    max in term time", and, "Work 10 hours max in term time",  the  concept
    of a work placement is defined in the following way:

             "A course-related work placement which constitutes an assessed
             part of your course and does not  exceed  half  of  the  total
             length of the course undertaken in the United Kingdom...".

             "...a work placement as part of your course of  study  if  you
             are studying a course at any level with a sponsor which  is  a
             UK  Higher  Education  Institution  and/or  a  Highly  Trusted
             Sponsor, or if you are studying with any  sponsor  where  your
             course is at NQF6/QCF6/SCQF9 or above. The work placement must
             constitute an assessed part of your course and not exceed half
             of the total length of the course  undertaken  in  the  United
             Kingdom...".

10. It is common ground in the present case that the work undertaken by the
    Appellant did not constitute an  assessed  part  of  his  CIMA  course.
    Accordingly, if the BRP "remark" condition was one or other of the  two
    referred to above then, there can be no doubt,  the  Appellant  was  in
    breach of the conditions attaching to his residence permit.

11. The third type of work placement is  that  under  the  BRP  remark  "No
    work". This states that:

             "All employment is prohibited, except:  A  work  placement  as
             part of your course of study if you are studying with a Highly
             Trusted Sponsor".

12. It will be seen from the difference  in  the  description  of  a  "work
    placement" under the three different BRP remarks, that  under  the  "No
    work" remark the concept of a work placement omits any requirement that
    it must constitute an assessed part of the course  in  question.  Under
    this remark it must merely be a work placement "as part of your  course
    of study".

13. Upon receipt of his new  residence  permit  subject  to  the  condition
    referred to above the Appellant immediately ceased his paid  employment
    and thereafter continued to work  upon  a  voluntary  basis  for  APECS
    Consult Limited in order to obtain work experience,  in  effect  as  an
    intern.

14. For reasons which are not  relevant  to  this  judgment  the  Appellant
    returned to his home country in order to obtain a replacement passport,
    his then valid passport having been stolen. He returned to  the  United
    Kingdom but was stopped at the border by Home Office staff when he  was
    questioned about his work. He explained that he had  worked  for  APECS
    Consult Limited as an  account  manager  until  his  visa  requirements
    changed. Thereafter in order to continue to gain  work  experience  for
    his CIMA course he worked upon an unpaid, intern, basis. The  evidence,
    which is  unchallenged,  is  that  he  discussed  this  change  with  a
    university administrator who informed him that he could undertake  work
    experience whilst remaining within the terms of his visa. This  was  to
    enable him to gain an international CIMA qualification  which  was  the
    next step in his career path.

15. However, this did not satisfy the  Home  Office.  On  1st  May  2014  a
    decision was taken to cancel his leave  to  remain  and  his  residence
    permit. The decision was expressed in the following way:

             "You hold a current UK biometric residence permit endorsed  T4
             General Student  which  confers  leave  to  enter  the  United
             Kingdom between 26th July 2013 and 19th March 2016  but  I  am
             satisfied  that  there  has  been  such  a  change   in   your
             circumstances since this leave was granted that it  should  be
             cancelled. The change of circumstances in your case is that by
             your own admission you have been working for APECS which is in
             breach of the condition of your  leave  to  enter  the  United
             Kingdom. I therefore cancel your residence permit  and  refuse
             you leave to enter the United Kingdom under paragraph 2A(8) of
             the Immigration Act 1971 and paragraph 321(A) of HC395".

16. It is also recorded in the decision that enquiries  were  made  of  the
    London School of Business and Finance as to whether there  was  a  work
    placement attached to the CIMA course. The decision refers to an  email
    dated 1st May 2014 from a Ms Sue Hoof from the academic institution  in
    the following terms:

             "Following our telephone conversation, this is to confirm that
             there is no work placement attached to the CIMA  course.  [The
             Appellant] commenced his  studies  here  from  July  2013  and
             attended very well. He attempted the three  exams  but  failed
             them. He registered for this semester but was unable to attend
             due to having to return home to sort out his lost passport".

17. An appeal was lodged with the Tribunal.

B. The judgment of the Tribunal

18. The Tribunal rejected the appeal. For  present  purposes  the  relevant
    paragraphs of the judgment are [26] - [29]:

             "26. It is clear from the email at Annex J that the  work  the
             appellant was carrying out was not a work  placement  attached
             to the CIMA course he attended.

             27. Mr Hone was equally correct to say that the  appellant  is
             credible and a bona fide student. I am inclined to think  that
             the appellant probably has done the best he can based  on  the
             advice he was given and he relinquished  his  remuneration  in
             order to benefit from the experience which could be useful  to
             him when entering the employment market. This does not  appear
             to be a student who was participating in  some  kind  of  scam
             using his student status as  a  front;  he  appears  to  be  a
             genuine student who carried  out  work  complementary  to  his
             studies for the best motives.

             28. If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  appellant  was  sent  the
             conditions leaflet by the UK Border  Agency  with  the  letter
             enclosing  his  bio  metric   residence   permit,   then   the
             respondent's understanding of work  placement  ought  to  have
             been clear. According to the  leaflet  it  is  "part  of  your
             course of study". Mr Hone makes the point that the leaflet  is
             not part of the Immigration  Rules  and  the  wording  on  the
             conditions  leaflets  is  not  binding  on  the  Tribunal.   I
             conclude, however, that giving the term "work  placement"  its
             plain and ordinary meaning it can only be  taken  to  indicate
             that any work carried out has to be as part of the course  the
             appellant is  undertaking  and  in  this  case  the  work  the
             appellant carried out was not part of his course. Even  though
             he was acting on advice, as  he  understood  it,  and  working
             without pay, I do not regard his  employment  as  an  accounts
             manager as a work placement, and I find that he  was  thus  in
             breach of the condition attaching to  his  residential  permit
             and his leave to be in the United Kingdom.

             29. There was therefore a change in  circumstances  since  the
             appellant's leave was given. The change  of  circumstances  in
             the appellant's case being that the  respondent  became  aware
             that he had not been complying with the condition attaching to
             his leave. The Rule applied is paragraph 321A  which  provides
             grounds for cancellation of  a  person's  leave  to  enter  or
             remain. There is no discretion in this kind  of  case,  unlike
             for example paragraph 320(8) which provides grounds  on  which
             entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter  "should  normally   be
             refused". In the case of paragraph  321A  leave  to  enter  or
             remain "is to be cancelled".  The  arguments  that  discretion
             should have been  exercised  differently  consequently  cannot
             succeed and the appeal is dismissed".

C. Grounds of appeal

19. Before us two  grounds  were,  in  substance,  advanced.  They  may  be
    summarised as follows. First, that the  Tribunal  erred  in  concluding
    that the work performed by the Appellant with APECS was not part of his
    course of study  when  that  provision  was  properly  and  purposively
    construed.  Secondly,  that  in  any  event,  the  Tribunal  erred  (in
    paragraph [29]) in concluding that the decision maker applied paragraph
    321A of the Immigration Rules and that there was no  discretion  to  be
    exercised.

D. Discussion

20. We turn now to the two grounds of appeal. We start by  summarising  the
    Appellant's submissions. Mr Mold of counsel, who appeared on behalf  of
    the Appellant, in concise and persuasive submissions, argued  that  the
    remark which was attached to the Appellant's residence permit  was  not
    one which was covered by the Immigration Rules. He pointed out that the
    Immigration Rules applicable at the time of the Appellant's application
    provided in the "notes" section of paragraph 245ZY that leave to remain
    could be granted subject to a condition  of  no  employment  which  was
    itself subject to the exception of:

             "...employment as part  of  a  course-related  work  placement
             which forms an assessed part of the applicant's course...".

21. He pointed out that the Conditions Leaflet in describing the "No  work"
    remark,  quite  unambiguously  excluded  a  requirement  that  a  "work
    placement" constitutes an assessed part of  the  relevant  course  (see
    paragraph [11] above). Accordingly,  he  submitted  that  the  relevant
    condition in the Appellant's visa operated outside  the  scope  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He  also  submitted  that  the  purpose  behind  the
    restriction on employment was focused essentially upon paid employment,
    not internships. As such the placement undertaken by the  Appellant  it
    did not offend against the purpose of the Conditions  Leaflet  and  the
    "No work" remark and "work placement" should hence be construed broadly
    as including unpaid work. As to the requirement that it  be  "part  of"
    the Appellant's course he submitted that this was met  in  the  present
    case because the work placement  was  approved  of  by  the  Appellants
    educational establishment, it was beneficial to  his  CIMA  course  and
    amounted to relevant, and valuable, experience in preparation  for  his
    proposed course of study in international finance. He  further  pointed
    out that he had, in a wholly transparent manner, sought the  advice  of
    his educational establishment and, at the very least, it was their view
    that this placement was helpful and not inconsistent with his studies.

22. We have considerable sympathy  with  the  position  of  the  Appellant.
    However, we have come to the conclusion that the Tribunal did  not  err
    in its analysis of a work placement. We  can  express  our  conclusions
    shortly.

23. First, the remark in the Appellant's BRP was clearly intended to  refer
    to the "No work" remark in the Conditions Leaflet. The inclusion of the
    additional words "except work placement" is a clear indication that  it
    is the "No work" remark in the Conditions Leaflet which applies. In our
    view, the expression "No work except work  placement"  is  an  accurate
    description of the substance of the "No work" remark in the  Conditions
    Leaflet. Indeed, we can see the sense behind the inclusion of the three
    additional words; in their absence the BRP could be misleading in that,
    on  its  face,  it  prohibited  employment  whereas,  in  actual  fact,
    employment  is  prohibited  but  subject  to  the  exception  of   work
    placements. As such the  wording  in  the  Appellants  visa  accurately
    reflects the "No work" remark in the Conditions Leaflet.

24. Secondly, we agree with the Judge, in paragraph [28]  of  his  judgment
    cited above. The critical words are "as part of your course of  study".
    In our view this indicates that the internship  or  work  placement  in
    question must constitute a formal part of the course of  study  in  the
    sense  that  it  must  be  integrated  into  the  curriculum  in   some
    appropriate way. In contrast to the other references to work  placement
    in the Conditions Leaflet, it need not  be  an  assessed  part  of  the
    course. But it must form a part of the course. It is, in our  judgment,
    not  enough  for  the  placement  to  be  one  that   the   educational
    establishment informally approves on an  ad  hoc  basis  as  not  being
    inconsistent with the student's course of study or  even  as  generally
    beneficial. Were this to be  otherwise,  then  every,  ad  hoc,  extra-
    curricula internship would fall to be permitted within the scope  of  a
    "No work" remark attached to a BRP. In our view, if this had  been  the
    intended result, it would have been set out explicitly, but it has  not
    been.  There is in our view a real and substantial difference between a
    non-assessed placement which is an integral part of a course of  study,
    and an extra-curricular internship or placement.

25. For these reasons we conclude that the work placement engaged in by the
    Appellant was in breach of the conditions attached to the BRP.

26. We turn now to the  Appellant's  second  ground  which  challenges  the
    conclusion of the Tribunal in paragraph [29]. There the Tribunal stated
    that the rule applied by the decision maker was that at paragraph  321A
    which, the Tribunal concluded, contains no discretion. With  regard  to
    this it is clear from the terms of the decision  recited  in  paragraph
    [15] above that in addition to paragraph 321A the decision  maker  also
    exercised a power under "paragraph 2A(8) of the Immigration Act  1971".
    We accept Mr Mold's submission that this is a reference to  Schedule  2
    to the 1971 Act. That provision states:

             "(8) An immigration officer may,  on  the  completion  of  any
             examination of a person under this paragraph, cancel his leave
             to enter".

                                    (Emphasis added)

27. The use of the expression "may" indicates the  existence  of  a  power.
    However,  on  the  face  of  the  impugned   decision   there   is   no
    acknowledgment of the existence of this power or its exercise  and  the
    conclusion to be drawn is that the decision maker failed to address the
    discretion; but rather treated  the  breach  of  the  visa  as  leading
    inevitably to a negative decision. In this the respondent erred.

28. It follows also that the  Tribunal  erred  in  concluding  that  simply
    paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules was applied because on the face
    of the decision paragraph 2A(8) of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 was also applied.

29. Accordingly, even if, for the sake of argument,  no  discretion  exists
    under paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules then  a  discretion  does
    arise under paragraph 2A (8) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971
    and the decision maker  erred  in  failing  to  consider  whether  that
    discretion should be exercised on the facts of the case. It is a  trite
    principle of administrative law that a policy that is so  rigid  as  to
    amount to a fetter on discretion is unlawful: see  by  way  of  example
    R(Lumba) v SSHD [2011] UK SC 12 at paragraph [21]; Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v R(S) [2007] EWCA Civ 546 at  paragraph  [50];
    and see also R(Thebo)  v  ECO  Islamabad  (Pakistan)  [2013]  EWHC  146
    (Admin) at paragraph [30].

30. In view of the facts and matters referred to and in particular those we
    have summarised at paragraph [21] above it was submitted to us that  in
    the circumstances of the case the decision maker should have  exercised
    her discretion to refrain from  cancelling  leave  notwithstanding  the
    breach of the conditions. We have concluded that the appropriate course
    given the error of law is to remit this case to the Secretary of  State
    for reconsideration.

31. To this extent, the appeal  is  allowed  and  the  matter  is  remitted
    accordingly to the Secretary of State in order to consider the exercise
    of her  discretion  under  paragraph  2A  (8)  of  Schedule  2  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.


Signed                                  Date 22nd June 2015






Mr Justice Green
