
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19060/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons               |
|On 13th July 2016                         |On 28th July 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:        No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal even  though
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State. First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington allowed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    residence card as confirmation of a derivative right  of  residence  on
    Article 8 grounds.
 2. The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal under Regulation 15A of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 on  the  basis  that,  although  the
    Appellant was the primary carer of the child, the child  would  not  be
    required to leave the UK. The refusal of a  derivative  residence  card
    would not lead to a situation where the child had to leave the European
    Union nor would he be deprived of his rights as a citizen  in  relation
    to Article 20 of the TFEU.

3.   The Respondent  appealed  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no  removal
    decision and therefore the judge was wrong to consider  Article  8  and
    allow it on that basis.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Frankish on 27th July 2015 on the  ground  that  it  was
    arguable that consideration of a derivative right under  Regulation  15
    had 'veered off'  into  Article  8  notwithstanding  removal  being  'a
    hypothetical consideration'.

4.   The Appellant also applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had erred in law in  her  findings
    under the EEA Regulations 2006.   Unfortunately,  the  application  was
    made to the Upper Tribunal and not  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    application for permission was not admitted under Rule 21(a) and (b) of
    the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  because   the
    Appellant had failed to make an application to the First-tier Tribunal.
    It was open to the Appellant to make such an application requesting  an
    extension of time. There was no evidence on the court file that such an
    application had been made by the Appellant and therefore there  was  no
    jurisdiction to consider the Appellant's cross-appeal. I  am  therefore
    only concerned with the Respondent's appeal.

5.   I did not need to hear from Ms Ahmad because, since  the  decision  was
    promulgated and after the grounds of appeal were submitted, the case of
    Amirteymour and Others (EEA appeals - human rights) [2015]  UKUT  00046
    (IAC) has been promulgated. In that case the Upper Tribunal held  that,
    where no notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act had been  served  and
    where no EEA decision to remove had been made, an Appellant  could  not
    bring a human rights challenge to removal in an appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

6.   There was no Section 120 notice in this  case  and  there  was  no  EEA
    decision to remove the Appellant. Accordingly, the judge's finding that
    the appeal succeeded under Article 8 was one which was not open to her.
     I, therefore, set aside the judge's decision under Article 8.

7.   There was no error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 and her findings in that respect are preserved. It  is
    open to the Appellant in this case to make a further application  under
    the EEA Regulations 2006 or on Article 8 grounds.



8.   In summary, I find that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision dated 28th April 2015 and I set aside the  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The decision to  dismiss  the  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations 2006 shall stand and the judge's findings are
    preserved. The Respondent's appeal is allowed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 27th July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

