
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/19410/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 1 September 2014                       |On 9 September 2014         |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between

                                ZAHEER AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Z Nasim counsel instructed by Maher & Co
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Prior promulgated on 1 November 2013 who found that  there
   was no valid appeal before the Tribunal and dismissed the appeal.
Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14 July 1979 and is a citizen of Pakistan.
4. On 22 April 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK  as
   a Tier 1 Entrepreneur Migrant under the Points Based System.
5. The application was refused and the refusal letter also stated  that  the
   decision did not carry a right of appeal as the Appellant  did  not  have
   leave to remain at the time  of  his  effective  application,  his  leave
   having expired on 25 March 2013.
6. The Appellant lodged an appeal. He stated that he had a right  of  appeal
   against the refusal of leave as he made a valid application on  25  March
   2013 and provided the correct credit  card  details  and  had  sufficient
   funds in his account to cover the fees. He asserted that  the  Respondent
   failed to process the card details properly. He relied  on  the  case  of
   Basnet (validity of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113(IAC) .


7. The case came before Duty Judge L A North who directed that the issue  of
   the validity of the appeal be determined at a substantive hearing.

The Judge's Decision


8. The hearing was  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Prior  (hereinafter
   called "the Judge") . The Judge found as a fact on the basis of the  oral
   evidence and documentary evidence of the card details provided  that  the
   Appellant had not in fact provided correct card details as he asserted in
   his grounds of appeal as he had omitted two numbers from what should have
   been a 16 digit number for his card;  he  distinguished  the  Appellant's
   case from Basnet where the Appellant's case  was  that  he  had  provided
   correct card details and found that the Appellant had not  made  a  valid
   authorisation to obtain the fee; he found that no prompt communication by
   the Respondent of the inability to collect the fee on 26 March 2013 would
   have allowed the Appellant to render his invalid application valid  prior
   to the expiry of his current leave on 25 March 2013; he found that  there
   was no unfairness on the part of the Respondent in their treatment of the
   Appellant; he concluded  that  there  was  no  valid  appeal  before  the
   tribunal and dismissed the appeal.
9. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 10 July 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Maclennan gave permission to appeal stating:
   "While this grant of permission is  not  restricted  ,  it  appears  self
   evident that to be valid, a payment authorisation needs  correct  payment
   details. It may be difficult to show that the point  needed  any  further
   reasoning. It is also fairly clear that there was no  material  by  which
   any judge might sensibly  have  reached  another  outcome  based  on  the
   appellant's private life."

10. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Nasim  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that in essence:

   a) It was common ground that the Appellant had made a mistake in relation
      to the card details rather than deliberately  trying  to  deceive  the
      Respondent.

   b) The Respondent should have  known  that  the  Appellant  had  provided
      incorrect details as there were only 14 digits  in  the  card  number.
      There was some discussion about this as I  asked  for  the  evidential
      basis for the suggestion that all cards had 16 digits.  I  checked  by
      way of example an American Express card I had, Amex being one  of  the
      acceptable forms of payment of the fees as is clear from page 6 of the
      Tier 1 application form. The American Express card has 15 digits.

   c) Basnet was not restricted in the way  the  Judge  interpreted  and  he
      relied on paragraph 32(3) and 33 that the Appellant intended  the  fee
      to accompany the application and the fact that he later paid  the  fee
      shows his intention

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Avery submitted that :

   a) There was no merit in the application.

   b) The case of Basnet was very different to that of the Appellant in that
      the applicant in that case had done everything right  in  relation  to
      the provision of card details.

   c) The Respondent could not chase every applicant who made mistakes.

   d) The Judge was also entitled to  find  that  even  had  the  Respondent
      contacted the Appellant it would have made no  difference  given  that
      his leave would have expired.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. Section 82 (2) (d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
   (the 2002 Act) only gives a right of appeal against a decision to vary or
   extend an applicant's leave "if the result of the  refusal  is  that  the
   person has no leave to enter or remain."  In other words it is only if an
   application is made during the currency of existing leave that a  refusal
   to vary or extend leave will  be  appealable.  In  this  case  the  Judge
   determined that there was no valid appeal because the Appellant  did  not
   make an effective application for  leave  after  his  current  leave  had
   expired.

14. The Judge set out the history of the Appellant's application:  that  the
   Appellant had leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  Post
   Study Work Migrant that expired on 25 March 2013. The Appellant submitted
   an application for further leave as a Tier 1  Entrepreneur  on  25  March
   2013. Although asserting in his original grounds of appeal  that  he  had
   provided the correct card details for the payment of the  fee  which  the
   Respondent failed to process, the Judge found after examining the payment
   section of the visa application that the Appellant had in  fact  provided
   only 14 digits of a 16 digit card number as a result  of  which  the  fee
   could not be processed.
15. The  jurisdiction  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore   turned  on
   whether a valid application had been made prior to the expiry of leave on
   25 March 2013.  The Judge took into account the case of  Basnet  ,  which
   sets out the Immigration & Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011  (2011  No
   1055), which provide at Regulation 37:

    "Consequences of failing to pay the specified fee.

    Where an  application  to  which  these  Regulations  refer  is  to  be
    accompanied by a specified fee, the application  is  not  validly  made
    unless it has been accompanied by that fee."


16. The question whether the first application was valid  therefore  depends
   not upon whether the payment was successfully processed, but  on  whether
   the application was accompanied by the fee. In Basnet at paragraph 20 the
   tribunal found
   "Validity of the application is determined not  by  whether  the  fee  is
   actually received but by whether the  application  is  accompanied  by  a
   valid authorisation to obtain the entire fee that  is  available  in  the
   relevant bank account."

17.  I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to distinguish  this  appeal
   from Basnet as he did in paragraph 11 of the determination because  while
   it was undisputed in Basnet that  the  applicant  had  provided  a  valid
   authorisation in the form of correct card details in this case the  Judge
   found that he had 'supplied inoperative authorisation  for  discharge  of
   the fee by the card issuer.' The  Judge  acknowledged  that  this  was  a
   genuine mistake but was entitled to conclude that the  incorrect  details
   he provided resulted in a  failure  to  provide  valid  authorisation  to
   obtain the fee.
18. It is argued in the grounds and by Mr Nasim that in accordance with  the
   measures set out in paragraph 32(ii) of Basnet to prevent  such  disputes
   in the future,  to  ensure  fairness,  the  Appellant  should  have  been
   contacted promptly in order to correct the error. I am satisfied  firstly
   that nothing was produced or  agued  in  front  of  the  Judge  that  the
   provision of a 14 digit number to the Respondent should have alerted them
   to the fact that there was a problem, indeed having looked at an American
   Express card it was clear that a 16 digit number is not  standard.  I  am
   also satisfied however that the Judge was entitled to take  into  account
   in determining the issue of fairness that  the  Appellant  in  this  case
   chose to make his application on the day his leave expired, the 25  March
   2013. This was the date given in  the  acknowledgement  letter  from  the
   Respondent dated 16 April 2013 and by the Appellant's representatives  in
   their grounds of appeal to the First-tier rather than  on  or  about  the
   '20th or 21st March' as suggested in  the  grounds  of  appeal  dated  11
   November 2013 to the Upper Tribunal . The inevitable consequence of  that
   was that the application had to be effective: I am satisfied that it  was
   open to the Judge to conclude that prompt  contact  would  have  made  no
   difference  to  the  outcome  as  he  had  allowed  no  time   'for   the
   regularisation of an invalid application'(paragraph 12).
19. Mr Nasim argued that the Appellant's willingness to pay the fee was  the
   decisive factor but I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
   conclude  in  accordance  with  Basnet  that  the  provision   of   valid
   authorisation was the decisive factor and in Basnet it was given  and  in
   the Appellant's case it was not.

20. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning. There was no error of law.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell








