
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19202/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 January and 10 March 2016           |On 4 April 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr MD Rana Shamim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr P Nath (29.01.16) and Mr S Kotas
                           (10.03.16), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    In person (29.01.16) and Mr Z Hussain
                           (10.03.16), Farringdon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against  the  decision  to
    refuse to grant him further leave to remain as a student.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that the claimant  should  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The application was made on 10 February 2014, and it was refused  on  9
    April 2014. The ground of refusal was that no CAS reference number  had
    been submitted with the application, and therefore the claimant had not
    shown he had a valid CAS.

 3. The claimant was not given a right of appeal as the SSHD contended that
    he was an overstayer. This was on the basis  that  his  last  grant  of
    leave had been curtailed  to  expire  on  30  July  2012,  and  so  his
    application of 10 February 2014 was well beyond the permitted period of
    28 days residence without extant leave.

 4. In his grounds of appeal, the claimant accepted that he did not have  a
    valid CAS. His explanation was  that  he  had  not  obtained  his  bank
    statements from Bangladesh at the time  of  his  application.  But  his
    leave was due to expire on 31 December 2013, and so he had to make  the
    application without a CAS. He had in fact made  an  application  on  31
    July 2012, which was returned as invalid due to  non-payment  of  fees.
    But he had not received notice of the invalidity until March  2013,  as
    he had changed his address.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appeal came before Judge Abebrese sitting at  Taylor  House  on  24
    July 2015. Both parties were legally represented.  The  judge  received
    oral evidence from the appellant, who was cross-examined.

 6. The claimant's evidence was that he had first submitted his application
    on 30 July (not 31 July) 2012.  He  had  then  re-submitted  it  on  31
    December  2013,  after  receiving  notification  of  the  rejection  on
    invalidity grounds in March  2013.  The  re-submitted  application  was
    returned as invalid for non-payment of the fee, and so he submitted the
    application for a third time on 8 February 2014.

 7. The judge accepted the claimant's evidence that  each  application  had
    been accompanied with authorisation for the funds to be taken from  his
    account, and that, applying Basnet, the burden of proof had shifted  to
    the SSHD to  prove  that  the  in-time  application  had  been  validly
    rejected. As the SSHD had not discharged this burden either in relation
    to the in-time application or the second application in December  2013,
    the judge held that the  third  application  of  February  2014  was  a
    continuation of the in-time application  made  on  30  July  2012,  and
    allowed the claimant's appeal on this ground.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 8. On 17 December 2015 Judge Astle granted the SSHD permission to  appeal,
    as the judge did not appear to have dealt with the issue of the CAS and
    it was arguable that there was no right of appeal in any event  bearing
    in mind Mitchell (Basnet revisited) [2015] UKUT 00562 (IAC).

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the outset of the  hearing,  the  claimant  renewed  an  adjournment
    request which had previously been made in writing to the Upper Tribunal
    by his solicitors, and which  had  been  refused.  As  canvassed  in  a
    lengthy letter dated 28 February 2016 from Farringdon Solicitors  which
    reached me in the course of the hearing,  the  reason  for  seeking  an
    adjournment was that their client had not been able to pass on to  them
    the papers which  were  still  in  possession  of  his  previous  legal
    representatives, and that their preparation for the  hearing  had  thus
    been compromised. At the end of the letter they said their client would
    be in attendance at the hearing and that he was aware that, "the matter
    may have to proceed in any event".

10. Having regard to the reasons for granting permission to appeal,  I  was
    satisfied that it was in accordance with the  overriding  objective  to
    give a ruling on the question of whether the decision was vitiated by a
    material error of law such that it should be set aside and remade,  but
    not to proceed immediately to remake the decision. After explaining why
    an error of law was clearly made out, I made directions for  a  resumed
    hearing before me to remake the decision.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

11. The first point raised by  Judge  Astle  when  granting  permission  to
    appeal is unanswerable. The claimant could not  succeed  in  an  appeal
    under the rules as, by his own admission (which he repeated to me),  he
    was not in possession of  a  valid  CAS.  It  appears  that  the  legal
    representatives and the judge became fixated on the question of whether
    the application for leave to remain should be treated as being made  in
    time, so as to give the claimant a right of  appeal,  and  ignored  the
    equally important question of whether  the  appeal  had  any  intrinsic
    merit.

12. As to whether the judge misdirected himself in law in finding that  the
    application was made in time, so as to give the  claimant  a  right  of
    appeal, I find that an error of law is  made  out  on  the  grounds  of
    inadequate reasoning. The judge has not, for example, engaged with  the
    fact that the claimant delayed making a second application for a period
    of nine months after he says he received notice of the rejection of the
    first application; and he has not engaged with the fact that service at
    an applicant's last known address is prima facie good service.

Directions for The Resumed Hearing

13. I directed that the issues which were to be  resolved  at  the  resumed
    hearing were (a) whether the claimant had a right of appeal; and, if so
    (b) whether the appeal should succeed outside the rules.

14. As to the first issue, none of the judge's findings of fact  should  be
    preserved.  As to the second issue, the claimant informed me  that  the
    case which he wished to present was that the  SSHD  should  have  given
    him, and/or should give him now, a 60 day permission letter  so  as  to
    enable him to obtain a valid CAS.

15. I gave permission to both the SSHD and the claimant to  adduce  further
    evidence on issues (a) and (b) provided that such evidence  was  served
    on the Upper Tribunal and on each other not less than seven days before
    the resumed hearing

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

16. In remaking the decision, I have taken  into  account  the  documentary
    evidence which  was  placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  the
    claimant's  previous  representative,  Immigration  4  U.   The  bundle
    contained a witness statement for the claimant that was  unsigned,  and
    so I asked the claimant to sign it in  my  presence.   He  was  briefly
    cross-examined  by  Mr  Kotas,  and  he  also  answered  questions  for
    clarification purposes from me.

17. On the question of whether the claimant had Section  3C  leave  at  the
    date of the refusal decision (9 April 2014), Mr Hussain relied  on  the
    proposition that the claimant had enjoyed Section  3C  leave  from  the
    date when his previous leave to remain  expired,  and  had  never  lost
    Section 3C leave, because the in time application made on 30 July  2012
    had not been validly rejected.  Accordingly,  he  submitted,  a  lawful
    decision on the in time application remained outstanding.

18. Mr Kotas submitted that the proposition did not stand up  to  scrutiny,
    even if the underlying facts relied upon by the claimant were accepted.
     He submitted that the  claimant  could  not  assert  that  he  enjoyed
    Section 3C leave in circumstances  where  he  had,  on  his  own  case,
    delayed until December 2013 before making a fresh application for leave
    to remain, having received (on his case) notice of the rejection of his
    in time application in March 2013.

19. Although not cited to me, I had regard to Mitchell  (Basnet  revisited)
    [2015] UKUT 562 which  was  published  on  25  August  2015.   This  is
    decision of a panel chaired by  Vice  President  Mark  Ockelton.  Judge
    Abebrese did not have the benefit of this decision. But the law  always
    speaks, and I am not constrained by Judge  Abebrese's  findings,  which
    are based on the earlier decision of Basnet [2012] UKUT 00113.

20. In Mitchell, the Tribunal distinguished the earlier case of  Basnet  on
    two grounds.  The first was that, in  Basnet  the  asserted  ground  of
    invalidity was solely within the knowledge of the Secretary  of  State,
    because the crucial events had happened after the submission of a  form
    which was good on its face; and it was therefore for the  Secretary  of
    State to show that the difficulty in collecting the fee  arose  from  a
    default by the appellant.  It did  not  appear  to  the  Tribunal  that
    similar reasoning applied where the alleged defect was apparent on  the
    face of the form itself, and so was in the knowledge of the  applicant.



21. The second ground for distinguishing the case before them  from  Basnet
    was that there had been  a  lengthy  delay  before  the  appellant  had
    asserted that the application in question had been wrongly rejected  on
    invalidity grounds.  The Tribunal found that the appellant's failure to
    raise the matter at the time impacted on  the  question  of  where  the
    burden of proof lay.  At paragraph [12] the Tribunal said:

         "Further, the position is that at all relevant times the  applicant
         knew that the Secretary of State's position was that her leave  had
         expired on 31  January  2010.   We  have  great  sympathy  with  Mr
         Matthews's submissions that if she wanted to assert  the  Secretary
         of State's view was wrong, she should have done  so  at  the  time:
         this view is if anything reinforced by the  evidence  to  which  we
         refer below.  One reason why any difficulty needs to  be  taken  up
         promptly is that nobody is entitled to require anybody else to keep
         documents indefinitely."

22. Paragraph 2 of the headnote to Mitchell reads as follows:

         "The evidence  shows  that  the  payment  pages  are  retained  for
         eighteen months.  Thus, within that period,  any  question  of  the
         reason for failure to obtain payment can be investigated,  although
         the reasons for declining a payment are available only to the  bank
         account holder, not the Secretary of State.  In the light of  this,
         a more nuanced approach to the burden of proof may be needed."

23. By letter dated 20 August 2012, which was sent to the appellant's  last
    known  address,  the  appellant  was  informed   that   his   attempted
    application which he had made by post on 30 July 2012 had been rejected
    because although credit/debit  card  details  had  been  provided,  the
    issuing  bank  had  rejected  the  payment.   There  might  have   been
    insufficient funds in the account or the details provided did not match
    the  information  held  by  the  bank.   For   security   reasons   the
    cardholder's name, address, expiry date and issue  number  supplied  on
    the payment form had to correspond with the  information  held  by  the
    issuing bank.  If the details failed to match, the  bank  would  reject
    the payment.

24. The letter indicates that enclosed with the letter was  the  claimant's
    passport and other supporting documents provided with the  application.



25. The claimant did not dispute the validity of this rejection until  some
    two years later.  In the circumstances, applying the reasoning  of  the
    Tribunal in Mitchell, I consider that the burden of proof  rested  with
    him to show that the application had been wrongly rejected.  I  do  not
    consider that he discharges this burden by giving oral evidence that he
    had provided all the necessary details, and so the fault must lie  with
    the Secretary of State.

26. But even if I am wrong about that, I do not consider that the  claimant
    has made out his case on the merits.  The claimant has not  shown  that
    his inability  to  rely  on  a  CAS  for  the  purposes  of  his  valid
    application of February 2014 flowed from the rejection of his  in  time
    application for leave to remain nearly two years earlier.  On  his  own
    case, the claimant was able to make two further applications for  leave
    to remain, one in December 2013 and  the  other  at  the  beginning  of
    February 2014.

27. The letter explaining  why  the  December  2013  application  has  been
    rejected on invalidity  grounds  is  not  included  in  the  bundle  of
    documents compiled by Immigration 4 U, although they have included  the
    Home Office's letter acknowledging receipt of the application  dated  6
    January 2014.  As surrounding documents were available  for  disclosure
    to the First-tier Tribunal, there is no satisfactory explanation as  to
    why the second rejection letter has not been disclosed.  So it  is  not
    satisfactorily demonstrated that the reason for  the  second  rejection
    was an inability to collect the fee, as distinct from a failure by  the
    appellant to ensure that the application was "accompanied by the  fee".



28. But at all events, when the claimant finally did  make  an  application
    which was accepted as valid by the Home Office, in his evidence to  the
    First-tier Tribunal he said that the reason why his sponsor institution
    did not issue him with a CAS was because they had not received his bank
    statements relating to his bank account in Bangladesh.  This is  not  a
    failure which can be laid at the door of the Home Office.

29. Before me, Mr Hussain submitted that the claimant could  not  obtain  a
    CAS without a 60 day letter: as the claimant did  not  have  a  60  day
    letter to show potential sponsors in December  2013,  January  2014  or
    February 2014, it was impossible for him to obtain a CAS.

30. But the case advanced by Mr Hussain is contradicted  by  the  evidence.
    It is not the claimant's evidence that he was hampered by  the  absence
    of a letter from the Home Office confirming that he could  look  for  a
    new sponsor.

31. Furthermore, the plain implication of the offer letter from the College
    of Advanced Studies dated 31 December  2013  was  that  the  claimant's
    immigration status was not seen by the college as an  obstacle  to  him
    being issued with a CAS.  The only condition which they imposed for the
    issue  of  a  CAS  letter  was  that  he  needed  to  provide  original
    documentary evidence to show that he had passed a qualification greater
    than or equivalent to NQF/QCF level 6; and that he should provide  them
    with original appropriate evidence showing that he had  access  to  the
    appropriate funds for 28 consecutive days ending no  earlier  than  one
    month before the date that he was going to submit his visa application.
     He had to fulfil these conditions by 3pm on 9 January 2014.

32. On his own case, the claimant failed to secure a CAS from  the  college
    because he did not provide by the  prescribed  deadline  the  requisite
    evidence to show that he met the maintenance requirement.  The claimant
    did not ask the Home Office to delay making a  decision  on  his  valid
    application of February 2014 on the ground that he needed a further  60
    days to obtain a valid CAS or that he needed a 60 day letter to show to
    potential sponsors.  The claimant simply applied for  leave  to  remain
    without a CAS.

33. As was held by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in R (On the  application  of
    Akudike) v Secretary of State for the Home Department IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00213 (IAC) at paragraph [30], the case law plainly recognises that, as
    a matter of fairness, the Secretary of State is not required to give an
    applicant notice that she considers that there is a deficiency in a CAS
    before making an adverse decision on that basis: see Kaur v SSHD [2015]
    EWCA Civ 13.  A fortiori, the Secretary of State in this case  was  not
    required to give the claimant notice that she was going to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain due to the complete absence of  a  CAS.



34. The claimant does not have a viable private life claim under the Rules.
     Turning to an Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  accept  that
    questions one and two of the Razgar test  should  be  answered  in  the
    claimant's favour, as the threshold for the engagement of private  life
    rights is relatively low.  Questions three and four of the Razgar  test
    must be answered in favour of the respondent.  On the crucial  question
    of  proportionality,  I  have  taken  into  account   the   Article   8
    jurisprudence relating to students and also Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  I do  not  consider  there  are  compelling  circumstances  which
    justify the claimant being granted Article 8 relief outside the  Rules.
    The claimant entered the United Kingdom for a  temporary  purpose,  and
    that purpose has been fulfilled in that he has completed the course  of
    study for which he was granted entry clearance.  The  claimant  had  no
    legitimate expectation of being able to remain in the United Kingdom to
    follow a further course of study unless he could bring  himself  within
    the Rules.  His ability to speak English  and  his  apparent  financial
    independence do not significantly tip the scales in his favour.  Little
    weight can be given to a private life which is built while  a  person's
    status here is  precarious.  I  conclude  that  the  decision  appealed
    against strikes a fair balance between, on the one hand, the claimant's
    rights and interests, and, on the other hand, the  wider  interests  of
    society. It is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to  be
    achieved, namely the maintenance  of  firm  and  effective  immigration
    controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

