
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19837/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2015                |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                              KWAKU BADU YEBOAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, Counsel; instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of  comprehension,  the  parties  are  referred  to  by  their
    appellate status and positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his application  for
    issue of a residence card, confirming  his  of  a  right  of  residence
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("2006 Regulations").

 3. In a Refusal Letter dated 30 April 2014, the Secretary of State refused
    the Appellant's application with reference to Regulations 7 and 8(5) of
    the 2006 Regulations. The Appellant appealed against that decision  and
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its   decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal against that decision on 12 January 2015.

 4.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle,  to  a  limited
    extent. The sole ground  upon  which  permission  was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

    '(i) It is arguable that the judge erred in considering the evidence of
         recognition of  a  proxy  marriage  in  Ghana,  with  reference  to
         headnote (g) of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  Nigeria  [2014]
         UKUT 24 (IAC), which states as follows:

         It  should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of  proof.  Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will,  for
         similar reasons, carry no weight.'

 5. I was provided at  the  hearing  with  a  Rule  24  response  from  the
    Appellant which parties had the benefit of reading before  the  hearing
    commenced.

Submissions

 6. Ms Pal submitted that  the  judge  did  not  engage  with  any  of  the
    Secretary  of  State's  analysis  of  the  legal  deficiencies  in  the
    Appellant's evidence and  instead  mischaracterised  her  challenge  as
    being one of fraud alone; and consequently there were  no  findings  on
    whether the documents contained the material information,  not  whether
    documents  were  supplied.  She  however  accepted  that  she  was   in
    difficulty in approaching the appeal in light of the sole  ground  upon
    which permission was granted.

 7. Curiously, both Ms Pal and  Mr  Garrod  agreed  that  headnote  (g)  of
    Kareem, as mentioned in the grant of permission, was irrelevant. For my
    part, it is  only  of  passing  relevance  as  it  mentions  that  mere
    production of legal materials will be insufficient  because  they  will
    rarely show how such law is understood or applied. In my view  that  is
    not the case here as it was clear based upon the materials  before  the
    judge, that Ghanaian customary law is quite  clear  as  to  how  it  is
    applied, there was evidence from the Ghanaian High Commission as to how
    it was understood by the relevant authorities, and  the  Appellant  had
    produced  unreported  determinations  of  the  Upper   Tribunal   which
    demonstrate how such law is understood and applied previously.

 8. Ms Pal submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  expected  to  see
    evidence of  either  the  Appellant's  EEA  spouse  (Ms  Botah)  having
    Ghanaian nationality or that her parents held Ghanaian nationality. The
    reason for this is that the  Secretary  of  State's  interpretation  of
    Ghanaian customary law is that both parties  to  a  Ghanaian  customary
    marriage must hold that nationality or only one party should whilst the
    parents of the other party must hold such nationality. On  that  basis,
    Ms Pal submitted the judge had  failed  to  grapple  with  whether  the
    marriage was properly registered.

 9. For the Appellant, Mr Garrod whom  also  was  present  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal replied at length, making  reference  to
    the voluminous bundle of evidence and materials submitted on behalf  of
    the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal as follows.

10. Mr Garrod first drew my attention to  a  letter  from  the  Ghana  High
    Commission dated 17 March 2014 (at pp.60-61 of the bundle)  which  gave
    detailed commentary on Ghanaian law concerning customary marriages  and
    stated inter alia that "by registering a customary marriage, the  State
    knows about the existence of the marriage; it also prevents disputes on
    the existence  of  the  validity  of  a  customary  marriage;  and  the
    certificate issued to the  spouses  is  used  to  support  requests  by
    Foreign Missions in applications for visas  and  permits".  The  letter
    gave further commentary in relation to a leading Ghanaian jurisprudence
    on the legality of proxy marriages known as McCabe v  McCabe  [1994]  1
    FLR 410; [1994] 1 FCR 257, which confirmed  that  the  marriage  of  an
    Irish national to a Ghanaian national  was  valid  i.e.  the  customary
    proxy marriage was  valid  despite  the  Irish  husband  not  being  of
    Ghanaian  nationality  or  origin.  This  Ghanaian  precedent   clearly
    contradicts the Secretary of State's position that  Ghanaian  nationals
    cannot marry foreign nationals unless that  foreign  national  person's
    parents are Ghanaian.

11. I was also pointed to pages 62-66 of the bundle which showed  a  letter
    from the Ghana High Commission dated 9 November  2012  which  confirmed
    that 4 items attached to  the  letter  were  genuine.  These  documents
    consisted of a Certification from the  Legal  and  Consular  Bureau,  a
    Certification from the First Deputy Judicial Secretary of the  Judicial
    Service  of  Ghana  (dealing  with  the  declaration   confirming   the
    marriage), a Statutory Declaration (confirming the  marriage  before  a
    Notary Public) and a Form of Register of Customary Marriage  issued  by
    the Registrar. Mr Garrod submitted that this was  evidence  before  the
    judge that the Appellant and  Ms  Botah  had  been  complied  with  the
    formalities of registering the customary marriage. This was because the
    Registrar was satisfied with the marriage  and  issued  a  certificate.
    This was reinforced by the letter from the High  Commission  confirming
    the authenticity of those documents validating the marriage.

12. Directly tackling the Secretary of State's ground of appeal  concerning
    whether marriages between Ghanaian nationals and foreign nationals were
    permissible and in what circumstances, Mr Garrod drew my attention to a
    previous reported determination of  the  Upper  Tribunal  known  as  NA
    (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 at
    [10-11] wherein the expert opinion of a barrister (Ms Mercy Akman of 36
    Bedford Row) was accepted by the Upper Tribunal. Ms Akman's report  was
    referred to by the Upper Tribunal at [11(5)] wherein she  stated  inter
    alia as follows:

         "... A valid customary marriage  can  only  be  validly  contracted
         between two Ghanaian citizens and both parties must  have  capacity
         to marry ..."

13. That, Mr Garrod submitted, was the source of the Secretary  of  State's
    position  that  marriages  can  only  be  contracted  between  Ghanaian
    citizens; however that authority was overtaken on this issue by a later
    unreported determination of the Upper Tribunal. To this end, Mr  Garrod
    referred to  the  determination  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  in
    Alexandra  Amoako  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (unreported, IA/23315/2012) which saw the same expert barrister  resile
    from her previous expert evidence, at paragraph  3,  in  the  following
    terms:

         'The Appellant had also obtained a further expert report  from  the
         same expert who had given evidence in NA, Mercy Akman. It  was  she
         who, before the Tribunal in NA, said that customary marriages  were
         only available to Ghanaian nationals. In her new  report  she  said
         that she, after  additional  research  and  reflection,  wished  to
         clarify and revise that opinion to  say  that  customary  marriages
         were available between non-Ghanaian citizens. I have concerns about
         that expert opinion because it was not  sourced  or  evidence-based
         which cast doubt, in my view, over not only that expert report  but
         the evidence before the Tribunal in NA.  However  that  all  became
         somewhat  irrelevant  when  Mr  Walker  produced  a  UKBA  document
         entitled "Customary Marriage and Divorce/Proxy Marriages contracted
         in Ghana" dated 17th January 2012 which at page 3 refers  to  those
         eligible to enter into such marriages and it includes:-

                . Ghanaian nationals resident in Ghana or abroad;

                . At least one of the parties must be a Ghanaian national;

                . If both parties are non-Ghanaian nationals at least one of
                  the parents of any  of  the  couple  must  be  a  Ghanaian
                  national

                . For a customary marriage to  be  registered.  Non-Ghanaian
                  nationals with no parental links to  Ghanaian  citizenship
                  are not entitled to customary marriage certificates.'

14. Mr Garrod highlighted that Ms Botah, was born  in  Ghana  and  drew  my
    attention to her previous passport (at p.542 of the bundle) even though
    she was now an EEA national.

15. I was  then  directed  to  pp.  633-635  of  the  bundle,  wherein  the
    Appellant's solicitors had produced  sections  5-19  of  the  Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985. Within that  legislation,
    Mr Garrod referred to section 13 which reads as follows:

         'In any proceedings a true  copy  of  the  entry  in  the  register
         certified under the hand of the Registrar shall  be  admissible  in
         evidence as sufficient proof of the registration of the marriage or
         the dissolution of the marriage.'

16. Mr Garrod highlighted that registration of a customary  proxy  marriage
    was mandatory from 1985 to 1991, however, failure to register  did  not
    affect the validity of the marriage and registration is now optional as
    confirmed at [24(b)] of NA. All of which was explained to the judge  in
    submissions.

17. I was then asked to note  the  references  in  the  Refusal  Letter  to
    section 3(1)(c) of the Customary Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)
    Law 1985. Section 3(1) states as follows:

         'The  application  for  registration  of  the  marriage  shall   be
         accompanied by a statutory declaration stating the following:-

   a) names of the parties to the marriage;

   b) the places of residence of the parties at the time of the marriage;

   c) that the conditions essential to  the  validity  of  the  marriage  in
      accordance with the applicable customary law have been complied with.'

18. Mr Garrod submitted  that  the  Home  Office's  interpretation  of  the
    legislation was that the Home Office expect  these  matters  underlying
    the registration to be proven to them independent of the fact that  the
    marriage  has  been  registered,  however  by  virtue   of   the   1985
    legislation, a Ghanaian would only  need  to  prove  eligibility  to  a
    registrar and then would be able to rely on  the  marriage  certificate
    after the event, the issue of registration having  been  satisfactorily
    discharged according to the  Registrar's  satisfaction  under  law.  Mr
    Garrod suggested it would be staggering to suggest  that  the  marriage
    certificate formalities have not been complied with simply because  the
    marriage certificate is a Ghanaian  one,  as  opposed  to  one  from  a
    European country. He submitted that the registration  certificate  from
    the Registrar should be accorded respect following registration to  the
    Registrar's  satisfaction,  in  accordance  with  section  13  of   the
    Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985. In  short,  the
    Secretary of State is misapplying Ghanaian law. The test is whether the
    marriage  is  registered  in  Ghana,  which  it  is,  and  if  so,  the
    certificate would be sufficient proof.

19. In conclusion, Mr Garrod submitted that it was only necessary  in  this
    particular appeal that the Appellant was Ghanaian as confirmed  by  the
    Registry, by the Ghanaian High Commission referring to McCabe v McCabe,
    through the retreat from  the  expert  evidence  in  NA  and  the  UKBA
    document  entitled  "Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce/Proxy  Marriages
    contracted in Ghana" referred to in Alexandra Amoako by  the  Secretary
    of State. In that light,  pursuant  to  section  13  of  the  Customary
    Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law  1985,  the  marriage   was
    registered and the certificate of marriage was sufficient proof for the
    purposes of this appeal.

No Error of Law

20. I do not find that there was an error of law in the decision such  that
    it should be set aside. My reasons for so finding are as follows.

21. In relation to the sole issue, it is unfortunate that  the  grounds  of
    appeal did not refer to the evidence before the judge at the First-tier
    Tribunal, as in my view, this considerable evidence  demonstrated  that
    the judge had sufficient cause to find in the Appellant's favour. I  am
    most grateful  to  Mr  Garrod  for  his  exhaustive  submissions  which
    highlighted the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and upon  which
    submissions were made. I therefore find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had sufficient cause to find as it did, however even if there  were  an
    error in the extent of reasons given, I am fortified in  my  view  that
    such omission would be immaterial given my view of the evidence.  Tying
    together the evidence  and  legislation  I  was  pointed  to  and  have
    rehearsed above, I find as follows in relation to each item.

22. In relation to the letter from the Ghanaian High  Commission  dated  17
    March 2014, which gave detailed commentary on Ghanaian  law  concerning
    customary marriages (as summarised above) the Ghanaian authorities have
    expressed their view on their law governing customary  proxy  marriages
    and it is their view that registration demonstrates the validity  of  a
    customary marriage and the certificate issued thereafter is  sufficient
    evidence of this lawful registration which is used to support  requests
    by Foreign Missions in applications for visas and permits.

23. This stance accords with my view of the Customary Marriage and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985. In relation to section 3(1)(c),  this  section
    rehearses the items that shall  be  submitted  for  registration  of  a
    customary marriage. In essence, this is a question of lawful  procedure
    which the  Registrar  for  marriages  will  necessarily  review  before
    issuing a couple with a Form of Register of Customary Marriage. Section
    13 makes clear that following registration, a true copy of the entry in
    the register certified under the hand of the  Registrar  is  sufficient
    proof of the registration of the marriage.  The  evidentiary  value  of
    such an entry is clearly of some  weight  given  that  the  legislation
    makes clear that such evidence is  admissible  in  proceedings  and  is
    admissible as  sufficient  proof  of  registration.  Therefore,  in  an
    application such as the instant one that the Appellant and  his  spouse
    previously made, as opposed to legal proceedings, it is unclear why the
    Respondent would question the due process of the registration that  the
    Registrar  has  already  considered,  satisfied   themselves   of   and
    consequently issued a Form of  Register  of  Customary  Marriage.  This
    stance is also tenuous given that the Ghana  High  Commission  rely  on
    certificates in Ghanaian Foreign Missions  in  relation  to  visas  and
    permits. Consequently, the provision of a  marriage  certificate  where
    the marriage has been registered was sufficient  proof  of  a  marriage
    validly registered by the Registrar. It would seem to me  that  if  the
    Respondent seeks to take issue with prima facie  evidence  of  a  valid
    marriage, it should obtain appropriate evidence of its invalidity, such
    as a confirmation by the Registrar that the registration  was  in  fact
    invalid.

24. In relation to the issue of whether the Appellant could  enter  into  a
    marriage with Ms Botah, given that she was an EEA national and  was  no
    longer a Ghanaian national,  I  accept  that  the  expert  evidence  in
    relation to this issue highlighted in  NA,  has  been  retreated  from.
    There was certainly no contradictory evidence or legislation  from  the
    Respondent on this issue  either  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
    myself. Were there any doubt  as  to  the  ability  of  a  non-Ghanaian
    national  (without  Ghanaian  origin  or  ancestry)  to  enter  into  a
    customary proxy marriage  with  a  Ghanaian  national,  that  doubt  is
    clearly dispelled in light of the  jurisprudence  referred  to  by  the
    Ghana High Commission on the legality of proxy marriages  in  McCabe  v
    McCabe. The fact that the Ghanaian courts found that a marriage between
    an Irish national and a Ghanaian national was valid despite  the  Irish
    national not being of Ghanaian nationality or origin places this  issue
    beyond  question,  even  against  the  evidence  expected  of   parties
    according to headnote (g) of Kareem.

25. In relation to the further issue raised by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Refusal Letter that Ghanaian nationals cannot marry  foreign  nationals
    unless that foreign national person's parents are Ghanaian, it  is  not
    necessary for me to decide this issue given the document  drawn  to  my
    attention which appeared in Alexandra Amoako and  was  helpfully  cited
    therein. As stated in that determination, those eligible to enter  into
    Customary Proxy Marriages include:

       . Ghanaian nationals resident in Ghana or abroad;

       . At least one of the parties must be a Ghanaian national;

       . If both parties are non-Ghanaian nationals  at  least  one  of  the
         parents of any of the couple must be a Ghanaian national

       . For a customary marriage to be registered.  Non-Ghanaian  nationals
         with no parental links to Ghanaian citizenship are not entitled  to
         customary marriage certificates.

26. This document was not placed before me by either  party  but  was  only
    relied upon to the limited extent that it  appeared  in  the  Alexandra
    Amoako determination of Upper Tribunal Judge Martin. Nonetheless  as  a
    document upon which the Respondent has previously relied and given that
    she did not seek to retreat from its position before me, I  shall  take
    into consideration. The Appellant clearly falls under the first bullet-
    point as a Ghanaian national resident  in  the  UK,  and  the  marriage
    satisfies the second bullet-point as the Appellant is a  party  to  the
    marriage and at least one of the parties to the marriage  is  therefore
    Ghanaian. In relation to the third bullet-point, it is  of  irrelevance
    given the Appellant's nationality, and  therefore  I  reject  Ms  Pal's
    submission that the Appellant needed to show that  Ms  Botah's  parents
    were Ghanaian. It appears that this would only be necessary if  neither
    party to the marriage was Ghanaian. It is also  clear  that  the  third
    bullet-point   contradicts   the   second,   making   this   document's
    interpretation somewhat unhelpful. Finally, the fourth bullet-point  is
    not relevant for the purposes of this appeal.

27. My view is further enforced by the reference in Alexandra Amoako to the
    expert evidence of Mercy Akman in NA being clarified before  the  Upper
    Tribunal on that occasion. In harmony with Upper Tribunal Judge Martin,
    I do not place weight upon that expert evidence, particularly as it  is
    not before me, but also for the reasons given in Alexandra  Amoako  and
    in light of that expert evidence not contradicting  the  UKBA  document
    referred to above.

28. Therefore, I accept Ms Pal's submission that the evidentiary burden  of
    establishing a valid customary proxy marriage lies with the  Appellant;
    however, pursuant to the valid registration of the customary  marriage,
    production of the marriage certificate was sufficient prima facie proof
    of that marriage's validity. This validity is confirmed by  section  13
    of the Customary Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law  1985  and
    enforced by the letters and attachments from the Ghana High Commission.



29. The judge's consideration of the evidence refers to  considering  those
    certificates at paragraph 23 of the determination.  As  an  aside,  the
    authenticity of those documents was also  accepted  by  the  Respondent
    (see paragraph 5 of the determination) before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    Therefore, in relying upon those certificates, including  the  marriage
    certificate, the judge  did  not  fail  to  consider  the  evidence  of
    recognition of a proxy marriage in Ghana. Even if I am  wrong  in  this
    view, having considered the evidence for myself, I do not find that any
    omission in the judge's consideration resulted in material  error  such
    that the determination should be set aside.

30. Consequently, given my findings above, the grounds  do  not  reveal  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

Decision

31. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
