
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/19872/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 10th August 2015                      |         On 4th September 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     DK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                    Claimant
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: DK attended in person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The claimant is a citizen of Belorussia. These proceedings concern  the
    status and interests of a child. In order to protect the child  I  make
    an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant in the present proceedings is the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [SSHD].

 3. This is an appeal by the SSHD against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  R  A  Cox  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Clarke
    promulgated  on  19th  March  2015,  whereby  the  judges  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the SSHD dated 15 April 2014.
    The decision by the SSHD  was  to  refuse  the  claimant  a  Derivative
    Residence Card as the primary  carer  of  a  British  Citizen,  who  is
    resident in the United Kingdom under Regulations 15A  and  18A  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. By decision made on the 18th May 2015 leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The matter appears before me to determine in  the
    first instance whether or not there is an error of law in the  original
    determination.

Factual background

 5. The claimant came to the United Kingdom in  2004  on  a  student  visa.
    Whilst in the United Kingdom she commenced a relationship with  LRE,  a
    British citizen. The  claimant  made  application  for  certificate  of
    approval to marry in 2006. The certificate was granted but  it  appears
    that the marriage never took place. As a result of the relationship the
    claimant gave birth to a child BE born on the 17th February  2007.  The
    child is a British citizen.

 6. The relationship between the claimant and LRE broke down  in  or  about
    2009. The claimant moved out of the family home and went to live at  an
    address in Boston with the child. The child has lived with the claimant
    since that time but has visited and stayed with his father at  weekends
    occasionally and during the summer holidays. In the First-tier Tribunal
    decision there is reference to the child staying with his father for up
    to 8 weeks in the summer holidays.

 7. The claimant commenced a relationship with another man in 2013. For the
    purposes of the present proceedings that relationship is  not  material
    other than as background information.

 8. LRE, who had moved and was living in Leeds,  commenced  a  relationship
    with another lady, married and has a  daughter  by  that  relationship.
    LRE and his wife and child live in a two-bedroom bungalow.

 9. The wider family of LRE, his parents and such, appear to  live  in  the
    vicinity of Boston, where the claimant and her  child  BE  are  living.
    Clearly the claimant is currently the primary carer for the child,  BE.
    The claimant wishes to remain in the United Kingdom to look  after  her
    child and in order to do so is claiming  that  she  is  entitled  to  a
    derivative right of residence under the regulations identified above.

10. However the child has a father in the United Kingdom.  Although at  the
    moment he does not have care of the child, the prospects of him looking
    after the child to enable the child to remain in the United Kingdom had
    to be considered.

11. The prospect of the claimant leaving her child to be  looked  after  by
    LRE is specifically considered in paragraph  6  of  the  decision.  The
    claimant asserts that it would be wrong to separate mother from  child,
    a mother, who the child has been with for over 8 years. The mother  and
    child are very close and the claimant could  not  imagine  leaving  the
    child with the father.

12. When questioned about who made the major decisions in  respect  of  the
    child the claimant indicated that she did and she did not discuss  such
    with LRE. Between the period of 2009 and 2013 the claimant  had  looked
    after the child entirely by herself save for occasional help from LRE's
    mother, who lived in the locality.

13. With regard to the child BE's father [LRE] the claimant claims that the
    father could not look after the child full-time as he and  his  partner
    work; they do not have the accommodation suitable for a male and female
    child; and it is alleged that the father would not take  responsibility
    for full-time care of the child. That has to be considered in light  of
    the fact that the child was looked after allegedly for 4  weeks  during
    the summer holidays, see paragraph 5 of the decision.

The Treaties, Regulations and caselaw

14. Regulation 15A and 18A are the material regulations and in the light of
    those regulations it had to be determined whether the child BE would be
    forced or compelled to leave the UK or does  the  availability  of  the
    father in the UK, who "should" be able to look  after  the  child  mean
    that the child would not have to leave the United Kingdom and therefore
    the claimant is not entitled to a derivative right of  residence.   The
    issue being whether in practice the father can and will look after  the
    child.

15. The claimant was applying under the provisions of Regulation  15  A  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulation 2006 for a residence card on the basis
    of a derivative right of residence. Those provision stem from  Articles
    20 and 21 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the  European  Union  and
    from the case of Ruiz Zambrano v Office  National  de  l'Emploi  [2011]
    EUECJ C034/09

16. The case law examines that the rights identified are  set  out  in  the
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European  Union  Articles  20  and  21
    which provide:-

    Article 20

    1 Citizenship of the Union is hereby established. Every person  holding
    the Nationality of a Member State shall be  a  citizen  of  the  Union.
    Citizenship of the Union  shall  be  additional  to  and  not  replaced
    national citizenship.

    2 Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be  subject  to  the
    duties provided for in the Treaties. They shall have, inter alia;

         a) the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the
    Member States;

         b), c) and d) [ not relevant for the current purposes ]

     Article 21

     1 Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move  and  reside
    freely within the territory  of  the  Member  States,  subject  to  the
    limitations and conditions laid down in Treaties and  by  the  measures
    adopted to give them effect.

17. I also draw attention to the provisions of the Citizenship Directive
    Article 24
    1. Children shall have the right to such protection and care as is
    necessary for their well-being. They may express their views freely.
    Such views shall be taken into consideration on matters which concern
    them in accordance with their age and maturity.
    2. In all actions relating to children, whether taken by public
    authorities or private institutions, the child's best interests must be
    a primary consideration.
    3. Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular basis a
    personal relationship and direct contact with both his or her parents,
    unless that is contrary to his or her interests.'

18. Taking the provisions identified the Court of Justice of  the  European
    Union in Zambrano determined that an EU  child  citizen  could  not  be
    compelled to forgo the benefits of being an EU  citizen  even  if  that
    meant that a non-EU parent had to be given a right to reside to  enable
    the EU citizen child to enjoy such rights. Paragraphs 41 to 45  of  the
    decision in the Grand Chamber contain the basis for the judgement.

    41 As the Court has stated several times, citizenship of  the  European
    Union is intended to be the fundamental status of Nationals  of  Member
    States....

    42 In those circumstances, Article 20 TFEU precludes national  measures
    which have the effect of depriving citizens of the Union of the genuine
    enjoyment of the substance of their rights conferred by virtue of their
    status as citizens of the union....

    43 A refusal to grant a right of residence to a third country  national
    with dependent minor children in the member state where those  children
    are nationals and reside, and also refusal to grant  such  a  person  a
    work permit, has such effect.

    44 It must be assumed that such a refusal would  lead  to  a  situation
    where those children, citizens of the Union, would have  to  leave  the
    territory of the Union in order to accompany their parents.  Similarly,
    if a work permit were not granted to such person,  he  would  risk  not
    having sufficient resources to provide  for  himself  and  his  family,
    which would result in the children, citizens of the  Union,  having  to
    leave the territory  of  the  Union.  In  those  circumstances,  though
    citizens of the Union would, as a result  be  unable  to  exercise  the
    substance of the rights conferred on them by virtue of their status  is
    a citizen to the union.

    45 Accordingly, the answer to the question referred is that Article  20
    TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that the precludes a member  state
    from refusing a third country national upon which his  minor  children,
    who are The  European  Union  citizen's,  are  dependent,  a  right  of
    residence in a member state  of  residence  and  nationality  of  those
    children, and from refusing to  grant  a  work  permit  to  that  third
    country national, insofar as such decisions deprive those children have
    the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights attaching  to  the
    status of European Union citizen.

19. In compliance with the decision in Zambrano  Regulation  15  A  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 was included in the Regulations. The
    Regulation provides : --

       15A. Derivative right of residence

       1) a person (' P ')  who is not an exempt person  and  who  satisfies
          the criteria in paragraph (2), (3) (4A) or (5) of this  regulation
          is entitled to the  derivative  right  to  reside  in  the  United
          Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

       2) ..[not applicable]..

       3) ..[not applicable]

       4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

              a) P is the primary carer of a British Citizen (' the relevant
         British Citizen ');

              b) the relevant British Citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
         Kingdom; and

              c) the relevant British Citizen will be unable  to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom or in another EEA State if P  were  required  to
         leave.

20. The case for the SSHD is that the FTT Judges have  failed  to  consider
    the requirements of the Regulation 15A properly. The  grounds  seek  to
    rely upon the cases of Jamil Sanneh v Secretary of State for  Work  and
    Pension 2013 EWHC 793 and MA & SM (Zambrano: EU  children  outside  the
    EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 130.

21. In the case of R (on the application of Jamil  Sanneh)  v  SSWP  having
    identified  the  relevant   treaties   and   regulations   Mr   Justice
    Hickinbottom summarises the case law including the  case  of  Zambrano.
    The judge in paragraph 19 of the judgement sets out  the  following  as
    the applicable legal principle of the decision; -

       19 (ii) ....... The rights of an EU child will not be  infringed  if
       he is not  compelled  to  leave.  Therefore,  even  where  a  non-EU
       ascendant relative is compelled to leave EU territory,  the  article
       20 rights of an EU child will not be infringed if there  is  another
       ascendant relative who has the right to reside in the  EU,  and  who
       can and will in practice care for the child

22. It is clearly the SSHD's case that there is another ascendant relative,
    i.e. the father of BE, who can  and  will  look  after  the  child.  By
    comparison it is the claimant's case that the father  cannot  and  will
    not look after the child.

23. It may be somewhat speculative but if one were to ask what would happen
    if the claimant mother herself was  unable  to  look  after  the  child
    whether through illness or other cause, would the father look after the
    child then, one might expect the father if asked in such  circumstances
    to be willing to take care of the child.  He  was  capable  of  looking
    after the child for 4 weeks in the summer holiday.

24. The SSHD also places reliance on the case of  MA  &  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT  380.  The  case  has  to  be
    approached with a degree of caution as the judgement  is  concentrating
    upon circumstances where, as set out in paragraph 43,  an  EU  National
    child, from whom a non-EU National child is seeking to  derive  rights,
    is not living within the EU at the relevant date and has never lived in
    the EU.

25. The facts in MA & SM, specifically in the second appeal which  is  most
    relevant, relate to an appellant who was a Thai citizen. She married  a
    British citizen husband in 2007 and had  two  children  who  were  dual
    nationals having British nationality and Thai nationality.  The  eldest
    child of the family had been brought to  the  United  Kingdom  and  was
    receiving education here but appeared not to be making as much progress
    as expected in education. The second child had always lived in Thailand
    with the mother/appellant. In the decision in the Upper Tribunal it was
    noted that the second child will be travelling to the United Kingdom in
    any event even if the appellant mother was not granted leave to do so.

26. As the Upper Tribunal concluded that the fact that  there  was  another
    parent in the United Kingdom and that the sponsoring parent in  the  UK
    had managed to tailor his working hours to ensure that  he  could  care
    for the first child meant that he could similarly care for  the  second
    child. The mere fact that the sponsor  could  not  be  as  economically
    active as he  would  wish  because  of  his  responsibilities  for  the
    children is not sufficient to support the conclusion that the  children
    would be denied the genuine enjoyment of the EU citizenship rights  and
    that would be the case even  if  the  sponsor  were  required  to  stop
    working altogether. It was noted that the  right  of  residence  was  a
    right to reside in the territory of  the  EU  and  not  a  right  to  a
    particular quality or standard of life. In the circumstances the  Upper
    Tribunal found that there would be no breach of the Article 20  of  the
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European  Union  right  of  entry  and
    residence of the EU citizen children by refusing the appellant/mother a
    derivative right of residence card.

27. I have to note that the Upper Tribunal went on to consider  the  appeal
    on the basis of Article 8 and allowed the appeal. It may  be  that  the
    present claimant may be able to rely upon Article 8 should she make  an
    application.

28. In the present appeal there is no decision to remove in line  with  the
    case of Amirteymour & others (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  2015  UKUT
    00466. The issue of Article 8 would not arise on  a  mere  decision  to
    refuse a right of residence under the EEA Regulations.

29. To an extent the real issue is whether or not the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judges considered that issue properly and determined whether the father
    could and would look after the child.

30. In dealing with the issues  in  paragraph  15  and  16  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judges clearly state that they are  dealing  with  this  as  a
    practical matter and an effective issue rather than  on  a  theoretical
    speculative and illusory basis. Thereafter in approaching the issue  of
    the suggestion on the part of the SSHD is that if the father  can  look
    after the child for eight weeks a year during the  school  holidays  he
    could equally look after the child for 52 weeks a year. The judges come
    to the following decision " There is simply no evidence that  he  could
    or would do so. The practical and effective  arrangements  for  BE  are
    those that obtain now. That is what we can  take  his  father  to  have
    agreed to is being the limits of his ability in all the circumstances".



31. In dealing with the matter in that way the judges were  clearly  minded
    to consider whether father could and would look after the  child  above
    and beyond the present support and assistance that he has provided. The
    conclusion that they reach given the circumstances of  the  father  and
    applying a practical approach was that the father at the  moment  could
    not and would not. Any speculation as to what might happen in any other
    circumstance would be of no assistance at all. The judges were  dealing
    with the position as presented before them and they were satisfied that
    the evidence produced had shown the limits of the father's  ability  to
    look after the child.

32. Accordingly they were satisfied that BE would be compelled to leave the
    United Kingdom if the claimant was not  given  a  Derivative  Residence
    Card. The judges have properly considered the issues in  the  case  and
    have made findings of fact based on the evidence. The judges have given
    valid reasons for concluding that the child would be compelled to leave
    the EU and that have justified  the  decision  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to a Derivative Residence Card.

33. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to allow the appeal.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 Tribunal (Upper Procedure) Rules
2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed                              dated

Deputy Judge.....



