
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19347/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 19th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Yucel Eviz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Anderson of Immigration Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dickson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd August 2014.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 18th September  1985.   He
    married a British citizen on 17th July 2012.  On 13th May 2013  he  was
    granted limited leave to enter the UK as a visitor, subsequently making
    an in time application for leave to remain in the UK as a self-employed
    person under the  provisions  of  the  European  Community  Association
    Agreement (the Ankara Agreement).

 3. He was refused on 10th April  2014  and  appealed  to  the  Immigration
    Judge, who found that the appellant had not established that he  had  a
    genuine intention to set up a viable business, nor that he would  bring
    sufficient funds to establish his business and nor that  his  share  of
    the profits would be enough to support him and his family.  Neither was
    he satisfied that the appellant had the skills and abilities  necessary
    to set up the business or that it would be  successful.   There  is  no
    appeal against the judge's conclusions.

 4. The judge said that, in reliance on SS (Turkey) [2006] UKAIT 00074 that
    it was insufficient to take a human rights claim for the first time  in
    the Notice of  Appeal  and  that  he  had  no  jurisdiction  under  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to hear the  human  rights
    appeal while the Appellant was in the UK.

 5. The appellant filed grounds of appeal alleging that the judge had erred
    in law in not reaching any  decision  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 claims which were raised in the Section 120 notice.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson  on  10th  November
    2014. He noted that the application was filed out of time but  extended
    time. He said that where a claimant already has an in country right  of
    appeal  and  could  not  be  removed  until  the  appeal  was   finally
    determined, commonsense dictated that all grounds of challenge  to  the
    immigration decision should be considered at the one appeal in  country
    (SA (Bangladesh) [2005] UKAIT 00178).  Since the appellant  had  an  in
    country right of appeal under the Immigration Rules human rights should
    have been considered at the same time.

 7. In her reply dated 17th November 2014 the respondent acknowledged  that
    the judge may have erred in not considering  Article  8  but  submitted
    that it could not be argued that the appellant met the requirements  of
    the Article 8 Rules and any right-minded  Tribunal  properly  directing
    itself would have dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

Submissions

 8. Miss Anderson submitted  that  this  was  not  an  appeal  which  would
    inevitably have failed.  Although the appellant would be able  to  make
    an out of country application to join  his  spouse,  since  she  was  a
    student, they would not meet the maintenance requirements.  She is  due
    to graduate in June 2015 but would then need to find work  and  provide
    six months' worth of payslips.  His wife suffers from anxiety and would
    not be able to cope with living in Turkey, but in any event  could  not
    join him in Turkey because she had family responsibilities  here.   Her
    mother suffers from various disabilities which restrict her ability  to
    care for her children who have been at risk of going into  care.   They
    have a good relationship with the appellant, and he also helps care for
    her elderly  grandmother.  The  sponsor's  father  suffers  from  sight
    problems and would become more isolated if she had to leave.

 9. A letter from the Leeds Family Intervention Service dated 27th November
    2014  records  that  the  younger  children  were  placed  on  a  child
    protection plan due to concerns of neglect but were removed in May 2014
    partly due to significant improvements to the home conditions  and  the
    support given by the sponsor and indeed the appellant.   If  they  were
    not available the two older children, now aged 11 and 9, would need  to
    take on further responsibilities.

10. So far  as  the  requirements  of  paragraph  117  are  concerned,  the
    appellant speaks good English and would be able to obtain work.  He has
    never been in breach of the Immigration Rules.

11. Mrs Petterson submitted that it was open to  the  sponsor  to  exercise
    choices, either to move to Turkey or to support the appellant in making
    the appropriate application.  She observed that the couple had  married
    in Turkey two and a half years ago and had not yet done so.

Findings and Conclusions

12. None of the facts are in dispute and accordingly Miss Anderson did  not
    seek to call oral evidence. It is  clear  that  the  wider  family  are
    highly supportive of the appellant since a number attended the hearing.

13. Section 117B of the 2014 Immigration Act sets out the  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases.  It is in the public  interest,
    and in particular in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the UK,
    that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK are  able  to  speak
    English and that  they  are  financially  independent.   Little  weight
    should be given to a private life  or  a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner which is established by a person at a time when  the
    person is in the UK unlawfully, and to a private life established by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

14. Removal would be an  interference  with  the  appellant's  private  and
    family life but would be lawful since he has no other basis of stay  in
    the UK. The issue is whether it would be proportionate.

15. The starting point is the Immigration Rules.  The  judge's  conclusions
    that the appellant does not meet the requirements for leave  to  remain
    under the Ankara agreement are not challenged. Nor is it argued that he
    is able to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE since he  has  not
    been in the UK for the requisite period of time, and he cannot  benefit
    from EX.1 of Appendix FM because he arrived in the UK as a visitor.

16. The appellant clearly enjoys a family life with his wife, but there  is
    insufficient evidence to establish a family  life  with  the  sponsor's
    wider family members.   The  witness  statements  refer  to  them  both
    assisting, but it is clear from the Family Support Service letter that,
    unsurprisingly, it is the sponsor who provides the principal support to
    her family.  There would undoubtedly be a detriment to the children  if
    she left the UK but it is much less clear what effect there would be if
    the appellant had to return to Turkey in order to make  an  application
    for entry clearance.

17. Moreover, according to the determination of  the  original  judge,  the
    sponsor's evidence was that when the couple married they  had  no  idea
    where they intended to live. She also temporarily suspended her studies
    whilst living in Turkey, which  is  not  consistent  with  the  present
    evidence that the couple are a vital part of the care required for  the
    sponsor's family.

18. In any event, whilst the relationships form a part of his private life,
    private life developed at a time when immigration status is precarious,
    such as here, must be given little weight.

19. It is clear that the appellant speaks  some  English  and  communicates
    well  with  the  sponsor's  family,  although   no   English   language
    qualifications have been produced.

20. So far as financial independence is concerned, the  appellant  was  not
    able to establish that he met the requirements of the Rules in  respect
    of setting up a  viable  business.   He  has  never  worked  in  Turkey
    although he has done some work in the Emirates.  Although he says  that
    he would be able to  obtain  work  in  the  UK,  possibly  through  the
    sponsor's family, there is absolutely no evidence of that and his  work
    record to date does not establish that his intentions  are  necessarily
    realistic.

21. There is no issue in relation to the appellant's relationship with  his
    wife, his qualifying partner, which did not develop at a time  when  he
    was in the UK unlawfully. Indeed he has never been here unlawfully.  On
    the other hand the sponsor is due to  graduate  in  six  months'  time.
    There is no reason why she should not obtain employment and would be in
    a position to support the proper application for entry clearance, which
    is yet to be made.  Taking into account all of the above considerations
    that is the proportionate course for the appellant to take.

Notice of Decision

22. The original judge erred in law insofar as Article 8 is concerned.  The
    following  decision  is  made.   The  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and with respect to Article 8.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

