

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/19043/2014
                                                             & IA/19048/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14th April 2015                   |On 17th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                          MR AMANVIR SINGH BAL (1)
                           MS MALA KAUR OBHOO (2)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by Uzma Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The first appellant is a citizen of India born on 4th April 1986. The
       second appellant is his spouse, and is a citizen of India born on 3rd
       December 1985.  The  first  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  on  28th
       September 2004 with leave to enter as a student. He had leave in this
       capacity and then as a Tier 4  student  migrant  until  31st  October
       2009. He then obtained leave as a  Tier  1  post-study  work  migrant
       until 30th October 2011. He then  had  leave  as  a  Tier  1  general
       migrant until 21st February 2014. On 17th February  2014  he  applied
       for further leave as a Tier 1 general migrant. The  second  appellant
       had leave as the first appellant's dependent from 17th September 2013
       to 21st February 2014, and  applied  to  extend  her  leave  in  this
       capacity on 17th February 2014..

    2. These applications were refused  on  3rd  April  2014  as  the  first
       appellant failed to get sufficient points under  Appendix  A  as  the
       respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  first  appellant's  claimed
       earnings from Amanvir Singh Bal T/A Bal Catering and Consultancy were
       from genuine employment. The first appellant raised a new  basis  for
       allowing the appeal under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules  in
       his s.120 notice and in his grounds of appeal, and also  argued  that
       the appeals should be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

    3. The appeals against  the  decisions  to  refuse  further  leave  were
       dismissed on all grounds by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  CJ  Woolley
       after a hearing on the 26th November 2014.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Shimmin on 23rd February 2015 on the basis that it was arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in dealing with  paragraph  322
       of his own volition when it had not been raised by the  Secretary  of
       State in the refusal letter and because the burden of  proof  was  on
       the Secretary of State and insufficient evidence had been provided to
       satisfy this burden of proof. There  were  also  arguments  that  the
       findings under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules  were  unsafe;
       that factual errors were made in  the  determination;  and  that  the
       Article 8 ECHR determination was not properly made  with  respect  to
       proportionality.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    6. In summary Mr Karim argued that it had been wrong for  Judge  Woolley
       to have raised paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules of  his  own
       volition when it had not been raised by the Secretary of State.  This
       was procedurally unfair as the appellant did not know the case he had
       to meet until the  matter  was  raised  in  the  submissions  of  the
       presenting officer as the first appellant was not on  notice  he  was
       alleged to have committed a deception. The First-tier judge  had  not
       clarified the issue at the start of the  hearing  and  there  was  no
       cross-examination from the  presenting  officer  on  the  issue.  The
       respondent refusing the first appellant's application as not credible
       was not the same thing as finding he had  used  deception.  Paragraph
       322(2) and the general grounds of refusal had not been applied to the
       first appellant  in  the  refusal  of  his  Tier  1  general  migrant
       application: if it had been relevant it would  have  been  raised  at
       this stage by the Secretary of State. Judge Woolley had also  shifted
       the burden of proof onto  the  first  appellant.  Further  there  was
       insufficiently cogent evidence that supported a finding of deception.
       According  to  Home  Office  Guidance  on  paragraph  322(2)  of  the
       Immigration Rules a document needed to be independently  verified  as
       false and this had not been done.  The respondent had stated  in  the
       refusal letter that full verification checks had not been carried out
       on the documents.

    7. He also argued that Judge Woolley could  not  properly  find  that  a
       grant of indefinite leave to remain was undesirable  under  paragraph
       276B(ii) of the Immigration Rules as the  alleged  deception  by  the
       first appellant had not been  proven  with  objective  evidence.  The
       burden of proof to show undesirability was on the respondent not  the
       appellant as the public interest was a matter for the respondent  and
       there was no conclusive objective evidence, such as  police  evidence
       or a conviction, to show that the first  appellant  was  undesirable.
       There was no criminal activity by this appellant, and further  weight
       had wrongly been attached to the  way  in  which  the  appellant  had
       accumulated ten years leave to  remain  in  the  UK.  The  delays  in
       allocating a hearing date were not of his doing.

    8. Mr Karim indicated that  the  evidence  which  would  have  been  put
       forward if the appellants had been on notice of issues  of  deception
       would have been oral explanations by the first appellant.

    9. The determination under Article 8 ECHR was flawed as  no  weight  was
       attached to the appellant having been in  the  UK  lawfully  for  ten
       years. This is clearly relevant, see Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72  at
       paragraph 56. Also there was reference to entry clearance and  family
       life, which were clearly not relevant to this  appellant's  case,  at
       paragraph 41 of the determination which showed that Judge Woolley had
       not understood the case before him. The determination of the  Article
       8 issue was also infected by the findings on deception  which  should
       not have been made.

   10. At the hearing Mr Karim accepted that small factual errors argued  in
       the grounds of appeal did not amount to errors of law.

   11. Ms Isherwood argued that the genuineness and credibility of the  Tier
       1 application and thus the first appellant's self-employed  work  had
       clearly been put in issue in the refusal of that  application.  There
       were many references to doubts over genuineness of earnings  and  the
       authenticity of the application in  the  refusal  letter.  The  first
       appellant had not addressed this in any way or sought to  argue  that
       it was wrong in his  appeal  either  in  his  statement  or  by  oral
       evidence given in examination in chief. Further if paragraphs 12  and
       13 of the determination are examined then it can  be  seen  that  the
       Home Office Presenting Officer had made submissions on the  basis  of
       the lack of credibility of the  Tier  1  application  being  material
       relevant to a finding of deception, and there is no evidence that the
       representative  of  the  appellants  indicated  that  he  wanted   an
       adjournment or to adduce further evidence  when  it  must  have  been
       explicitly clear (at this point if not  before)  that  these  matters
       were in issue in the appeal.  It was therefore open to the First-tier
       Tribunal to bring this material into the consideration as to  whether
       the first appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  276B  of  the
       Immigration Rules, which specifically required the Judge to  look  at
       whether the appellant fell to be refused under the general grounds of
       refusal and at whether his presence was  undesirable.  Judge  Woolley
       had  used  the  evidence  before   him   appropriately,   and   given
       explanations as to why he had  done  so  in  his  determination.  The
       appeals were also appropriately dismissed under Article  8  ECHR.  It
       was accepted that the appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules
       and the extent of the appellants' private life had been considered at
       paragraph 41 of the determination.

   12. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I did not  find
       that Judge Woolley had erred in law but that I would set out my  full
       reasons in writing.

Conclusions

   13. I do not find that the first appellant can properly argue  that  they
       were taken by surprise that Judge Woolley took the issue of his  lack
       of credibility in  connection  with  the  first  appellant's  Tier  1
       application into consideration in determination of the appeal,  which
       arose out of the refusal of that application.

   14. The nature of  the  concerns  of  the  respondent  were  set  out  in
       considerable detail in the refusal letter, which details the  reasons
       why the respondent did not find the first appellant was authentically
       or  credibly  self-employed  as  he  had  claimed  in  his   Tier   1
       application, and that the respondent was  concerned  that  money  was
       simply being circulated to  given  the  impression  of  self-employed
       earnings. Judge Woolley did not take into consideration any potential
       issues of deception or undesirability which were not set out in  that
       letter. I find therefore that there is no  procedural  unfairness  in
       the  sense  that  all  factual  matters  used  by  Judge  Woolley  in
       dismissing the appeal had been put to the appellants via the  refusal
       letter and relied upon documents submitted by the first appellant.

   15. Further paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules is put forward by the
       first appellant in the one stop notice and thus prior to the  hearing
       by the first appellant who was fully aware that  the  respondent  had
       not considered the matter and thus that each aspect of the Rule would
       have to be shown by him as met before the Tribunal. He was  therefore
       fully aware that he would have to show both that he did not  fall  to
       be refused under the general grounds  of  refusal  (which  of  course
       include paragraph 322(2) of the  Immigration  Rules  regarding  false
       representations made in a previous application)  in  accordance  with
       paragraph 276B(iii) and that it would not be undesirable for  him  to
       be granted indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 276B(ii) of the
       Immigration Rules.

   16. Further, as Ms Isherwood has argued, there was no application to  the
       First-tier Tribunal by the appellant's representative to  recall  the
       first appellant to give  further  oral  evidence  responding  to  the
       allegations of deception made by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
       in  his  submissions  which  would  have   been   expected   if   the
       representative had felt taken by surprise that the  issue  was  being
       raised and there was further evidence that he would  have  wanted  to
       present  and rely upon in submissions for the appellants.

   17. I find that Judge Woolley dealt with whether the first appellant fell
       to be refused in accordance with paragraph 322(2) of the  Immigration
       Rules in a precise  and  careful  fashion.  He  directed  himself  in
       accordance with AA (Nigeria) v SSH [2010] EWCA Civ 773. He looked  at
       the evidence submitted by the appellant in relation  to  his  Tier  1
       application in detail at paragraphs 19 to 23 of the determination. It
       is not argued that he has made factual mistakes in his  analysis.  He
       concludes that "Bal Catering was a fiction designed to assist in  the
       Tier One application", and thus that the false  representations  made
       were dishonest and thus could form  the  basis  of  a  refusal  under
       paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules (see paragraphs 27  and  28
       of the determination). He is careful to note however that  a  refusal
       under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules is not mandatory, and
       thus to look for reasons as to why this normal course should  not  be
       followed. He finds however that the first appellant has not  put  any
       forward as he had not addressed the reasons for refusal letter in any
       way.

   18. I accept that Judge Woolley did not explicitly  direct  himself  that
       the burden of proof was on the Secretary of  State  in  this  matter,
       however he has looked at the evidence before him and  has  not  based
       his findings on empty allegations by the respondent but  on  specific
       matters such as payments in and out of the HSBC bank account for  the
       first appellant which lead him to the conclusion of deception.  Judge
       Woolley did not find that any document was a forgery,  but  that  the
       appellant had put together the documentation so  as  to  deliberately
       deceive the respondent. In  such  circumstances  there  would  be  no
       relevance of any document verification reports.  I  find  that  Judge
       Woolley followed the guidance in NA & Others  (Cambridge  College  of
       Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031 in subjecting the  evidence  to
       critical, anxious and heightened scrutiny, and therefore applied  the
       appropriate standard and burden of proof.

   19.  I also find that Judge Woolley has  properly  applied  the  test  at
       paragraph 276B(ii) of the Immigration Rules. At paragraph 29  of  his
       determination he sets out reasons why it would be undesirable in  the
       public interest to  allow  the  appellant  to  stay.  He  finds  that
       fabricating earnings for a Tier 1 application and thus attempting  to
       deceive the Home Office are  matters  that  reflected  on  the  first
       appellant's character and conduct and thus made  it  undesirable  for
       him to be granted indefinite leave  to  remain.  I  find  that  Judge
       Woolley has approached this issue appropriately and made  a  decision
       based on clear findings of fact drawn from the evidence  before  him,
       and which showed that the appellant fell to be refused in this way.

   20. It follows that I find that Judge Woolley  did  not  err  in  law  in
       dismissing the appeal under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

   21. I am also satisfied that he dealt with the  appeal  under  Article  8
       ECHR lawfully. At paragraph 33, when  dealing  with  Article  8  ECHR
       under the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE, it is clear that  he
       has in mind the precise dates on which the appellants entered the  UK
       and thus their period of lawful residence. In looking at  the  matter
       outside of the Immigration Rules he notes that they have private life
       in the UK at paragraph 37  which  includes  some  work  and  a  house
       purchased with  a  mortgage.  His  consideration  of  proportionality
       properly places the false representations made by the first appellant
       along with their ability to reintegrate in  India  into  the  balance
       against the appellants.

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

    2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeals  is
       upheld.



Signed:     Date: 14th April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley




Fee Award   Note: this is not part of the determination.

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed:     Date: 14th April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

