
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19957/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 24 November 2016                 |On: 25 November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 Memory [P]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 18 April 1977. She  has
    been given permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mailer, dismissing her appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in  February  2000  on  a  six
    month visit visa and was subsequently granted further periods of  leave
    as a student nurse until 31 December 2007. Thereafter she  remained  in
    the UK without leave and on 15 February 2011 was  issued  with  removal
    papers as an overstayer.  She then  made  an  asylum  claim  which  was
    refused in March 2011 and unsuccessfully  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in May 2011.

 3. On 30 March 2015 the appellant applied for further leave to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of family and private life established in  the  UK.
    Her application was based  in  particular  upon  her  'shared  parental
    responsibility' with her sister in respect of the care of her  sister's
    two daughters, both of whom were British citizens. It was claimed  that
    the children had no contact with their father  and  that  their  mother
    worked away from home for extended  periods  in  Guernsey,  as  an  NHS
    midwife, so that parental responsibility fell  upon  the  appellant  to
    look after the children, the youngest of whom, [S],  was  HIV  positive
    and required extra care and assistance with her medication and hospital
    appointments.

 4. The appellant's application was refused by the  respondent  on  13  May
    2015, on the grounds that she did not meet  the  relevant  criteria  in
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules as a partner or parent,  that  she
    did not meet the criteria under paragraph 276ADE(1)  on  the  basis  of
    private  life  and  that  there  were  no   exceptional   circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision. In her grounds of appeal,
    she relied on Article 8 outside the immigration rules,  asserting  that
    the respondent had failed  to  consider  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and had failed  to  conclude  that
    there  were  exceptional  circumstances  existing  in  this  case,   in
    particular in relation to [S] and the extra care that was  afforded  to
    her by the appellant as a result of her medical condition.

 6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 26 April 2016
    in the First-tier Tribunal. Judge Mailer heard from the  appellant  and
    her sister. By that time the appellant's nieces were aged  14  and  15.
    The judge recorded the evidence given by the appellant and  her  sister
    that she had been caring for [S] since 2003 and had developed a  strong
    bond with  the  children,  sharing  parental  responsibility  with  her
    sister. When her sister started working in Guernsey  in  November  2014
    she became [S]'s main carer, taking her to  hospital  appointments  and
    administering her medication. It was claimed that  the  same  level  of
    care and affection could not be met through the intervention of  social
    services. The appellant claimed that she had no family or  social  ties
    to Zimbabwe. The judge found that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    criteria in Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE(1).  He  found  that  the
    respondent had  properly  concluded  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances  outside  the  immigration  rules  and   he   accordingly
    dismissed the appeal.

 7. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    on the grounds that the judge  had  failed  to  conduct  an  Article  8
    assessment outside the immigration rules and  had  failed  to  consider
    section 55 of the 2009 Act with respect to the children.

 8. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently
    granted on 28 October 2016 on all grounds.

 9. At the hearing before us, Mr Khan relied and expanded upon the  grounds
    of appeal, submitting that the judge had failed to conduct a two  stage
    assessment  of  Article  8  as   set   out   in   Bossade   (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  415,  failing  to  consider
    Article 8 outside  the  immigration  rules  and  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He referred to  [120]  of
    the judge's decision where the judge said that a separate consideration
    of Article 8 outside the rules was not  necessary.  Mr  Khan  submitted
    that if he had given consideration to  paragraph  117B  he  would  have
    considered that there was a parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child. Furthermore, there was no consideration given to section 55  and
    the best interests of the children, contrary to the principles set  out
    in JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517.

10. Mr Armstrong submitted that there was no parental relationship for  the
    purposes of section 117B and that the judge had clearly considered  the
    children's  best  interests  and  all  relevant  matters  outside   the
    immigration rules.

Consideration and Findings

11. Whilst the judge's decision could perhaps have  been  better  expressed
    and formulated, we do not agree with the appellant's  submissions  that
    it was flawed  in  any  material  respect.  We  admit  to  having  some
    difficulty in understanding what the judge meant at [120] but we do not
    agree with the assertion made in the grounds and Mr  Khan's  submission
    that that was a reflection or indication of a failure by the  judge  to
    consider Article 8 outside the immigration rules. We consider that what
    he meant by his comments at [119] and [120] was that the appeal had not
    raised any new matters that had not  already  been  considered  by  the
    respondent. However we do not consider that to be an indication that he
    simply endorsed the respondent's decision without  undertaking  a  full
    assessment of all relevant matters himself or that he did not  consider
    Article 8 in its widest context. On the contrary, it is plain that  the
    judge embarked upon a full and detailed assessment of  the  appellant's
    circumstances and those of her sister  and  her  sister's  children  in
    considering Article 8 outside the rules and indeed devoted most of  his
    findings and reasoning to the consideration of Article  8  outside  the
    rules. He made express reference to  his  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the rules at [111] where he then went on to consider the public
    interest factors in section 117B of the 2002  Act.  Mr  Khan  submitted
    that the judge failed to take into account  paragraph  117B(6)  on  the
    basis of the appellant's relationship to qualifying children, but we do
    not agree that  that  relationship  can  be  described  as  a  parental
    relationship for the purposes of that provision, however close the bond
    may be between them.

12. We also find no merit in the assertion in the grounds  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the best interests  of  the  children,  when  it  is
    clear, once again, that his decision was for the most part devoted to a
    careful consideration of the children's interests, albeit  without  any
    specific citation of section 55, but expressly referring at [91] to the
    welfare  of  the  children  as  an  integral  part  of  the  Article  8
    assessment. The judge took full  account  of  the  role  the  appellant
    played in the children's lives and the care she provided, in particular
    to [S], and  gave  careful  consideration  to  the  medical  and  other
    evidence produced in that regard. There was nothing  inconsistent  with
    the decision in JO in the judge's approach to the children's  interests
    and indeed that case made it clear that each case had to be decided  on
    its facts  and  on  the  information  and  evidence  available  in  the
    application. Whilst the respondent made no  express  reference  to  the
    children's best interests in the refusal decision, that  was  no  doubt
    because the application had not been specifically put on that basis and
    did not involve a parental relationship to  children,  whereas  by  the
    time of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the issue had evolved
    and, as a result, was a matter considered and addressed by the judge at
    length.

13. Mr Khan submitted that the judge erred in  law  by  making  no  express
    finding on where the best interests of the children lay, but we do  not
    consider that it was necessary for him  to  do  so  in  this  case,  in
    particular since the children had a  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with their own mother in this country. The judge's  findings  at  [114]
    and [115] indicate, in any event, that he accepted that it was  in  the
    best interests of the children for the appellant to remain  with  them,
    particularly in the short term. However he went on to provide  numerous
    reasons for concluding that that did not in itself justify a  grant  of
    leave outside the rules, including the fact that the children were  now
    capable of attending to their day to day needs  themselves,  that  they
    could make their  own  way  to  and  from  school,  that  [S]  was  now
    sufficiently responsible to take her medication without being prompted,
    that a carer could be employed to assist  the  appellant's  sister  and
    that there was no evidence to suggest that her sister could not  obtain
    more flexibility in her employment in terms of her hours or location so
    as to be more available to her children as she was previously.

14. Having carefully considered and weighed up all the various factors, and
    taken full account of  the  needs  of  the  children  as  well  as  the
    appellant and her sister,  the  judge  concluded  that  they  were  not
    sufficient to warrant a grant of  leave  outside  the  rules  on  wider
    Article 8 grounds. That was a conclusion fully open to the judge on the
    evidence available to him. We do not consider that the judge  erred  in
    his approach to Article 8. His  approach  was  one  that  was  entirely
    consistent with relevant jurisprudence and included a full and detailed
    consideration of all relevant matters. We find no errors of law in  his
    decision.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside. We do not  set
    aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
