
                                    [pic]
The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19413/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th January 2017                     |On 23rd January 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                   Mrs VANESSA DE OLIVEIRA ARAUJO FIGUEIRA
                        (NO ANONYITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

An Anonymity Direction is NOT made. There has been no request and  there  is
no apparent need.
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. F. Aziz of Oakmont Law, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.  Although it is the respondent who is appealing in these proceedings,
   for convenience, I will continue to refer to the parties as in the First-
   tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a national of Brazil born on 15th June 2010. She was
   issued with a residence card confirming her right to reside in the United
   Kingdom by virtue of Treaty rights. The card was valid from 12 November
   2010 until 12 November 2015. It was issued on the basis of she was the
   spouse of a European national, Mr. Alves Genoese, who was exercising
   Treaty rights.

3. This residence card was revoked under regulation 20(2) of the
   Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006(hereinafter referred to 2006
   regulations) because she and her husband divorced as evidenced by a
   certificate dated 24 July 2013. This meant she was no longer his family
   member.

4. On 12 January 2005 she applied for a further residence card. This was on
   the basis she was the unmarried partner of an Italian national, Mr Luca
   Laudani, who was exercising Treaty rights. As an unmarried partner he was
   classified as an extended family member under regulation 8 rather than an
   immediate family member.

5. Her application was refused on 11 May 2015. Under regulation 8(5) it was
   necessary for her to demonstrate that she was in a durable relationship
   with her partner: this is generally taken to mean two years cohabitation.
   The respondent found that there were insufficient proofs to demonstrate
   the durable relationship.

The First tier Tribunal.

6. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy on 10
   February 2016 at Manchester. The judge was satisfied they had been
   cohabiting from 2011 and that Mr Laudani was exercising Treaty rights.
   The judge then found she was entitled to a residence card and allowed the
   appeal.

The Upper Tribunal.

7. The respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   because the issue of a residence card to an extended family member is at
   the discretion of the respondent pursuant to regulation 17(4) of the 2006
   regulations. Consequently, the finding of  a durable relationship was not
   conclusive and meant the appeal could only be allowed to the extent of
   the matter being remitted to the respondent for the exercise of her
   discretion (see Ihemedu (OFM's -meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.

8. Both representatives were in agreement that it was a material error of
   the law for the judge to allow the appeal outright. Instead, the judge
   should have referred the matter back to the respondent for the exercise
   of her discretion.

9. However, a more fundamental issue has following of the decision in Sala
   EFM's : Rights of Appeal [2016 ]UKUT 00411. That decision does not change
   the law but is declaratory as to its meaning. It concluded there was no
   right of appeal in respect of a refusal to issue a residence card to an
   extended family member under the 2006 regulations. The focus in that
   appeal was the definition of an "EEA decision" in regulation 2(1)(b).
   This refers to a person's entitlement (my emphasis) to documentation. The
   point was that whilst there is an entitlement for an immediate family
   member the issue of documentation in relation to an extended family
   members is discretionary. Therefore, there was no entitlement as of
   right.

10. Paragraph 79 of that decision states:

      ... We agree that a third country national who has been issued with a
      residence card on the basis he is an EFM because of a `durable
      relationship 'should be "treated as a family member "by virtue of
      regulation 7(3)... Any appeal against the decision made under the EEA
      regulations 2006 by such a person, including a refusal to renew the
      card would on the face of it, fall within regulation 26 (1) and (3) as
      an appeal by "a person ...[who] claims to be a family member ".

11. Mr. Aziz argued that the appellant could benefit from this because she
   previously had been issued with a residence card. The difficulty with
   this argument, as Mr Harrison pointed out, is that the residence card
   related to her marriage to her former husband.

12. If the wording of regulation 7 (3) is considered then Mr Harrison's
   proposition is correct. It provides

      ... A person who is an extended family member and has been issued with
      ... a residence card shall be treated as a family member of the
      relevant EEA national ...

       Notably, the reference is to `the relevant EEA national '.


13. In the application under appeal there was no earlier issue of a
   residence card in relation to the relevant EEA national, namely , Mr Luca
   Laudani.The Sala decision appears to be behind the amendment to the
   definition of "EEA decision" in the Immigration European Economic Area
   Regulations 2016 which specifically says in the new regulation (2)(1)
   that an EEA decision does not include a decision to refuse to issue a
   document under regulation 18(4), namely, the issue of a residence card to
   an extended family member. Whilst these regulations do not come into
   force until 1 February 2017 they  implement what has been established by
   Sala. The appellant's representative provided me with the respondent's
   guidance to its staff dated September 2016 which at page 17 states there
   is no right of appeal in respect of a refusal for an extended family
   member.

14. It is my conclusion therefore that this appellant has no right of
   appeal stop consequently, the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
   determine the matter.




Decision

The decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Foudy allowing the appeal was a
material error of law and cannot stand. This is because there was no
jurisdiction to hear the appeal. I set the decision aside and substitute a
decision that there was no valid appeal before the first-tier Tribunal


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


