
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19517/2014
     IA/19522/2014
     IA/19518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd September 2014                          |On 15th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     SNP
                                     KTP
                                    SSKP
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Wells, Legal Representative from M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Bircher
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 23rd June 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of India.  The first and second  Appellants
    are married to each other  and  they  are  the  parents  of  the  third
    Appellant.

 3. The first Appellant arrived in the UK on 9th April 2001 on a  visitor's
    visa and has overstayed.  The  second  Appellant  joined  him  on  10th
    February 2004, also on a six month visit  visa,  and  also  overstayed.
    Their child was born in the UK on 4th  April 2010.

 4. On 26th May 2011 they submitted an application  for  further  leave  to
    remain on the  basis of their private and family life in  the  UK.   It
    was refused on 26th July 2011 with no right of appeal.

 5. On 18th May 2012 there was a request to review  the  original  decision
    and to grant an in-country right of appeal.  No action was taken by the
    Respondent in response to that letter.

 6. A year later,  in  May  2013,  there  was  a  further  request  for  an
    appealable removal decision and, following JR  proceedings  which  were
    settled by consent, the decision letter which was the  subject  of  the
    appeal before the judge was issued in April 2014.

 7. It was submitted before the judge  that  the  applications  and  appeal
    ought to be considered under the pre-9th July 2012 legal framework.

 8. The judge wrote as follows:

         "I disagree for the following reasons. The  Appellants  made  their
         applications  for  leave  to  remain  on  26th  May  2011  and  the
         Respondent refused the applications on 26th July 2011.  The refusal
         decision was therefore decided before 9th  July  2012  and  in  any
         event with no in-country right of appeal  the  Appellants'  appeals
         are reconsidered in the context of the new Immigration Rules."

 9. In the grounds of appeal it was argued that the judge had erred in  her
    approach to the post July 2012 Rules, and had failed to properly  carry
    out the  full  five  stage  proportionality  assessment  under  Razgar.
    Moreover  she  had  erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellants  had  not
    demonstrated that they had lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of
    thirteen years because their original passports had not been submitted.
    There was no evidence before the Tribunal or from the  Respondent  that
    the Appellants were not in the UK for the time claimed.

10. On 14th August 2014 the Respondent served a reply submitting  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge directed herself  appropriately  and  carried
    out a careful analysis of the factual issues as required.

Submissions

11. Mr Wells submitted that the judge had started her  considerations  from
    the wrong starting  point  which  had  infected  her  consideration  of
    Article 8 under Razgar which she had failed to mention.  She  may  have
    come to a different decision had she approached  the  issue  correctly.
    He asked that the appeal be remitted  for  a  de  novo  hearing  before
    another Immigration Judge at Newport  where  the  Appellants  were  now
    living.

12. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the error was immaterial because the facts
    of the Appellants' immigration history were not challenged.  The  judge
    had dealt with all of the relevant factors and had considered the  best
    interests of the child who would be removed with his parents.

Findings and Conclusions

13. With respect to the application of the new Rules in  applications  made
    before 9 July 2012, in Edgehill and Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  402
    the Court of Appeal considered the arguments in relation to whether the
    Respondent is entitled to rely upon the  post  9  July  2012  Rules  in
    rejecting applications made before that date.

14. The transitional provisions expressly state that  any  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain before 9 July but not yet decided  "will  be
    decided in accordance with the Rules in force on 8th July 2012".

15. The Court said:

         "The Immigration Rules need to be understood not only by specialist
         immigration Counsel but also by ordinary people who read the  Rules
         and try to abide  by  them.   I  do  not  think  that  Mr  Bourne's
         interpretation of  the  transitional  provisions  accord  with  the
         interpretation which ordinary reader  would  place  upon  them.  To
         adopt the language of Lord Brown in Mahad 'the natural and ordinary
         meaning of the words, recognising that they are statements  of  the
         Secretary of State's administrative policy' is that  the  Secretary
         of State will not place reliance on the new Rules when dealing with
         applications made before 9th July 2012."

16. The Secretary of State was not entitled in her decision letter  of  9th
    April 2014 to rely on the new Rules and the  Immigration  Judge  should
    have so found.  It also  follows  that  she  herself  should  not  have
    founded  her  decision  upon  whether  the  Appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the new Rules. To that extent she was in error.

17. The judge accepted that the couple had established private life in  the
    UK, unsurprisingly, and that removal would interfere with their private
    lives with consequences such as to engage the operation of  Article  8.
    She then addressed herself to  the  third  and  fourth  of  the  Razgar
    questions,  albeit  not  referring  to  it  directly,    and   properly
    considered all of the relevant evidence before coming to a decision  on
    the proportionality of removal.

18. She stated that the main thrust of the case  was  that  the  first  and
    second Appellants maintained that they had lived in the UK for thirteen
    years and ten years unlawfully.  The first Appellant arrived in the  UK
    as a visitor and overstayed unlawfully for a  very  lengthy  period  of
    time.  Moreover his wife, who must have lied to an Immigration  Officer
    when applying for her own visit visa, did exactly the  same  since  she
    could not have been unaware of the fact that her husband had no  status
    here. She rejected the explanation that no  application  to  regularise
    was made until 2011 because they did not know how to go  about  it,  as
    she was entitled to do, especially since their close friend had already
    engaged with the authorities years before  2011  in  order  to  achieve
    status for himself and his family.  She concluded  that  the  birth  of
    their son the year before made them realise that  they  would  need  to
    register him in school which  would  require  an  engagement  with  the
    authorities.

19. She  properly  observed  that  the  first  and  second  Appellants  had
    developed their private lives in the UK at a  time  when  they  had  no
    legitimate expectation that they would be allowed to remain here.

20. She considered their financial  situation  and  was  satisfied  that  a
    family friend, DP, a British citizen, was able and willing to offer the
    first Appellant a job here. She accepted that the family  were  holding
    their own financially with the help of their friend and that they  were
    meeting their expenses but there was very little  documentary  evidence
    which shed light upon the quality of their private life.

21. She also considered the best interests of  the  third  Appellant  as  a
    primary consideration.  It was in his best interests to live with  both
    his parents and the family would all be removed together.  The evidence
    was that the couple maintain contact with  their  relatives  in  India,
    speaking to them about once a month by telephone.   She  recorded  that
    the third Appellant had not yet started mainstream school and would  be
    returning with both of his parents to his country of nationality and to
    relatives in India with whom he would be afforded  the  opportunity  to
    get to know in a close  and  meaningful  way.   There  were  no  health
    issues.

22. Her conclusion that removal would not be disproportionate was  properly
    reasoned and open to her.

23. She was also fully entitled to find that, because  the  passports  were
    missing,  she  could  not  be  satisfied  that  they  had  demonstrated
    continuous residence.

24. Accordingly, since the  judge  did  in  fact  conduct  a  detailed  and
    thoughtful analysis of all relevant Article  8  issues,  her  error  in
    relation to the application of the Immigration Rules post July 2012  is
    immaterial.



Decision

25. The original judge did not err  in  law.   Her  decision  stands.   The
    Appellants' appeals are dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

