
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/19043/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                          |On 22 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                              baba aye emmanuel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe of Counsel instructed by Roli
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal comes back before me to remake the decision in  the  appeal
    further to the error of law hearing held on 14 November 2017.  On  that
    occasion I found that there was an error of  law  in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge White promulgated on  27  January  2016  such
    that the decision in the appeal required to be remade.

2.   One issue in particular had detained  the  Tribunal  and  that  was  in
    respect of the  applicability  of  a  policy  in  respect  of  bereaved
    partners.  Since the last hearing  the  Appellant,  who  is  now  in  a
    marital relationship with an EEA national,  has  been  granted  an  EEA
    residence card.  The card was issued to him on 11 December 2017.   This
    circumstance, however, does not dispose of the  issues  in  the  appeal
    which are based on a human rights claim and human rights grounds.

3.   I am grateful for the helpful approach taken  by  both  representatives
    before me this morning which allows me to dispose  of  this  matter  in
    relatively brief terms.

4.   On the previous occasion I made reference to a  policy  in  respect  of
    bereaved partners that  had  been  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  in
    judicial review proceedings: see paragraph 9  of  the  'error  of  law'
    decision.  However, notwithstanding that the contents of the policy had
    been set out in the judicial review papers, no relevant policy document
    had been produced by  either  party  and  so  it  was  not  immediately
    apparent what was the source of the policy as set out in  the  judicial
    review pleadings.  Mr Bramble has now produced a copy of  the  relevant
    policy document.  He now acknowledges on behalf of the Respondent  that
    the terms of the policy appropriately applied  appear  to  benefit  the
    Appellant.

5.   Ms Anifowoshe on behalf of the Appellant essentially  submits  that  in
    those circumstances any proportionality issue should have been resolved
    in the Appellant's favour - and indeed should now be so  resolved.   Mr
    Bramble does not resist that submission.

6.   In the circumstances I conclude that the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    did not accord  adequate  respect  for  the  Appellant's  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom given that he had been in the  United
    Kingdom for a number of years and indeed,  most  recently,  with  leave
    pursuant to his successful appeal  before  Immigration  Judge  Tootell.
    The Appellant has clearly established sufficient private life to  allow
    him to clear the threshold of the first two Razgar questions; there  is
    no particular issue between the parties in respect  of  the  third  and
    fourth Razgar questions; and, as I  have  alluded,  it  appears  to  be
    common ground that the proportionality argument raised under the  fifth
    Razgar question should be resolved in the Appellant's favour  in  light
    of the policy applicable to his circumstances.  It  is  unnecessary  to
    descend to an analysis of the public interest considerations: these are
    essentially subsumed by the Respondent's policy document,  and  in  any
    event the Respondent does not suggest that they are such  as  to  weigh
    against the Appellant. For these reasons the appeal is now  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

7.   The appeal is allowed.

8.   No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make a  whole  fee
award.


Signed:                                 Date: 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)

