
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19104/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th September 2017                    |On 19th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr Ejaz hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pooler, promulgated on 15th June 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 14th June 2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  13th
    May 1987.  He appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated
    30th April 2015 refusing to issue the Appellant with a  residence  card
    as a confirmation of his right of residence as a family  member  of  an
    EEA national.

The Determination

 3. The judge's determination shows that the Appellant  did  not  give  any
    evidence at the hearing and was not subjected to any  cross-examination
    (paragraph 8).  It also shows that the Appellant's  representative  did
    not seek to persuade the  judge  that  he  should  consider  the  issue
    whether the Appellant's wife was a qualified person at any  time  other
    than the date of the  hearing.   The  judge  also  noted  that  it  was
    "acknowledged" that the Appellant's bundle of documents did not include
    any evidence of the employment of the Appellant's wife later  than  May
    2015".  On that basis, the judge held that he could  not  be  satisfied
    "that the wife continued  to  be  a  qualified  person  and  thus  that
    requirement of the Regulations was  not  met"  (paragraph  8).   Whilst
    recognising that there was much unsatisfactory evidence on the part  of
    the Respondent Secretary of State, including the lack of  an  interview
    record, (paragraph 18) and whilst concluding in the Appellant's  favour
    that he had not engaged in a marriage of convenience with his Bulgarian
    wife, (paragraph 23), the judge nevertheless concluded that the  appeal
    on EEA grounds had to be dismissed.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. On 6th March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the application by
    the Appellant to appeal, whereupon the Grounds of Appeal  were  renewed
    to the Upper Tribunal, with it being argued that this was not an out of
    time application because there had been an error on  the  part  of  the
    Respondent in serving the decision at the right address,  whereupon  on
    11th July 2017, UTJ Pitt, purported to grant permission to appeal.  The
    Rules 24 response that then followed that grant of permission, which is
    dated 4th August 2017, makes it clear that  Judge  Pitt's  reasons  for
    granting permission were  anything  but  that,  given  that,  what  she
    intended to do was to actually refuse to grant permission.  Judge  Pitt
    gave her reasons on the substantive issue (at paragraph 4) and  stated,
    "in  any  event,  the  application  would  have  been   refused.    The
    substantive grounds challenged the finding at [9]  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the spouse had worked from 2015  onwards.   None  of  the
    materials on which the Appellant seeks to  rely  show  otherwise.   The
    Grounds of Appeal cannot show legal error in the decision of  the  FTTJ
    therefore."  (See paragraph 5 of the Rule 24 response).





The Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me the Appellant was not represented, and did not
    appear, and there was no explanation given for either.   The Respondent
    was represented by Mr  A  McVeety,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, and he submitted that it was plain from the  decision  of  UTJ
    Pitt on 11th July 2017, that what she purported to do was  to  actually
    refuse permission to appeal.  There were two  issues.   The  first  was
    whether the decision of Judge Pooler  had  been  sent  to  the  correct
    address.  The judge had stated (at paragraph 3) that, "contrary to  the
    suggestion in the grounds, the Tribunal file shows that  on  15th  June
    2016 the decision of FTTJ Pooler was sent to the Appellant at  his  new
    address of 4 Western Lane".  UTJ Pitt then goes on to say (at paragraph
    4) that,

         "In any event,  the  application  would  have  been  refused.   The
         substantive grounds challenging the finding [at 9] that  there  was
         no evidence that the spouse had worked from 2015 onwards.  None  of
         the materials on which the Appellant seeks to rely show otherwise".



No Error of Law

 6. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007 such that I should set aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  It is plain that what UTJ Pitt purported to state  was  that
    "the application is  refused",  rather  than  "granted"  and  the  four
    reasoned paragraphs in her decision suggests exactly that.   This  kind
    of error, though regrettable, is not  infrequent,  and  it  in  no  way
    suggests that permission to appeal had been granted.  In any event, the
    Appellant has not appeared and has not been represented  and  there  is
    still nothing  before  this  Tribunal  to  show  that  the  Appellant's
    Bulgarian wife did indeed work later  than  May  2015.   That  was  the
    position before Judge  Pooler  and  it  is  the  position  before  this
    Tribunal.   The appeal did not succeed, and it could not have succeeded
    and it would not succeed before this Tribunal.  There  has  simply  not
    been an error of law at any stage.

Notice of Decision

 7. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th September 2017

