
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19325/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14 January 2015                            |On 22 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                         MR BHAUMIK BHARATBHAI DESAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidhyadharan, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the refusal of  leave
    to remain as a student on the ground inter alia that he had relied on a
    forged bank statement, and thus his application fell for refusal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make
    an anonymity direction, and I do not consider that such a direction  is
    warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In support of the  forgery  allegation,  the  respondent  relied  on  a
    document verification report.  This  specified  the  type  of  document
    which had been submitted  for  verification:  a  bank  certificate  and
    statements from Punjab National Bank.  It also specified  the  relevant
    branch location: GT Road, Surat.  It further specified the account name
    and the account number.  However the details of who had been  contacted
    at the bank were redacted.  Details of the verifier were also redacted.
     The contact history was stated to be as follows:

         Called the number and spoke to [redacted] - assistant  manager  who
         confirmed that the account number is incorrect - he confirmed  that
         also Punjab National Banks have a sixteen digit account number.

         [Redacted] confirmed that the document submitted by  the  applicant
         is not genuine.

 3. In the notice of appeal,  the  appellant's  solicitors,  Maalik  &  Co,
    pleaded that the Secretary of State did not  discharge  the  burden  of
    proving that the appellant had supplied a false document in relation to
    his application.  In a subsequent letter addressed to the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officers' Unit dated 10th June 2014, they said their  client
    noted the contents of the document verification report.  He  had  since
    spoken to his father, who had informed him that  the  bank  had  stated
    that there had not been any contact or query from the Home Office about
    the account.  In the light of this, they requested that the  allegation
    against the appellant was supported either by a letter from the bank or
    an e-mail from the bank or  a  recording  of  the  purported  telephone
    conversation, as their client denied the allegation against him.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant's appeal came before Judge L K Gibbs  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross in the First-tier Tribunal on 1 October 2014.  Both parties  were
    legally represented.  Mr Mahol, the appellant's  legal  representative,
    relied upon an extensive skeleton  argument.   He  submitted  that  the
    respondent had  not  offered  any  proper  or  conclusive  evidence  to
    substantiate the allegation  of  forgery.   On  balance,  the  evidence
    contained in the DVR was inconclusive, and so the  respondent  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof.

 5. In his oral evidence, the  appellant  confirmed  that  his  father  had
    contacted the bank in India who had said  they  had  not  received  any
    enquiry relating to his bank documents.  In cross-examination,  he  was
    asked why he had not obtained or provided any written evidence from the
    bank with regard to his bank statements.  The appellant said he did not
    realise he had to do this as previously his bank  statements  had  been
    accepted by the Home Office.  He complained the  Home  Office  had  not
    said who they contacted or what telephone number had been used.

 6. In her subsequent  decision,  Judge  Gibbs  held  at  paragraph  12  as
    follows:

         The respondent has relied  on  a  telephone  conversation  with  an
         assistant  manager  from  Punjab   National   Bank.    Although   I
         acknowledge Mr Mahol's point (that the name and telephone number of
         the person [contacted is not given] and nor is there  a  record  of
         the telephone  conversation)  I  am  not  satisfied  that  in  this
         particular appeal this undermines the weight that I  can  place  on
         the DVR.  I say this because the information given does not pertain
         only to the appellant's bank account but  is  a  general  statement
         that all Punjab National Bank accounts have 16 digits.   Given  the
         general nature of this information I find that it is less  relevant
         as to which branch was contacted or the specific name of the person
         as the information provided is general to all accounts.

 7. The judge went on to find in  paragraph  13  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof which then  shifted  to  the  appellant.
    She found the appellant  had  not  produced  any  evidence  at  all  to
    contradict the allegation made by the  respondent.   Although  he  said
    that his father was able to contact the bank, she would expect  written
    evidence/support from the bank.   She  found  that  the  lack  of  such
    obviously required evidence,  from  a  legally  represented  appellant,
    caused her to  have  significant  doubts  about  his  credibility.   In
    paragraph 14, the judge ruled that she was satisfied on the balance  of
    probabilities that the respondent had discharged the burden  of  proof.
    The appellant had provided false documents in his application  and  the
    refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was correct. The  judge  considered  an
    alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR, and dismissed it.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 8. On 25 November 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G White  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the judge is in error in finding  that  such  a
         document is sufficient to discharge the burden of proof resting  on
         the respondent (see the discussion in Shen (Paper appeals,  proving
         dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00326 (IAC)), particularly when  the  judge
         is critical of the appellant's failure to obtain evidence  directly
         from the bank.

The Rule 24 Response

 9. On 8 December 2014  John  Parkinson  of  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team
    settled a Rule 24 response on behalf of  the  respondent  opposing  the
    appeal.  He submitted the grounds were  a  lengthy  series  of  counter
    assertions and amounted to nothing more than a continuing disagreement.
     There were no cogent arguments  advanced  to  deal  with  the  central
    issues.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.  I was satisfied that proper notice of the  hearing  had
    been served on the appellant's nominated legal representatives,  Maalik
    & Co, and on the appellant himself at the address for him given in  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The notice
    had been issued on 10 December 2014, and sent to both the appellant and
    his representatives by first class post.  As there was no  satisfactory
    explanation  for  the  absence  of  representation  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, I proceeded to hear the appeal in the  appellant's  absence.
    Ms Vidhyadharan submitted that the appeal should be dismissed  for  the
    reasons given in the Rule 24 response.

Discussion

11.  Shen  is  concerned  with  paper  appeals,  where  considerations   of
    procedural fairness in the context of an allegation of  dishonesty  are
    potentially more acute.   In  this  case,  the  appellant  was  legally
    represented throughout the appeal process, and he  was  given  an  oral
    hearing of his appeal, as he had requested.

12. Judge Gibbs rightly recognised that the burden of proof  lay  with  the
    respondent to provide sufficiently cogent evidence of forgery  such  as
    to discharge the burden of proof on the balance of  probabilities.   If
    the evidence was too weak or equivocal to sustain a prima  facie  case,
    then the allegation of forgery fell away.  Conversely, if the  evidence
    was sufficient to sustain a prima facie  case,  the  evidential  burden
    shifted to the appellant to bring forward evidence  in  rebuttal  which
    negated or at least undermined the prima facie case.

13. I find that the judge has given adequate reasons in paragraph 12 of his
    decision as to why she has found that the respondent has discharged the
    burden of proof; and that in consequence the appellant has  a  case  to
    answer.  Whether or not all Punjab National Bank accounts have  sixteen
    digits is a question which  is  objectively  verifiable  with  relative
    ease.  As indicated by the judge, the truth of this proposition is  not
    dependent on which  branch  was  contacted,  or  the  identity  of  the
    assistant manager of the branch  who  allegedly  gave  this  particular
    piece of information.  If it is true  that  all  Punjab  National  Bank
    accounts have sixteen digits, the bank documentation relied upon by the
    appellant is clearly fraudulent.  For the purported account number  has
    only six digits.

14. Since the appellant and his legal representatives were in possession of
    the DVR well in advance of the appeal hearing, there was plenty of time
    to gather evidence to rebut the proposition that all bank accounts  for
    the Punjab National Bank have sixteen digits.

15. So there was no procedural unfairness in the  judge  finding  that  the
    appellant had not brought forward any credible evidence  to  rebut  the
    central piece of evidence which underpinned the forgery allegation, and
    which (if accepted)  was  completely  determinative  of  the  issue  of
    forgery.

16. In short, the judge reached a conclusion that was  reasonably  open  to
    her on the evidence and which was adequately reasoned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 22 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

