
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19033/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 May 2015                       |On 4 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                       and Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD AIZAZ HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr O Skinner, (of Counsel) instructed by ATM Law
Respondent:   Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. The origins of this appeal lie in a decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (the
    "Secretary of State"), dated 11 April 2014, whereby the application  of
    the Appellant, a national of Pakistan  aged  31  years,  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  was
    refused.  The essence of the refusal decision was that the  Appellant's
    business proposal was not viable and credible.  His ensuing  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was dismissed.

 2. At the conclusion of the hearing, in an ex tempore judgment, we allowed
    the appeal on the following grounds.  First, the Secretary  of  State's
    decision making process was unfair.   It  was  not  disputed  that  the
    principles  of  procedural  fairness  were  of  application   in   this
    particular context.  These have been expounded by this Tribunal in Miah
    (Interviewer's Comments: Disclosure: Fairness) [2014]  UKUT  515  (IAC)
    and, more recently, in R  (on  the  application  of  Mushtaq)  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer of Islamabad, Pakistan (ECO  -  procedural  fairness)
    IJR [2015] UKUT 00224 (IAC).  It was common case  that,  in  submitting
    his application, the  Appellant  had  provided  all  of  the  documents
    required by the Immigration Rules.  Furthermore, it was  agreed  by  Mr
    Richards,  representing  the  Respondent,  that  the  purpose  of   the
    interview was to probe and air the  Respondent's  doubts  and  concerns
    relating to the viability of the proposed business enterprise.  In  the
    decision letter,  the  Respondent  highlighted  a  series  of  specific
    reservations  relating  to  the  credibility  and  viability   of   the
    Appellant's business proposal.  It was not disputed that these had  not
    been ventilated during the pre-decision interview.  The conclusion that
    the decision making process was procedurally unfair follows inexorably.
     In turn, the decision of the FtT cannot be sustained, in view  of  the
    Judge's failure to conclude accordingly.

 3. Our second ground for allowing the appeal is that  the  Judge,  in  our
    estimation,  misunderstood  the  relevance  of  section  85A   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  the  context  of  the
    appeal.   Section 85A had no application whatsoever to the pre-decision
    interview.  We make clear our  view  that  there  would  have  been  no
    prohibition on the Appellant producing relevant documents  in  response
    to specific doubts and  concerns  raised  by  the  interviewer,  to  be
    contrasted with documents which must compulsorily be provided with  the
    application proper and documents which are excluded from the  ambit  of
    the FtT hearing by statutory prohibition.  Furthermore, section 85A had
    no application to the appeal, since the Appellant was  not  seeking  to
    adduce new evidence at that stage.  The Judge's approach to this  issue
    cannot be sustained.

 4. Thirdly, and finally, we accede to the free standing ground  of  appeal
    that the determination of the FtT is vitiated on the further ground  of
    the intrusion  of  certain  immaterial  considerations.   These  relate
    essentially to the question of whether the Appellant had submitted  the
    requisite documents with his application.  As noted above, this is  not
    in dispute.  Furthermore, we agree with the criticism  that  the  Judge
    wrongly took into account the date upon which the Appellant's  business
    had begun (to his detriment) and incorrectly construed the purpose  for
    which certain contracts were included in the Appellant's appeal bundle.
     These  discrete  errors  may  also  be  characterised  as  aspects  of
    procedural unfairness, illustrating the intrinsic versatility  of  some
    of the well established public law  misdemeanours.  Finally,  we  agree
    with the contention that  the  Judge  wrongly  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's lack of previous employment activity, having regard to  the
    prohibitions and limitations enshrined in the Immigration Rules.



DECISION

 5. We decide thus:

     a) the determination of the FtT is set aside;

     b) the appeal is allowed; and

     c) it will now be incumbent on the Secretary of State to make a  fresh
        decision, duly guided and enlightened by this judgment.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                           Date: 14 May 2015
