
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 November 2014                           |On 18 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ALEXANDER OBIRI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to Mr Obiri  as  the  appellant
    and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana and he  was  born  on  20  November
    1987.

 3. The appeal is against the decision promulgated on 21 July 2014 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Woolley  which  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 30 April 2014 to refuse to issue  a  residence
    card as confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom (UK) as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

 4. The main dispute here was whether the appellant and a  French  national
    had entered into a valid marriage conducted by proxy in Ghana.

 5. The respondent's grounds of appeal  maintained  that  he  had  not  and
    relied on the cases of Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24
    as confirmed by TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT  316
    (IAC) as it had not been shown that the marriage would be recognised as
    valid by the French authorities. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in
    failing to have regard to those authorities.

 6. In response to the respondent's arguments, the appellant told  me  that
    he had spoken to the French Embassy who had told him that the  marriage
    was valid. He  did  not  have  anything  in  writing  from  the  French
    authorities or anything else to show that proxy marriages were accepted
    there. That evidence was not before the First-tier Tribunal, however.

 7. It was my view that the First-tier Tribunal did not have proper  regard
    to the reported cases of Kareem and TA and materially erred where there
    was no evidence of whether  the  marriage  was  accepted  as  valid  in
    France. I set aside the decision for that reason and proceeded  to  re-
    make the appeal.

 8. It was also my judgement that the appeal as regards the marriage had to
    fail where the only evidence of how the marriage  would  be  viewed  in
    France was given by the appellant before me and  related  to  telephone
    call made at some point to the French authorities in the UK. There  was
    no indication of exactly when the telephone call took  place,  who  was
    spoken to, their status as  regards  being  able  to  give  a  view  on
    validity of marriages  in  France  and  so  on.  I  did  not  find  the
    appellant's oral evidence  about  the  telephone  call  to  be  at  all
    sufficient to show that the proxy marriage would be regarded as  lawful
    in France.

 9. I also did not find that the evidence was sufficient to show  that  the
    appellant had a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights. At the hearing he told me that his  partner  was  abroad
    visiting her mother and had not returned as her mother  was  unwell.  I
    had no written evidence to show that the wife was abroad  or  that  her
    mother was unwell. Where this appeal could only  but  be  an  important
    matter to a partner it was  my  view  that  some  documentary  evidence
    showing why the partner could not attend could be expected. Where there
    was nothing it was not my view  that,  without  her  being  present  to
    confirm and submit to cross-examination, I could place much  weight  on
    the written evidence of the appellant's partner that was before me.

10. I also did not find the limited documentary  evidence  of  cohabitation
    was sufficient to show that the couple had lived together  as  partners
    or been in a durable relationship for 2 years. The  evidence  comprised
    gas bills, council tax bills, pay slips  for  the  partner  and  health
    insurance documents for the appellant. In my judgement these  documents
    showed, at best, that the appellant and the French national  shared  an
    address.  It  was  not  sufficient  to  show  a  durable  relationship,
    particularly so where the partner had not  attended  the  hearing,  the
    explanation for that being insufficient.

11. I also find that the refusal of a residence card is not a  matter  that
    can be said to engage Article 8 of the ECHR and the appellant  has  not
    made an application on that basis in  the  required  manner  so  I  say
    nothing further in that regard.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside. I re-make the appeal as refused on all grounds.



Signed:                                 Date 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt








