
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19101/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 15th December 2014                |On 17th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between
                            Rael Guerrero Miranda
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Komusac, instructed by Igor & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Mexico born on  19th  November  1977  and
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  10th  May
    2013 to refuse to issue a permanent residence card to him as  a  family
    member of his spouse Ariadne Citlali Morillas Pantoja  who  is  a  dual
    Spanish and United Kingdom citizen.

 2. In a determination dated 7th July 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal
    Vaudin d'Imecourt refused the appellant's appeal as he stated that  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (EEA Regulations)
    did not apply as the sponsor was a UK citizen.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The application for permission to appeal made by the appellant asserted
    that the Judge did not refer to any EEA law nor any  EU  Directive  nor
    any UK Regulations to show that the appellant's wife could not exercise
    her Treaty rights in the UK. The spouse had been residing for  most  of
    her life in Spain or in Mexico prior  to  her  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Further the judge did not make any  finding  of  fact  as  to
    whether the spouse was moving within the EU as enunciated in  Metock  &
    Othrs [2008] ECR I-6241.  The ECHR decision in McCarthy v SSHD  Case  C
    434/09 was not applicable as the dual national had always lived in  the
    UK. Permission to appeal was granted.

 4. At the hearing before Mr Melvin drew my attention to the Rule 24  reply
    from the Secretary of State which conceded that EEA law  had  not  been
    considered. Mr Komusac pointed out that the  appellant  had  previously
    been issued with a residence card in November 2007 and the  appellant's
    spouse produced her Spanish identity card.  Indeed she had  only  lived
    in the UK for one month following her birth in 1981.   The  appellant's
    wife arrived in the UK in 2006 whilst her spouse arrived in 2007.

Conclusions

 5. McCarthy referred to a case whereby the EU/British  citizen  had  never
    moved to or within the territory of the European Union.  This  was  not
    the case here as  set  out  above.  Further  the  respondent  issued  a
    residence card under the EEA regulations in 2007.   Although  the  Rule
    24 reply referred to Regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations,  and  thereby
    the restrictions on a British citizen being considered an EEA national,
      Schedule 3 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  (Amendment)
    (No 2) Regulations 2013 which came into  force  on  1st  January  2014,
    provides  transitional  provisions  such  that  the   substitution   of
    Regulation 9 by the revised Regulations has no effect where the  family
    member of a British citizen  held  a  valid  registration  certificate,
    residence card or EEA family permit issued under the 2006  Regulations.
    It would appear that that is the case here depending on the findings in
    relation to the spouse as indicated.

 6. I find that Article 3(1) of the EU Directive 2004/38/EC  regarding  the
    right of citizens within the EU to move freely is applicable and should
    have been considered.  It was incumbent upon the Judge to make findings
    as to whether the spouse moved within the European  Union  whereby  she
    became a qualified person under Regulation 6  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006.  Whether the appellant has resided in the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of five years in accordance  with  the  Regulations  depends  on
    findings in respect of the spouse and this fact  finding  exercise  was
    not undertaken.

 7. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed      Date 15th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



Directions

All further evidence relied upon should be served on  the  other  party  and
the  First  Tier  Tribunal  no  later  than  fourteen  days  prior  to   the
substantive hearing.

