
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19738/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 December 2014                   |On 28 May 2015                       |


                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. Mr JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD FAISAL SHAIKH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was granted entry clearance on 10 May 2006 as a  student.
    There followed successive decisions to  vary  and  thereby  extend  his
    leave to remain. The most recent grant of leave to remain was  made  to
    him as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant on 6 September 2009,  expiring  on  8
    August 2015. That period of leave was however subsequently curtailed so
    that it would expire instead on 11 February 2014 in the  light  of  the
    material change in the Appellant's circumstances,  that  followed  from
    his redundancy.

 2. The Appellant applied on 10 February 2014 for a  further  variation  of
    his leave to remain, relying upon his "private life" in  the  UK.  That
    application was refused on  10  April  2014,  and  in  consequence  the
    Respondent decided to remove him to Pakistan by reference to s47 of the
    2006 Act.

 3. The Appellant lodged  an  appeal  against  both  of  those  immigration
    decisions. His appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  on
    Article 8 grounds by First Tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie  in  a  decision
    that was promulgated on 26 August 2014. Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted to the  Appellant  by  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Taylor on 6 October 2014 on the basis it was arguable the FtT had
    failed to give adequate reasons for its decision.

 4. Thus the matter came before us on 4 December  2014.  Since  the  issues
    that were raised by this appeal were closely comparable to those raised
    by another appeal before us which was the subject of special directions
    and programming, we heard argument upon this appeal, but  reserved  our
    judgement, in order to await the outcome  of  that  other  appeal.  The
    parties were told that  further  directions  would  be  given  for  the
    hearing of this appeal, only if we considered it appropriate to do  so.
    Both parties were given liberty to apply for  further  directions,  but
    neither has done so.

 5. The decision of the Tribunal in AA/05666/2014 has now been promulgated,
    and reported as AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 00260. We do not consider
    it necessary to hear further  argument  from  either  party  upon  this
    appeal in the light of that decision,  and  thus  we  now  deliver  our
    reserved judgement.

The challenge

 6. Although the grant of permission is  framed  in  terms  of  the  narrow
    challenge that  the  FtT  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  its
    decision, it was common ground before us  that  the  reasons  given  do
    allow the reader to understand why that decision was reached. We accept
    that the real challenge that is advanced in the grounds is the argument
    that the FtT failed to properly undertake the  assessment  required  by
    ss117A-D of the 2002 Act, and that had this been  done  it  would  have
    been bound to find on the facts of this case that there  were  positive
    factors that weighed significantly in the Appellant's interests to  the
    extent that the decision to remove him was  disproportionate.  Thus  it
    was argued before us that the FtT was bound to give positive weight  to
    the following;

          i) The Appellant's ability to speak English,

         ii) The Appellant's ability to support himself through  the  offer
             of employment that he held from Rolls  Royce  plc,  which  was
             itself a post that appeared on the Tier 2 Shortage  Occupation
             List, and

        iii) The fact that the Appellant  had  formed  the  "private  life"
             relied upon at a time when he had been  lawfully  resident  in
             the UK.



The decision of the FtT

 7. The FtT noted that the Appellant did not qualify under the  Immigration
    Rules for the variation of leave that he sought. There is no  challenge
    to that aspect of the decision. In considering paragraph 276ADE the FtT
    noted that the Appellant would  have  no  difficulty  in  returning  to
    Pakistan where his parents and family lived. The Appellant simply saw a
    greater advantage if he were able to pursue his career in the UK.

 8. The  FtT  went  on  to  consider  the  Article  8  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, as it was invited to  do.  It  was  noted  that  the
    decision to curtail the grant of leave to remain from 8 August 2015  so
    that it expired on 11 February 2014 was not the decision that was under
    appeal. The decision to curtail the Appellant's leave had been taken by
    the Respondent as a result of the decision by the Appellant's  employer
    to terminate his employment as a result of a decision to make his  post
    redundant. The FtT noted that  whilst  the  Appellant  had  brought  an
    appeal against his employer's decision to the Employment Tribunal,  the
    hearing of that appeal had been concluded, and all that was awaited was
    the receipt of the reserved decision[1].  This  was  not  a  case  that
    raised the need for a claimant to  remain  in  the  UK  to  participate
    properly and effectively in litigation with a  reasonable  prospect  of
    success. It was also not  argued  that  his  presence  in  the  UK  was
    required in order to receive that decision, or to  undertake  any  step
    required to complete the  appeal  process  before  that  Tribunal.  The
    appeal was instead advanced on the basis that it  was  disproportionate
    to remove the Appellant to Pakistan, when he had an offer of employment
    in the UK from Rolls Royce plc.

 9. We are satisfied that on the evidence before the  FtT,  ultimately  the
    Appellant's case was no more than that he should  be  relieved  of  the
    obligation to return to his family in his country of origin,  and  make
    application for entry clearance to the UK as a work  permit  holder  in
    the usual way, although he could do so in safety.

10. Put shortly the FtT was not satisfied that the existence of  the  offer
    of employment relied upon was sufficient reason to justify any grant of
    leave outwith the Immigration Rules,  or,  to  render  the  Appellant's
    removal from the UK  disproportionate.  In  the  course  of  the  brief
    reasons that were given reference was made to s117B of the 2002 Act and
    to the public interest in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control.

Decision

11. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 introduced into the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a new Part 5A, headed "Article 8 of the
    ECHR: Public Interest Considerations". These new provisions are set out
    in sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act, which were brought into  effect  on
    28 July 2014  pursuant  to  Article  3  of  The  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No 1, Transitory and Saving Provisions) Order 2014.  This
    appeal came before the  FtT  on  15  August  2014,  and  thus  the  new
    provisions applied to it.

12. Whilst the FtT did make express reference to s117B in the course of its
    decision, it did not set out in full therein the provisions  of  either
    s117A, or, s117B. That was not however, of  itself,  an  error  of  law
    sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and  remade.  It  is
    not necessary for the FtT to set out in full in each of  its  decisions
    each of the statutory provisions that it seeks to apply to the evidence
    placed before it in the course of an appeal. What is  required  of  the
    FtT is no more, and no less, than that its decision should  demonstrate
    that the relevant statutory provisions have been  taken  into  account,
    and that they have been applied to the facts of the particular  appeal;
    AJ (India) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 at [43]. That is  a  requirement
    of substance, rather than of form.

13. In our judgement s117A(2), required the FtT  (in  particular)  to  have
    regard to the considerations listed in s117B. The FtT had no discretion
    to leave one of those considerations out of  account,  if  that  was  a
    consideration raised by the evidence  before  it.  In  principle  there
    could, however, be no error of law in the failure by the  FtT  to  have
    regard to one of those considerations if the evidence did not raise it.
    The recurring truism that every  appeal  is  case  sensitive  and  fact
    specific applies.

14. In this case there was no period during which the  Appellant  had  been
    living in the UK unlawfully, so there was  no  obligation  to  consider
    s117B(4). His immigration status, although lawful, has always been  the
    result  of  grants  of  limited  periods  of  leave  and   was,   thus,
    "precarious" at all times.

15. Upon their proper construction neither s117B(2) nor s117B(3) grants any
    form of immigration status to an  individual  who  does  not  otherwise
    qualify  for  that  status  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  There  was
    therefore no error of law in  the  FtT's  approach  to  the  issues  of
    English language fluency and financial independence in the  context  of
    the consideration of s117B. The  Appellant  could  obtain  no  positive
    right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B(2)  or  s117B(3),
    whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or the strength  of  his
    financial resources. The evidence bearing on these issues  was  plainly
    referred to in the decision and we are satisfied that it was taken into
    account, even if ultimately little weight was given to it.

16. Whilst the guidance to be found upon the proper approach to a  "private
    life" case in the decisions of Patel [2013] UKSC 72, and  Nasim  [2014]
    UKUT 25 was not referred to expressly  by  the  FtT,  the  decision  is
    consistent with it. The appeal did not rely upon the core  concepts  of
    moral and physical integrity. Even if the offer of well paid employment
    that the Appellant wished to be able to accept was one that appeared at
    any relevant date upon the Shortage Occupation List, it  could  not  be
    argued that this was sufficient of itself  to  render  disproportionate
    the decision to remove. This was,  rather,  simply  another  factor  to
    which the judicial review standard of rational weight applied.

17. Accordingly the criticisms advanced of the decision in the grounds  are
    revealed upon examination to be no more than a  disagreement  with  the
    FtT's assessment of the proportionality of  the  removal  decision.  No
    material error of law has been  demonstrated.  We  dismiss  the  appeal
    accordingly.

Conclusions

    In our judgement, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission  to
    appeal was granted, there is no merit in the grounds advanced.  It  was
    open to the Judge to reach the conclusion that he did, for the  reasons
    that he gave. Those  reasons  were  adequate  and  disclosed  that  the
    relevant statutory provisions had  been  considered  and  applied.  The
    complaints made about the Judge's approach reveal no material error  of
    law that requires his decision promulgated on 26 August 2014  to be set
    aside and remade. It is accordingly affirmed.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 18 May 2015

-----------------------
[1] The appeal was not argued before us on the basis that the Appellant had
been successful in his appeal to the Employment Tribunal. It was accepted
that he had not, and that the Employment Tribunal had held that his was a
genuine redundancy, and that he was fairly selected for it, without any
discrimination.

