
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 19724 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2014                            |On 24 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               Harinder Kumar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   IMMIGRATION OFFICER HEATHROW TERMINAL 4
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awani, Solicitor instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen  of  India  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on 6 June 2013.  The appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It comes before me because it was found to be arguably  wrong
    in law.

 2. I have considerable sympathy for the Immigration Officer and the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge because this is a case arises from that  potentially
    confusing  part  of  the  rules  concerning  the   cancellation   and/or
    curtailment of leave and reasons for such a decision such as a change of
    circumstance or behaving in a way not in accordance with the  permission
    granted.  I am being deliberately vague  because  I  want  to  save  the
    precision for when I come to deal with the case actually before me.

 3. I have been shown a decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department and Daniel Owusu Boahen  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    555 where Thomas LJ, as he then  was,  said,  having  commented  on  the
    clarity of the judgment of Lord Justice Pitchford  in  explaining  these
    Rules, that:

           "The complexity of the task that he has undertaken demonstrates,
           if further demonstration was needed, the urgent need to simplify
           and write in plain English the relevant  Regulations  and  other
           provisions.  It cannot be right that officials of the UK  Border
           Agency are required to try and  understand  and  make  sense  of
           provisions that are so arcane and poorly drafted."

 4. Although there have been many changes to the rules since Thomas LJ  made
    this criticism in 2010 but this part of the rule is no clearer. They are
    confusing.   Experienced   lawyers   approach   them   carefully    and,
    understandably, Immigration Officers can easily err.

 5. I am entirely satisfied having considered the material  before  me  that
    this is a case where the Immigration Officer did make a mistake and  has
    made a decision under the wrong Rule so that the decision is unlawful.

 6. As indicated the decision was made on 6 June  2013  but  the  notice  of
    refusal of leave to enter does not identify the Rules  under  which  the
    decision is made.  The complaint  is  clear  enough.   It  is  that  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom as a student  under  the  provisions
    relating to a Tier 4 (General) Student, and at the material time had  no
    right to work but, it is said, did work.  Previously he had leave  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student and did have a right to work but the rules  had
    changed when the Immigration Officer made his decision. At that time the
    appellant did not have permission to work. It is  also  plain  that  the
    Immigration Officer decided that the appellant had been working and that
    conclusion was supported by a particular interpretation of an  interview
    he conducted with the appellant.

 7. It was not until the form IS125 was prepared on 1 October 2013 that  the
    regulatory basis of the decision was identified properly,  or  at  least
    with some clarity.  According to that form the decision on 6  June  2013
    was under paragraph 321A(2) of HC 395.  That is a provision that applies
    where false representations were made or false  documents  submitted  or
    material facts not disclosed that justified the cancellation at port  of
    existing leave.

 8. Having heard Mr Awani I am quite satisfied that the Rule identified  was
    not the Rule that gave effect to the analysis of the case  conducted  by
    the Immigration Officer.  This is not a case  where  leave  should  have
    been cancelled because the appellant's purpose in being  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that is to study, had not altered.  Cancellation  was  not  the
    appropriate response to  the  finding  that  the  appellant  had  worked
    without permission. If some steps were necessary  in  the  mind  of  the
    Immigration Officer he should have looked not at Rule 321A but Rule  322
    which is appropriate where leave should be  curtailed.   Curtailment  is
    the proper remedy where, as is alleged here, the person has  been  doing
    something during the currency of his leave that he was forbidden to do.

 9. This distinction is not pedantry.  As Mr Awani  pointed  out  correctly,
    the application of the two Rules  is  quite  different.   Paragraph  322
    contains a discretion.  It provides  circumstances  where  leave  should
    normally be refused. The  discretion  under  the  rules  must  first  be
    exercised by the Immigration Officer that takes the decision.

10. It follows that by applying the wrong Rule the Immigration  Officer  has
    conducted a wrong function because he has not exercised  any  discretion
    that should be exercised under the appropriate rule.  I do not  want  to
    give any indication  at  all  about  how  the  discretion  ought  to  be
    exercised. I simply make the point that this case is about a man who has
    not necessary been earning very much money at all if what he  was  doing
    is the kind of work that is of concern to the Immigration  Officer.   In
    other words I am satisfied there is  something  about  which  discretion
    ought to be exercised, although I emphasise I am giving no indication of
    what I think the outcome ought to be.  That is not a matter for me.

11. It follows that the decision has been made for an entirely wrong  reason
    and I am satisfied the decision is wrong in law and should  go  back  to
    the Immigration Officer to be decided in accordance with relevant Rules.

12. There have been  many  criticisms  made  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  These include an incorrect  direction  about  the  burden  of
    proof, a failure to consider human rights and also a failure to  explain
    the decision properly.  I do not make any findings on  these  criticisms
    because they are irrelevant to my primary  finding  which  is  that  the
    decision is unlawful because the wrong Rule has been applied.

13. It follows therefore that I have set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and I allow the appeal to the extent that I  declare  that
    no lawful decision has been made and that  it  is  for  the  Immigration
    Officer to make a proper decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 January 2014                |








