
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2016                |On 29th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             MISS ADJOA WILLIAMS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  6th  November  1984.   The
    Appellant applied on 24th October 2014 for a permanent  residence  card
    as a confirmation of right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 12th May 2015.   The
    Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Immigration Judge Hussain
    hearing the appeal on the papers at Birmingham on 29th April 2016.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 29th April 2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was refused under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 2. On 6th May 2016 the Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   Those  grounds  recited  that  on  16th  March   2016   the
    Appellant's newly instructed legal representatives, GK Associates,  had
    sent an email to Customer Services at the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    informing them that they wished for the paper appeal to be vacated  and
    for the matter to proceed by way  of  oral  hearing.   A  response  was
    received by them but on 29th April 2016  the  Notice  of  Decision  was
    received indicating that the decision had been made on the papers.

 3. It is against that basis that the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 4. On 1st November 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response noted that subject  to  any
    evidential issues relating to the paragraphs involved  or  relating  to
    payment of fees the Secretary of State did not oppose  the  Appellant's
    application for permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal  to  find
    an error of law on the basis of either  procedural  impropriety  or  in
    fairness and thereafter to remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to  decide  whether
    or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant does not attend.  The Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Armstrong.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Armstrong reiterates the content of the Rule 24 reply.  He indicates
    that in the circumstances the Secretary of State accedes to the  wishes
    of the Appellant and is prepared for the court providing  it  finds  an
    error of law to remit the matter back to the First-tier.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 9. In this matter the Appellant originally asked that her appeal be  dealt
    with by way of an oral hearing.  That was reiterated on more  than  one
    occasion by her  instructed  solicitors.   Despite  that  the  Tribunal
    Service brought the matter before the Tribunal on the basis that it was
    to be heard and  dealt  with  on  the  papers.   It  is  a  fundamental
    principle of English law that a person has a right to have his/her case
    properly heard.  Mr Armstrong has quite properly conceded that there is
    a material error of law and that this case should have been dealt  with
    at an oral hearing and therefore there is  procedural  impropriety  and
    potential unfairness to the Appellant.  That is not  to  say  that  the
    outcome of the appeal may or may not be the same  as  that  reached  by
    Judge Hussain.

10. In such circumstances the correct approach is to find that there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to
    set aside that decision and to remit the matter back to the  First-tier
    and to give directions for the re-hearing of this appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.  The  matter  is
re-made remitting the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing.  The following directions will apply.

 1) The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  on
    the first available date 28 days hence at Taylor House with an  ELH  of
    two hours.

 2) That none of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  are
    to stand.

 3) That the appeal be before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
    Immigration Judge Hussain.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek  to
    rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That in the event of the Appellant requiring an  interpreter  then  her
    instructed solicitors must notify the Tribunal at least  fourteen  days
    prior to the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

