

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19726/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14th February & 4th December 2013        |On: 09th December 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee
                            Resident Judge Conway


                                   Between

                            lasisi abudu ibrahim

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Clodaghmuire Callinan, instructed by Owoyele
Dada & Co.
For the Respondent:    Miss Alice Holmes of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   On 22nd March 2012 an application was made on behalf of the  appellant,
    a citizen of Nigeria born 27th March 1972, for a residence card as  the
    husband of a Portuguese national who was exercising 'Treaty rights'  in
    the United Kingdom.  The couple were  said  to  have  been  married  by
    customary law in Nigeria on 24th December 2011.  The evidence for  this
    was an affidavit sworn by the appellant's father on 9th March 2012 at a
    Magistrate's Court in Lagos, a certificate of marriage  by  Native  Law
    and Custom issued on 9th March 2012 by a registrar of the Mushin  Local
    Government, and a letter of even date from a customary court of Mushin,
    issued by the same  registrar  and  confirming  that  the  couple  were
    married in conformity with "the Native Law and Customs  of  the  land."
    The groom's father had moved an oral motion  in  the  court  that  day,
    supported by the affidavit sworn on the same day  at  the  Magistrate's
    Court.  None of these documents mention that the bride and  groom  were
    in England when the marriage took place.

2.   The application for a residence card was refused on 29th  August  2012,
    on the basis that there was no evidence that the couple were present at
    the marriage ceremony in Nigeria.  It may not  have  been  made  clear,
    when the application was lodged, that the marriage had taken  place  by
    proxy.  When the appeal against  refusal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, however, Judge Keith Brown took the view that "the  issue  in
    the appeal is whether proxy customary marriages are lawful in Nigeria."
     The background material before him indicated that "customary marriages
    are recognised under the Nigerian civil law" but that "proxy  marriages
    are not recognised under Nigerian civil law", with the  result  that  a
    proxy customary marriage "is not a legal  marriage  in  Nigeria."   The
    appeal was dismissed, and permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was granted on the basis that the judge had not taken  account  of  the
    documents from Nigeria listed above.  That is quite correct.   Although
    the judge mentions the documents at paragraph 8 of  his  determination,
    he does not say what he thinks of them, and they play no  part  in  his
    reasons for dismissing the appeal.

3.   When the appeal came on before  us  on  14th  February,  we  identified
    another error of law.  It is simply  wrong  to  say  that  a  customary
    marriage celebrated by proxy cannot be a  legal  marriage  in  Nigeria.
    Statutory marriage under the Marriage Act 1990 exists side by side with
    marriage in accordance with Native Law and Custom, and  both  forms  of
    marriage are lawful.  The former does not allow marriage by proxy,  but
    the latter does.  The question therefore  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    whether in the instant  case  a  proxy  marriage  took  place  on  24th
    December 2011 in accordance with Native Law and Custom.

4.   Miss Callinan submitted for the appellant that we cannot go behind  the
    documents issued by the customary court of Mushin.  The  registrar  was
    satisfied that a valid customary marriage had  taken  place,  and  that
    should be the end of the matter.  We are not so sure.  When a customary
    marriage is celebrated in the absence of the bride and groom, we  think
    that their parents must  give  their  consent,  that  members  of  both
    families must be present (indeed they would have to be  at  a  'normal'
    customary marriage) and that dowry must be paid.  There was no evidence
    before us that these incidents of a customary marriage were present  in
    the instant case, save for the assertion in Azeez  Ibrahim's  affidavit
    that "the marriage was conducted with the assent of both parents."

5.   We were minded to adjourn the case so that evidence could  be  obtained
    that these requirements had been met.  But Miss Callinan told  us  that
    her instructing solicitors had thirty similar cases on their books, and
    that it would be very burdensome for evidence to be obtained for all of
    them when it might be that the certificate of  a  customary  court  was
    (contrary to our view)  all  that  was  needed  to  establish  a  valid
    customary marriage.  Many other appeals  on  exactly  this  point  were
    currently going through the First-tier and Upper Tribunals, and we were
    aware that a test case was likely to come before a Presidential or Vice-
    Presidential panel in the next few weeks.  We therefore decided not  to
    direct at this point that further evidence be obtained, but  simply  to
    adjourn the case and re-list it 'for mention only' in six weeks'  time.
    By then it should have become clearer what would be  the  best  way  of
    disposing of the instant appeal.

6.   As it turned out, the test case was listed in  June  but  adjourned  in
    order for the parties to address an issue raised for the first time  by
    the Vice-Presidential panel, namely whether the Union citizen spouse in
    such cases is permitted by the law of the Member State of which she  is
    a national to contract a marriage by proxy,  or  a  marriage  which  is
    potentially polygamous (as  Nigerian  customary  marriages  are).   The
    hearing of the test case was not resumed until the end of October,  and
    the determination has not yet been promulgated.  In the  meantime,  the
    instant case has been listed twice 'for mention' only, and once  for  a
    substantive hearing, which was adjourned with directions this time  for
    further evidence that the incidents of a customary  marriage  had  been
    observed.

7.   When the case finally came before  the  Upper  Tribunal  again  on  4th
    December, I sat alone.   The  appellant  was  in  attendance  and  Miss
    Callinan did her best for him on the basis of what evidence there  was.
    The documentary evidence has not been greatly  supplemented  since  the
    original hearing before the First-tier Tribunal last year.  There is  a
    letter dated 28th January 2013 from  the  Registrar  of  the  Customary
    Court in Mushin, to confirm that "this traditional  customary  marriage
    by proxy was conducted with the consent of the parties, families, dowry
    accepted and the marriage conformed with the Native Law and Customs  of
    the Land."  Little weight can be  attached  to  this  letter.   It  was
    written at the behest of the appellant's father, from whom came all the
    information in the sentence just quoted.  There is  an  Affidavit  from
    the appellant's aunt, sworn on 26th March 2013, declaring that she  was
    present at the proxy marriage ceremony, and that "the marriage received
    the blessing of both families."  An identical declaration was  made  by
    the appellant's brother, in an Affidavit sworn on the same date.  These
    declarations do not take matters any further.  The manner in which  the
    marriage was blessed by both  families  is  left  wholly,  and  perhaps
    deliberately, vague and unspecified.  Finally, Miss Callinan handed  up
    some colour photographs, which had been brought for the first time that
    morning.  They depict a social gathering of Nigerian folk, the women in
    their traditional  finery,  and  with  local  agricultural  produce  on
    display.  One is asked to accept  that  the  social  gathering  is  the
    celebration of the appellant's customary marriage by  proxy,  and  that
    the local produce is the dowry paid to the bride's family.

8.   Even if these photographs were taken on 24th December 2011 ~  in  which
    case, one wonders why they were not produced to the tribunal  sooner  ~
    it is clear that no member of Anabela da Costa's  family  was  present.
    So one essential ingredient of a proper customary marriage was missing.
     There was no one to give the  dowry  to.   Nor  is  there  any  direct
    evidence from the bride's parents that they gave their consent  to  the
    marriage.  So another ingredient  of  a  valid  customary  marriage  is
    missing.

9.    It  was  not  necessary  to  deal  with  the  question  posed  in  the
    forthcoming 'reported' decision of the  Vice-Presidential  panel  about
    the ability of the Union citizen spouse to contract a marriage of  this
    nature.  Nor was it necessary to do more than remark  in  passing  that
    marriage certificates purportedly issued  by  registrars  of  customary
    courts are unlikely to be reliable evidence that a  customary  marriage
    has taken place, as there is apparently no official system  in  Nigeria
    for the registration of customary marriages.  It suffices to  say  that
    the  evidence  adduced  in  the  present  appeal  is  insufficient   to
    demonstrate on a  balance  of  probabilities  that  a  valid  customary
    marriage has been celebrated  in  Nigeria  between  the  appellant  and
    Anabela da Costa.  It follows that the appellant cannot be regarded  as
    the 'family member' of an EEA national who is exercising Treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.

10.  When the appeal came before Judge Brown last October, he quite  rightly
    rejected the  possibility  that  there  was  a  'durable  relationship'
    between the appellant and an EEA national.  There was simply not enough
    evidence to support this alternative route into  the  EEA  Regulations.
    If there now is good evidence of a durable relationship, it is open  to
    the appellant to apply for a residence card on  that  basis.   But  for
    present purposes, although the First-tier  determination  must  be  set
    aside and the decision on the appeal re-made by the Upper Tribunal, the
    outcome is the same.


     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           5th December 2013
[pic]


