
IAC-FH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/19627/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            ms fatima kanadjiqui
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia and  her  date  of  birth  is  18
    March 1990.  She made  an  application  for  a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member pursuant to the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  The Secretary of State in  a  decision  of  14
    April 2014 refused the application.  The reason for  the  decision  was
    that it was not accepted that the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and  the  EEA  national,  Mr  Abdoulaye  N'Diaye,  a  French   national
    exercising treaty rights was durable.  The decision maker  referred  to
    the policy of allowing unmarried partners to come to  the  UK  to  live
    here namely that relationships must be sufficiently robust  to  justify
    allowing them to come here to enable them to live together and in order
    to assess durability it is expected that an  applicant  would  have  to
    demonstrate that she had been living with the EEA national sponsor  for
    at least two years.  It is raised  in  the  decision  letter  that  the
    representatives did not state how long the  appellant  has  been  in  a
    durable relationship.  It was accepted that the appellant had  produced
    a  birth  certificate  but  she  did  not  provide  any   evidence   of
    cohabitation with the EEA sponsor or any evidence that they  are  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage.

2.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  and  the  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch in a decision  that  was
    promulgated on 6 October 2014.  The appeal was determined on the papers
    at the request of the appellant.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P J  M  Hollingworth  in  a  decision  of  26
    November 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the FtT

3.   The Judge had before him an  appellant's  bundle  which  contained  the
    witness statements of  both  the  appellant  and  her  partner.   Their
    evidence was that they live in London with their child.   They  met  in
    December 2012 and started living together in  January  2013  and  their
    daughter was born  on  13  November  2013.   The  Judge  made  material
    findings at paragraphs 16, 17, 18,  19,  21,  22,  23  and  24  of  the
    determination:

     "16.    The copy documentation  demonstrates  the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor living at the same address in  London.   The  dates  on  it
         cover the period between November 2013 and July  2014.   The  birth
         certificate shows the same address and that the child was  born  in
         London on 13 November 2013 and the appellant and  the  sponsor  are
         named as parents.  The copy documentation provided  indicates  that
         the appellant and the sponsor had been living together at the  same
         address since about at least November 2013 and the birth  of  their
         child demonstrates their relationship.

    17.  The relationship between the appellant and the sponsor clearly has
         not been one of very long duration notwithstanding the birth  of  a
         child, given that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  only  met  in
         December 2012.  The evidence from the witness  statements  is  that
         they  started  living  together  in  about   January   2013.    The
         application  form  (a  copy  of  which  is  contained  within   the
         respondent's bundle) is dated 13 January 2014.  The  appellant  and
         the sponsor had therefore only been in a relationship for  about  a
         year at the date of the application.

    18.  Whilst it is not stated as an absolute  requirement  in  terms  of
         Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations  that   it   must   be
         demonstrated that the relationship between an unmarried couple  has
         lasted  at  least  two  years  to  demonstrate  it  is  a   durable
         relationship, this is the usual requirement.  This accords with the
         Immigration Rules in respect of unmarried couples.  The  respondent
         has explained in the refusal letter that there is a  long  standing
         policy of allowing unmarried partner of EEA  nationals  settled  in
         the UK to  live  with  them  if  the  relationship  meets  specific
         criteria as set out in the Immigration Rules.  It  is  stated  that
         these were developed in parts to identify partnerships that  should
         be  considered  as  "durable"  for  immigration  purposes.   It  is
         thereafter noted that to demonstrate that  a  relationship  may  be
         considered as a "durable" one, thee should be evidence of it having
         lasted at least two years.

    19.  The UKBA Guidance dated 1 January 2014 in respect of  applications
         for a Residence Card clearly states:

              'If you are living with a partner who is not your  spouse  or
             civil partner, you will need to provide proof that you are  in
             a durable relationship.  You would generally need to  show  us
             that you have been in a subsisting relationship for two  years
             or more.  This could be through joint bank or building society
             statements, joint tenancy agreements,  council  tax  bills  or
             evidence that  you  are  both  paying  utility  bills  at  the
             property at which you reside.'

    21.  Given the limited information and  supporting  documentation  that
         was provided for the purpose of this application, I find  that  the
         respondent was entitled to reach such a conclusion.   The  decision
         is in accordance with the law.

    22.  Subsequent information provided for  the  purpose  of  the  appeal
         demonstrates that the relationship had only been of short  duration
         at the time of the application and the date of decision.   It  fell
         far short of two years.  The relationship still falls short of  the
         two years referred to in the relevant guidance for applications  of
         this kind.

    23.  The application has been a premature  one  in  the  circumstances,
         made when the relationship had only been subsisting for just over a
         year, according to the evidence in the witness statements.  On this
         basis, I dismiss the appeal.  I do not find that the appellant  has
         demonstrated to the required standard of proof that she has met the
         criteria to entitle her to a Residence Card as  confirmation  as  a
         right of residence in the UK.

    24.  It is  open  to  the  appellant  to  make  a  further  application
         providing  full  information  with  supporting   documentation   to
         demonstrate she is in a subsisting relationship  with  her  sponsor
         and can meet the criteria in respect of being the unmarried partner
         of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights."

The Grounds of Appeal

4.   It is argued that the appeal before the Judge is governed by  the  2006
    Regulations and not the Immigration Rules. The Judge accepted that  the
    appellant and her partner have lived together for a year and that  they
    have a child together and he should in those circumstances have gone on
    to allow the appeal.

Error of Law

5.   The  appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and she did not attend the hearing  before  me.   There  is  a
    letter from Chancery CS Solicitors representing  the  appellant  of  27
    January 2015 indicating that they are not able to  attend  the  hearing
    and that the appellant wishes for the appeal to be  determined  on  the
    papers. There was no further evidence relied on by the appellant served
    and filed in accordance with the directions of the Tribunal.

6.   Mr Wilding relied on the Secretary of State's response of  22  December
    2014 pursuant to Rule 24 of the 2008 Regulations.  However, on  further
    consideration of the matter, having taken into account paragraph 22  of
    the determination, he concluded that the Judge made a material error in
    considering the evidence  at  the  date  of  the  application  and  the
    decision of the Secretary of  State.  He  should  have  considered  the
    evidence at the date of the  hearing  before  him.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Wilding that this is a material error  of  law  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    2006 Regulations and re-make the appeal.

7.   The decision of the Secretary of State  was  made  on  14  April  2014.
    There are statements from the appellant and her partner dated  25  July
    2014.  There are bank statements and  utility  bills  relating  to  the
    appellant and her husband.  There is a bank statement  in  their  joint
    names dated January 2014.  There are poorly photocopied photographs  in
    the appellant's bundle.  The evidence  before  me  is  insufficient  to
    establish that at the date of the hearing before me the relationship is
    durable.  I have of course attached weight to the  evidence  and  taken
    into account the findings of the Judge who accepted that at the date of
    the application and decision  there  was  a  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor and that they were living together.  There is
    no evidence before me that the relationship is durable at the  date  of
    the hearing.  I considered adjourning the hearing in  order  to  enable
    the appellant to submit further evidence on  this  point,  but  decided
    against this. She is represented and has not submitted further evidence
    notwithstanding the directions of the UT.

8.   There is no evidence before me that the decision would  breach  Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights. This was  not  determined  by
    the FtT and was not an issue raised in the  grounds  seeking  leave  to
    appeal. In any event, in the absence of any  up  to  date  evidence,  I
    dismiss the appeal under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

9.   The appeal under the 2006 Regulations is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 6.2.15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
