
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/19758/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 4 June 2014         On 9 June 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                            Anthony Ngozi Dimgba
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Burrett of Counsel instructed by CASA.
For the  Respondent:             Mr.  S.  Kandola,  Home  Office  Presenting
                            Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Seelhof promulgated on 19 February 2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 8 May 2013 to refuse to
      vary leave to remain in the UK and to remove the  Appellant  from  the
      UK.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 15 May 1959. He entered
      the UK on 7 November 1998 with a six months visit visa. The  Appellant
      overstayed his visa. The Appellant's history - and in  particular  his
      use  of  the  identity  Chinedum  Okey  Rufus,  and  the   Appellant's
      encounters with the immigration authorities between 2004 and 2006 - is
      otherwise considered in the determination of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      and further referenced below. Suffice to say  at  this  juncture,  the
      Appellant made no formal application to regularise his status  in  his
      own identity until he applied for indefinite leave to remain by way of
      application form SET(O) signed on 6 July 2012 and sent under cover  of
      letter of the same date -  such  application  being  recorded  by  the
      Respondent as having been made on 7 July 2012 - on the basis  of  long
      residence. In a supporting statement, also  dated  6  July  2012,  the
      Appellant stated that although he had not quite reached the  14  years
      required under the then applicable 'long residence rule', he was  "now
      aware that the immigration rules have changed  and  the  changes  will
      take effect from 9 July 2012" and he understood that  if  he  did  not
      make his application before 9 July 2012 he "would have to wait until I
      have lived in the UK for 20 years before I could attempt to regularise
      my immigration status".


   3. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter  dated  7  May  2013,  and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision was issued accordingly on 8 May 2013.


   4. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons  set  out   in   his
      determination.


   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 11 March 2014, but subsequently
      granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 15 April 2014.


   6. The Respondent has  filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  10  May  2014
      resisting the appeal.


Consideration

   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant had been living
      in the UK since 6 November 1998, and as such for a period in excess of
      16 years by the date of the hearing (determination at  paragraph  23).
      In this context the Respondent had conceded  that  the  Appellant  had
      been here for over 14 years (paragraph 16).
   8. Further, it was agreed between the representatives and the Judge  that
      the Notices served in 2004 and 2006 could not be  treated  as  notices
      that effectively 'stopped the clock' pursuant to paragraph  276B(i)(b)
      because they had not been specifically issued to the Appellant in  his
      own name and related to the history of Mr Rufus -  in  whose  identity
      the Appellant was then  presenting  himself  to  the  Respondent:  see
      paragraphs 15 and 24.


   9. Accordingly the issue in the appeal related to  paragraph  276B(ii)  -
      specifically whether "having regard to the public interest  there  are
      no reasons why it would be undesirable for [the Appellant] to be given
      indefinite leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence"  taking
      into account all of the circumstances.


  10. The Judge  answered  this  question  against  the  Appellant:  see  in
      particular paragraphs 25-27.


  11. The Judge went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR, but found against
      the Appellant in this regard also. Although a challenge was raised  to
      the Article 8 assessment in the Appellant's grounds in support of  his
      application for permission to appeal, this  did  not  find  favour  in
      Upper Tribunal Judge Allen's grant of permission, where  he  described
      this particular ground as having "no arguable  merit".  Before  me  Mr
      Burrett confirmed that he  did  not  seek  to  pursue  the  Article  8
      challenge.


  12. In respect of the decision under the Rules it is argued on  behalf  of
      the Appellant that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  misdirected  himself
      when considering rule 276B(ii), and in  particular  failed  to  direct
      himself to the decision in ZH (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ 8.


  13. It is to be noted that the Judge did make  express  reference  to  the
      case of Aissaoui [2008] EWCA Civ 37: see  determination  at  paragraph
      25.


  14. In the Appellant's Skeleton Argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      quotations from  both  Aissaoui  and  ZH  (Bangladesh)  were  set  out
      consecutively under the same paragraph (3v). Further, both cases  were
      cited together in support of the same proposition at  paragraph  4  of
      the Skeleton Argument: "While the appellant committed  an  offence  in
      using another person's identity to work in the UK, the Court of Appeal
      in Aissaoui and ZH (Bangladesh) made it clear that the use of a  false
      identity is not a decisive factor that will  make  a  refusal  of  ILR
      inevitable".


  15. In my judgement it is plain that  the  Judge  had  well  in  mind  the
      substance of the Appellant's case, and his reliance on case law. It is
      overt at paragraph 21, and moreover it  is  apparent  that  the  Judge
      accepted the legal proposition that the Appellant relied upon:

"Mr Burrett [who also appeared before the First-tier Tribunal] addressed  me
      on conduct and reminded  me  that  the  visa  category  in  which  the
      Appellant applied was for persons who had spent 14  years  in  the  UK
      illegally and that it was inevitable that everyone  in  that  category
      would have broken the law in some way. I indicated that I agreed  with
      him in principle..."


  16. It is also apparent that the Judge accepted  the  essential  principle
      relied upon by the Appellant in his citation of Aissaoui at  paragraph
      25:

"I have considered the case of Aissaoui.... in which  the  Court  of  Appeal
      held that the use of a false identity in order to obtain work was  not
      sufficient to engage 276B(ii)".

The Judge repeats his acceptance of this principle in the  first  clause  of
      the first sentence in paragraph 27.


  17. It is equally clear that the  Judge,  having  accepted  the  essential
      principle, evaluated the particular  facts  of  the  Appellant's  case
      pursuant to  that  principle,  but  determined  that  the  Appellant's
      conduct  was  such  that  applying  paragraph  270B(ii)  it  would  be
      undesirable for the Appellant to  be  granted  indefinite  leave.  The
      Judge indicated his  concerns  in  this  regard  during  Mr  Burrett's
      submissions  (paragraph  21),  and  gave  detailed  reasons  for   his
      conclusion at paragraphs 25-27.


  18. The Judge's reasons relate not merely to the use of a false  identity,
      but its particular use during the period 2004-2006 when the  Appellant
      had come to the attention of the immigration  authorities.  Indeed  at
      paragraph 25 the Judge explains why he considers the instant  case  to
      be distinguishable from the facts in Aissaoui:

"The difference in this  case  is  that  this  Appellant  did  come  to  the
      attention of the Home Office and while the Respondent may have made an
      initial error as to his identity, in August 2004 he was in  possession
      of a passport that could have clarified that issue from November 2004.
      I find that on each and every  weekly  signing  appointment  over  the
      following year and a half the  Appellant's  failure  to  disclose  his
      passport to the Home Office was calculated to  avoid  his  removal.  I
      further note that the Appellant allowed High Court proceedings to take
      place in which it appears he was represented as  Chinedum  Okey  Rufus
      and removal was avoided. I find that the perpetuation of the deception
      will have been disruptive for the Respondent and costly to the  public
      purse."


  19. The Judge summarises the matter in paragraph  27:  "...  I  find  that
      specific and prolonged deception of  the  Immigration  authorities  is
      different to just being here illegally, or using false documents".


  20. The Judge also finds that the reason the Appellant was not issued with
      a valid removal notice in 2004 (rather than the notice in the identity
      of Mr Rufus) was "in part a consequence of his  deception"  (paragraph
      26).


  21. I note paragraph 22 of Aissaoui:

"Nor is it true to say that he had assumed a false identity  "to  evade  the
      consequences of the refusal of his appeal." He had started  to  use  a
      false identity for the purposes of obtaining work late in 1991."


  22. Judge  Seelhoff  appropriately  identifies  as  a  key  distinguishing
      feature that the Appellant herein did make use of a false identity  in
      order to resist removal - indeed, even going so far as to represent to
      the High Court that he was somebody  else.  (Although  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge did not articulate it in this way, Mr Kandola  observed
      in the course of submissions before me that this might  be  considered
      both as contempt of court and perjury, the latter of  which  might  be
      considered a serious crime.)


  23. Further, in this context and generally, it is to  be  noted  that  the
      Judge in setting out his 'Findings and Conclusions' from paragraph  23
      onwards makes no adverse reference to the Appellant's use of  a  false
      identity to secure employment - which was  essentially  the  erroneous
      approach successfully challenged in both Aissaoui and ZH (Bangladesh).


  24. As regards ZH (Bangladesh), Mr Burrett was invited  to  articulate  in
      what way the Judge's  approach  diverted  from  any  principle  to  be
      derived from ZH  (Bangladesh),  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  any
      express citation of the case in the  Determination.  Mr  Burrett  made
      reference to passages in ZH (Bangladesh) which he submitted  indicated
      that Judge Seelhoff had taken "a different  path".  I  consider  these
      passages below: however, in my judgement, these  passages  essentially
      related to matters of factual assessment, and not issues of principle.
      Indeed, save for the use of different examples and illustrations,  and
      the more emphatic criticism of  MO  (Ghana),  the  judgement  of  Lord
      Justice Sedley in ZH (Bangladesh)  does  not  progress  the  issue  of
      principle any further than the judgement of  Lord  Justice  Hooper  in
      Aissaoui - in which Lord Justice Sedley also sat and gave a  judgement
      in agreement.


  25. Further to Mr Burrett's submissions on  ZH  (Bangladesh)  I  make  the
      following observations:

(i) In respect of paragraph 16: the use of  a  false  identity  because  the
      applicant was afraid of being detected as an illegal  immigrant.  This
      would appear to be a reference to paragraph 9  of  the  determination,
      cited at paragraph 7 of the Court  of  Appeal's  judgement,  which  in
      part, states, "I used an alias in 2001 because I was told that if  you
      use genuine details then people will catch you so I was  scared".  The
      context of use by ZH was in order to be better able to sustain himself
      without being caught by the authorities. This  is  factually  distinct
      from using deceit when actually caught by the immigration  authorities
      as happened herein.

(ii) Further in respect of paragraph 16: in  respect  of  the  reference  to
      sustained deceit, it is  to  be  noted  that  Judge  Seelhoff  made  a
      sustainable  finding  that  the  Appellant  herein  had  practised   a
      prolonged deception on the Respondent.

(iii) In respect of paragraph 18: prolonged evasion of immigration  control,
      not in itself to be used as a justification for refusing  a  '14  year
      Rule' application. In my judgement it is clear that what the Court  of
      Appeal had in mind in referring to evasion of immigration control  was
      the effective long-term 'going to  ground'  of  ZH  aftr  becoming  an
      overstayer, and not a deliberate and sustained misrepresentation  made
      directly to the immigration authorities - the  distinguishing  feature
      identified by Judge Seelhoff herein. Judge  Seelhoff  clearly  had  in
      mind that the operation of the 14  year  Rule  would  be  premised  on
      persons who had been present in the UK illegally, and that there would
      be inherent in any such application the breaking of some laws:  it  is
      equally clear - in particular at paragraphs 21 and 27 - that the Judge
      recognised that this was not determinative and therefore not  a  basis
      which in itself could defeat a long residence application.

(iv) In respect of paragraph 23: "The use of  a  false  identity  may  be  a
      relevant factor in gauging where the public interest lies, but nothing
      in the rule accords it any given weight, much less makes it decisive."
      In my judgement, this passage  recognises  that  all  cases  are  fact
      sensitive. The real issue is in what way and to  what  end  use  of  a
      false identity is made.  This  is  implicit  at  paragraph  16  of  ZH
      (Bangladesh) where reference is made to the 'sinister' use of a  false
      identity to commit fraud rather than avoiding  being  detected  as  an
      illegal immigrant: the implication being that use of a false identity,
      though not inevitably decisive, may be decisive depending on the facts
      and context. This passage does  not,  in  my  judgement,  support  the
      proposition that Mr Burrett urges upon me that  the  use  of  a  false
      identity cannot ever be decisive.


  26. In all such circumstances I find  the  Judge's  failure  to  make  any
      express  reference  to  the  decision  in  ZH  (Bangladesh)   in   his
      determination is not material to the outcome. Moreover, I  can  detect
      nothing from the reasoning set out in the determination that indicates
      the Judge departed from the ratio decidendi in ZH (Bangladesh),  which
      is essentially the same  as  in  Aissaoui.  The  failure  to  site  ZH
      (Bangladesh) does not indicate that the judge erred in law.


  27. Finally, for completeness, and for  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  I
      record that Mr Burrett appropriately acknowledged that the  references
      in Aissaoui to the commission of 'a most serious offence' are  not  to
      be read as setting a test  under  paragraph  276B(ii)  requiring  that
      there to have been serious  criminal  conduct  before  an  application
      under the 14 year rule could be defeated.


  28. In all such circumstances I find no error of law in  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Accordingly,  the  decision  under  the
      Immigration Rules is to stand.

Decision

  29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  no  error  of
      law and stands.


  30. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     5 June 2014
