
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19284/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th April 2015                            |On 5th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Abdul Hafeez Niazi Niazi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Kumudusena (Solicitor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the Secretary of State is  the  appellant  and  Mr  Niazi  the
    respondent, it is convenient to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant's  appeal   against
    decisions to refuse to vary his leave and to remove him from the United
    Kingdom was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  Chowdhury  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 29th December 2014.

2.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He and his wife  entered  the
    United Kingdom as visitors on 4th May 2012.   On  26th  September  that
    year, he applied for leave to remain outside the rules.  He  was  given
    limited leave in response, valid until 15th January 2014, to enable him
    to remain while his wife received medical treatment.  Sadly, she passed
    away.  The day before his limited leave expired, the appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain, outside the  rules.   That  application
    was refused on 9th April 2014 and the two immigration decisions  giving
    rise to the appeal were made.

3.   The judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant's  son.   The  appellant
    himself was unwell  and  did  not  attend.   It  was  agreed  that  the
    requirements of the rules could not be met.  The judge found that there
    were good grounds for  considering  whether  leave  should  be  granted
    outside the rules, finding that the appellant had suffered the loss  of
    his wife and that all of his children reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His medical expenses were met by means of private insurance.  The judge
    found that the appellant had established a family life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that Article 8 was engaged and that she was required  to  have
    regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act.   She concluded that  it  would
    be unjustifiably harsh for the appellant to return to  Pakistan  alone.
    She found that the adverse decisions  amounted  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 rights.

4.   The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    contended that the judge erred in law in failing  to  explain  why  the
    appellant's circumstances were compelling or exceptional  and  why  the
    public  interest  was  outweighed.   The   appellant   had   precarious
    immigration status and there was nothing  about  his  private  life  or
    family life that could not be continued in Pakistan.  The appellant had
    been present in the United Kingdom for a short period of time  and  had
    spent most of his life in the country of his  nationality.   Permission
    to appeal was granted on 13th February 2015, on the basis that  it  was
    not clear how the judge found compelling circumstances  other  than  by
    reference to the appellant's distress in the aftermath  of  his  wife's
    demise.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Tufan said  that  reliance  was  placed  on  the  grounds.   It  was
    conceded that the appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rules and the judge erred in the proportionality exercise.  Any private
    life ties established by the appellant had little weight in  the  light
    of his precarious immigration status.

6.   Mr Kumudusena said that the judge had been entitled to make an  Article
    8 assessment  outside  the  rules  and  she  correctly  identified  the
    compassionate circumstances in the  case.   The  appellant's  wife  had
    passed away while she was present in the United  Kingdom  and  she  was
    buried in this country.  The appellant's son gave evidence and  adopted
    the witness statement which was  before  the  judge.   The  appellant's
    family members were here and all  the  members  of  his  wife's  family
    remained in Pakistan.  There was no contact with  the  appellant's  in-
    laws, at least not to the extent that he  could  depend  upon  them  in
    Pakistan.  In any event, they had their own  families  to  look  after.
    The judge made an assessment of the circumstances and took into account
    medical evidence.   This  showed  that  the  appellant  was  undergoing
    treatment for chest problems.  His wife had passed away but before  the
    sad event, the Secretary of State had not accepted that there were  any
    compassionate circumstances in her case.  Now, however, the  focus  was
    on the appellant himself.  He had heart problems.   The  judge  made  a
    finding that his medical expenses were being met by  means  of  private
    insurance.  The judge was entitled to allow the appeal.

7.   The judge properly took into account section 117A  to  D  of  the  2002
    Act.  The appellant had complied with the rules in the past.   She  was
    entitled to conclude that  the  circumstances  were  compassionate  and
    compelling.  The appellant was in his 70s and all his immediate  family
    members, including his grandchildren, were here in  this  country.   He
    was being looked after by his daughter-in-law.  She was a  doctor,  not
    practising here but qualified in Pakistan and she provided care for the
    appellant.  This too was a relevant factor  and  there  was  supporting
    documentary evidence before the judge.  The proportionality  assessment
    was properly considered.  The appellant's presence would not  undermine
    the public interest.

8.   Mr Tufan said that the evidence, including the letter at page 6 in  the
    appellant's bundle "A" showed that there was nothing exceptional  about
    his medical circumstances.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   I conclude that a material error of law has been shown.   The  decision
    has been prepared with considerable care by an experienced judge.   She
    was, I find, entitled to conclude that the  immigration  rules  do  not
    fully cater for the appellant's circumstances.  There is  no  provision
    for leave to be granted to a claimant with the  combination  of  family
    and medical circumstances in the present appeal.  However, what is  not
    clear, with great respect to the judge, is the reasoning  lying  behind
    the overall conclusion that the public interest was outweighed.

10.  The factors identified by the judge as critical  appear  at  paragraphs
    19 to 22, 24 and 25 and 27 of the decision.  She made her assessment in
    the light of evidence given by  a  witness  she  found  credible.   The
    appellant's medical expenses are being met by means of  private  health
    insurance and  his  children  and  grandchildren  live  here.   He  has
    relatives in Pakistan, consisting of sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law
    but they have their own families to look after.  The  appellant  is  in
    his 70s.  There are several factors capable of weighing in his  favour.
    On the other hand, the appellant has been present in the United Kingdom
    for only a short period of time, although he has visited in  the  past,
    and  he  was  given  limited  leave  in  the  light   of   his   wife's
    circumstances.  The appellant suffered the  very  severe  blow  of  his
    wife's demise and there is no reason to doubt that this sad event would
    have caused  great  distress  to  the  entire  family.   The  appellant
    himself, however, can have had no expectation that he would be  allowed
    to remain here indefinitely, without meeting the  requirements  of  the
    rules, although he was of  course  perfectly  entitled  to  seek  leave
    outside them.

11.  The salient feature  is  the  appellant's  wife's  demise.   The  judge
    properly took into account the isolation he would suffer in consequence
    and the obvious importance of  the  close  ties  to  his  children  and
    grandchildren here.  Nonetheless, it is not  clear  how  she  concluded
    that these  important  features  of  the  case  outweighed  the  public
    interest.  The prospect of the appellant's return to Pakistan  and  his
    likely reliance there on privately paid carers, noted by the  judge  at
    paragraph 27, are not at all unusual or remarkable factors in the light
    of the sad circumstances  the  appellant  finds  himself  in.   As  the
    Secretary of State noted in her decision letter, the ties  between  the
    appellant and his family members here might, notwithstanding his wife's
    demise and his ill health and reliance upon others in  the  future,  be
    maintained as they have over the  years.   What  is  missing  from  the
    operative part of the decision is reasoning which shows how  the  judge
    concluded that the public interest was outweighed, in a case where  the
    requirements of the rules were not met and where the appellant has  had
    only limited leave in the past,  taking  into  account  fully  the  sad
    demise of his wife and the medical aspects.

12.  I conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside and remade.  In a discussion with the  representatives  regarding
    the appropriate venue, Mr Kumudusena  said  that  further  fact-finding
    would be required and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the  better
    forum.  The appellant was not present and so the decision could not  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal immediately.  He was currently in hospital
    (and a letter from St Bartholomew's NHS Trust was provided in  support)
    and heart surgery might be required.  Indeed, it was possible  that  an
    application to the Secretary of State might be made under the rules, in
    the light of his current ill health.  Mr  Tufan  said  that  sufficient
    evidence was before the Upper Tribunal to enable  the  decision  to  be
    remade but, on the other hand, the appellant was not present.

13.  In the circumstances, and taking into  account  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, I find that further,  additional
    fact-finding will be required in this appeal and that  the  appropriate
    venue is the First-tier Tribunal.   There is no reason to  disturb  the
    findings of fact made by the judge regarding the circumstances  of  the
    appellant as they were as at the date of the  hearing.    The  decision
    will be remade before a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R
    Chowdhury.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a judge  other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge R Chowdhury.


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
