
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19807/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13th May 2015                              |On 1st June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                       mr MOHAMMED AHMEDUDDIN FAROOQUI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K S Sreekumar, Solicitor, Kumar Legal Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India who appealed against  the  decision
    of the Respondent dated 16th April 2014 to refuse to vary his leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and to remove him.   He  had  applied  for
    leave to remain under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant scheme and  the
    Respondent had refused his application under  paragraph  245DD  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's  subsequent  appeal  to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio was heard on 3rd December 2014 and dismissed  under
    the Immigration rules and in respect of human rights  grounds  on  19th
    December 2014.

 2. The judge noted that none of the original documents  were  attached  to
    the Respondent's bundle and the Appellant had tried  to  replicate  the
    bundle.  Bearing in mind that the Respondent did  not  submit  all  the
    original documents, the judge was willing to  give  the  Appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt that he had submitted documents regarding business
    activities to the Respondent with his initial application. With  regard
    to the bank statement, it was quite clear that the  Appellant  was  the
    director of the business in the UK and it was obvious that his name was
    a missing item on the bank statement. The fact that he had  a  business
    in a limited liability company and was sole director and sole signatory
    of the account meant that he had access to the funds for his  business.
    The judge therefore found that this was a suitable case where paragraph
    245AA of  the  Immigration  Rules  should  have  been  applied  by  the
    Respondent on this part of the application to obtain the  right  format
    of the letter from the bank.

 3. However the judge found  there  was  one  other  aspect  on  which  the
    Appellant's appeal had to fail.  If a person  is  claiming  points  for
    being a director of a UK company a print out of the current appointment
    report from Companies House dated no earlier than three  months  before
    the date of application should be provided.  The document  provided  by
    the Appellant was dated 15th August 2013 and therefore did  not  comply
    with the time limit set in the rules. Given that, the Appellant did not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(e)(v)(2) of Appendix  A  of
    the Rules and the appeal had to be dismissed.

 4. Grounds of appeal were lodged.  At paragraph 3 it was  noted  that  the
    judge had effectively dismissed the appeal exclusively on  one  premise
    and that was the fact that the Appellant's print  out  of  the  current
    director's appointment report  from  Companies  House  was  dated  15th
    August 2013. Paragraph 4 states that the judge made a material  mistake
    as to fact.  The print out from Companies House demonstrated  that  the
    Appellant became a director  on  15th  August  2013  and  it  was  that
    information that was recorded on the printout that  the  Appellant  had
    obtained from Companies House website, three weeks prior to  submission
    of application.  This was the Appellant's evidence and it appears  that
    the judge had accepted that evidence.  In that connection it  was  said
    that the Appellant clearly satisfied the terms of the Rules. Permission
    to appeal was granted on the basis of what was said in the grounds.

 5. The Respondent had lodged a Rule 24 notice dated 3rd March 2015 stating
    that the Appellant did not submit a document dated in the correct  time
    period. As such  the judge did not err in law.

 6. Thus the matter came before us.

 7. For the Appellant Mr Sreekumar said that he now had the  document  from
    Companies House which had a date on it of 28th March 2014  and  it  was
    the Appellant's case that this document had  been  submitted  with  the
    application.  It was accepted that the document was  not  contained  in
    the Appellant's bundle of 29th December 2014, being a bundle lodged  in
    connection with the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  nor  was  it
    contained in the Appellant's bundle dated 13th  June  2014,  being  the
    bundle which was before Judge Adio.  If he were not allowed to rely  on
    that document, Mr Sreekumar submitted that the Secretary of State ought
    to have exercised her discretion and allowed the error to be rectified.
     Having heard from Mr Jarvis in response Mr Sreekumar  made  a  further
    submission, namely that the documents were part of a  sequence  and  if
    one looked very carefully towards the right hand foot of the  documents
    at 98-100 numbers 2, 3 and 4 emerged and there was  no  number  1.   As
    such, the Secretary of State should have exercised  her  discretion  on
    this point under paragraph 245AA as well.

 8. For the Respondent Mr Jarvis submitted that the Rule was clear and  had
    different elements to it. The Rule was in terms under 41-SD(2) that  if
    claiming points for being a director of a UK company, a printout from a
    current report from Companies House, dated no earlier than three months
    before the date of the application, listing the applicant as a director
    of the company and confirming the date of his  appointment  had  to  be
    produced.   There was no document in front of the judge which indicated
    that the report was dated no earlier than three months before the  date
    of the application, which was a mandatory requirement.  The  judge  had
    therefore been entirely correct to dismiss the appeal on this basis and
    there had been no submission made before him that the  failure  by  the
    Appellant to produce the necessary document was one  which  fell  under
    paragraph 245AA.

 9. After a brief adjournment we indicated to the  parties  that  we  would
    dismiss this appeal for reasons which we would give in writing.

Conclusions

10. The evidential requirements of  paragraph  41-SD  provide  a  range  of
    evidence  under  which  an  Appellant  has  to  demonstrate  that   his
    application under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  route  should  be
    granted.  The Rules are demanding and  clear.   One  of  the  documents
    which the Appellant had to  produce  was  a  printout  of  his  current
    appointment report from Companies House dated  no  earlier  than  three
    months before the date of application.  It seems quite clear to us that
    this document was not before the judge.  We say this  because  no  such
    document appears in the bundle of  evidence  placed  by  the  Appellant
    before the judge.  In those circumstances Mr Sreekumar accepted that it
    was difficult for him to maintain the position that  the  document  had
    been lodged particularly given that the grounds of appeal  say  nothing
    about that or that the documents fell  as  part  of  a  sequence  which
    should have obliged the Secretary of State to exercise  her  discretion
    under Rule 245AA.

11. The focus in the grounds of appeal  was  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    material mistake as to  fact,  and  that  the  Appellant  had  in  fact
    obtained  a  printout  from  Companies  House  three  weeks  prior   to
    submission of the application.  However the particular  document  which
    might have established this was not placed before Judge Adio and  given
    its absence the judge was quite entitled and indeed bound  to  conclude
    that the particular Rule had not been complied with and  therefore  the
    appeal had to be dismissed under the Immigration rules. It was too late
    to produce it now.

12. Mr Sreekumar's further and final point which was raised only  after  we
    had heard  from  Mr  Jarvis,  namely  that  there  was  a  sequence  of
    documents, was not  an  argument  that  had  been  made  at  any  point
    previously.  We were not invited to amend the grounds of appeal and  do
    not consider that the point is well made. We would observe  that  while
    the numbers are there they are truly minuscule in  size  and  far  from
    obvious to any reader.

13. Furthermore, the problem the Secretary of State had with the claimant's
    documents  is  not  their  format  or  sequence  but  rather  that  the
    particular document relied on did not contain information which,  under
    the mandatory Rules, the Appellant was obliged to produce.

14. It follows that there is no error in law by the judge and  this  appeal
    must be dismissed.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. We do not set aside the decision.

17. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

