


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22646/2015
      IA/19327/2015
      IA/22105/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 12 June 2017                            |On 12 July 2017                |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    V D C
                                     D R
                                     N R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jayfoelly, Callistes Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1. The Appellants are Mauritian nationals who were born on [  ]  1976,  [  ]
   1981 and [ ] 2007. The first two Appellants are the parents of the  third
   Appellant. On 4 March 2015 they made an application for leave  to  remain
   on the basis of their family and private life in the United Kingdom.  The
   third Appellant was born in the United Kingdom.  The  Respondent  refused
   their applications under  the  partner  route,  parent  route  and  under
   paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. It was accepted that the third
   Appellant had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for 7 years at the
   date of the decision but  the  Respondent  concluded  that  it  would  be
   reasonable for him to leave the United Kingdom.


2. The Appellants appealed against this decision under  section  82  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA) and their appeal  was
   heard on 2 March 2016 and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hussain
   in a decision promulgated on 20 July 2016.  He found that the  Appellants
   did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and concluded that
   the Respondent's decision would not breach  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).


3. In a decision promulgated on 24 April 2017 I  found  that  there  was  an
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The core reasons
   for this finding are recorded at  paragraphs  14  to  16  and  20  of  my
   decision. The Appellants argued that the First Appellant had  accrued  10
   years lawful residence because a curtailment notice had not been properly
   served. I made the following findings in respect of that argument:


      "14.  It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal did not  consider  this
      argument. Whilst this may have been a procedural error I find that  it
      cannot have been material for the following  reasons.  The  Appellants
      relied in their skeleton argument on the case of Syed (curtailment  of
      leave-notice) [2013] UKUT 00144. Until 2013, there  were  no  specific
      regulations  dealing  with  notice  in   respect   of   non-appealable
      immigration decisions. In Syed the Upper Tribunal concluded,  applying
      R (Anufrijeva) v SSHD [2003] UKHL 36 that a non-appealable curtailment
      decision did not take effect until it was communicated to  the  person
      concerned.


  15. The Appellants in this case  did  not  dispute  that  the  curtailment
      decision was communicated to them. It  is  acknowledged  both  in  the
      skeleton argument and in the first Appellant's witness statement at p7
      of the Appellants' bundle before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
      curtailment notices were received on 31  March  2012.  Those  letters,
      save for the first  Appellant's  letter  which  she  acknowledges  she
      received, are at pages 36  and  37  of  the  Appellants'  bundle.  The
      Respondent informs the Appellants therein that their leave is  due  to
      expire on 26 May 2012. I have been provided with  no  authority  which
      holds that the 60 day period starts to run on the date the  notice  of
      curtailment is received  rather  than  the  date  of  the  curtailment
      letter. The Respondent's 'Patel' policy in  relation  to  the  60  day
      period to allow applicants to obtain a new CAS  when  their  sponsor's
      license is revoked is appended to the case of  Kaur  (Patel  fairness:
      respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 344 which is on the  court  file  and
      appears to have been relied on by the Appellants before the First-tier
      Tribunal. According to that policy the caseworker needs  to  calculate
      the end of the 60 day period as it needs to be included in the  letter
      being sent  to  the  applicant.   This  of  course  ensures  that  the
      applicant knows by which date an application should be made. Any other
      course would lead to uncertainty. In the absence of any  authority  or
      having heard any cogent argument why the contrary should be the  case,
      I conclude that the curtailment decisions were  lawfully  communicated
      to the Appellants and  the  60  days  expired  on  26  May  2012.  The
      Appellants were clearly aware of the  need  to  make  the  application
      because the first Appellant sets  out  in  her  witness  statement  at
      paragraph 6 that she instructed someone to apply for further leave  on
      her behalf and was provided by him with a delivery slip  dated  5  May
      2012.


  16. I therefore  find  that  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      consider the argument raised in the skeleton argument that  the  first
      Appellant  satisfied  the  requirements   of   paragraph   276B,   the
      Appellants' leave was lawfully  curtailed  on  26  May  2012  and  the
      application of 11 June 2012 was therefore made out of time. The  first
      Appellant's claim to have accrued 10 years  lawful  residence  from  6
      December 2004 could not  have  succeeded.  Further,  even  if  on  the
      Appellants' own construction the 60 days were to  run  from  31  March
      2012 the application of 11 June 2012 would  still  have  been  out  of
      time. Any procedural error in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      was therefore not material."


4. I found, however, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law  in
   his assessment of proportionality under Article 8:


      "20.  There is no  recognition  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that, despite the fact that the First-tier Tribunal was aware
      of the third Appellant's age, living in the UK for 9 years from  birth
      was a significant factor weighing in favour of the child remaining  in
      the UK. The fact therefore that the Judge did not recognize  that  the
      third Appellant was a qualifying child and then give  this  weight  in
      the proportionality exercise was an error of law.  Whilst  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge  may,  had  he  properly  directed  himself,  have
      reached the same conclusion, it cannot  be  concluded  that  he  would
      have. In the circumstances I find that the error was material."


The Re-making of the decision in the appeal

The Appellants' submissions

 5. The Appellants relied on their skeleton at pages 1 to 6 of their bundle.
    Mr Jayfoelly also relied on his notice under Rule 15 (2A) asking the
    Tribunal to take into consideration that the third Appellant was
    entitled to be registered as a British Citizen under section 1 (4) of
    the British Nationality Act 1981. He had applied to be registered as
    such and a decision was awaited from the Home Office.


 6. Mr Singh acknowledged that the age of the child was a factor of
    significance and made no further submissions.


 7. I reserved my decision.


Legal framework


    8. Paragraph 276ADE(1) sets out the requirements  which,  if  satisfied,
       lead to the applicant being granted leave to remain. The provision is
       as follows:

           The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain
           on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
           application, the applicant:

           (i) does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
           Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in  Appendix  FM;
           and

           (ii) has made a valid application for leave  to  remain  on  the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and

           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in
           the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           applicant to leave the UK; or

           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has  spent
           at least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18  years  or  above,
           has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK".


    9. Sections 117A and 117B are found in part 5A of the 2002 Act and apply
       in all cases where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to  determine
       whether a  decision  made  under  the  Immigration  Acts  breaches  a
       person's rights under Article 8.


Section 117A is as follows:

           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).


   10. The considerations referred to in section 117A(2)(a), which are  said
       by that provision to be applicable in  all  cases  where  the  public
       interest question is under consideration, are as follows:

            (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
           public interest.

           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.

           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


   11. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;



   Discussion and Findings


12. The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 6 December  2004  with
    leave  to  enter  as  a  student  which  was  extended   on   successive
    applications until  31  May  2013.  On  26  March  2012  the  Respondent
    purported to curtail the Appellants' leave to 26 May 2012 as  the  first
    Appellant's sponsor's licence was revoked. On 11  June  2012  the  first
    Appellant submitted an application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on
    human rights grounds with the other Appellants as her dependents. On  12
    February 2013 this was refused with no right of appeal. She submitted  a
    further application on the same grounds on 27 February  2013  which  was
    refused on 5 June 2013 with no right of appeal. On 5 September 2013  she
    lodged a Judicial Review against the decision dated 5 June 2013.  On  11
    August 2014 the third Appellant submitted an application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK under the family  and  private  life  route.  This  was
    refused on 14 October 2014 with no in country right  of  appeal.  On  14
    November 2014 the application for Judicial  Review  was  refused.  On  4
    March 2015 the Appellants made a human rights which was  refused  on  11
    May 2015. That decision is the subject of this appeal.


13. The Respondent refused the applications for the following  reasons.  The
    first two Appellants applications were refused because they did not meet
    the requirements of paragraph D-LTRP.1.3 with  reference  to  R-LTRP.1.1
    (d) (ii) and (iii) of the Immigration Rules. Consideration was given  to
    their applications for leave as a parent. Although it was accepted  that
    the third Appellant  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  7  years
    immediately preceding the date of the application it  was  not  accepted
    that it would be unreasonable for him to leave the UK  as  he  would  be
    returning as part of the family unit  and  would  be  supported  in  his
    integration into Mauritius. The application was refused under  paragraph
    D-LTRPT.1.3 with reference to R-LTRPT.1.1 (d) (iii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


14. The Respondent refused the first  and  second  Appellants'  applications
    under the private life route because they had not met  the  requirements
    of length of residence and the Respondent concluded that there were  not
    very significant obstacles to  their  integration  into  Mauritius.  The
    Respondent also concluded that the third  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv) because it was  reasonable  to
    expect him to leave the United Kingdom.


15. The Respondent considered her duties under section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the circumstances  of  return  and
    their  private  life  ties  here  and  concluded  that  there  were   no
    exceptional circumstances in their case.


16. The Appellants rely on their rights under Article  8  ECHR  both  within
    and outside the Immigration Rules. The appeal is against the refusal  of
    their human rights claims and by virtue of section  84  of  the  Asylum,
    Immigration and Nationality Act 2002, they can only succeed  by  showing
    that, at the date of the  hearing,  their  Article  8  rights  would  be
    breached. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal in  relation  to  appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds only was considered in respect of visit visa cases and
    by analogy the approach here should be the same. In Kaur (visit appeals;
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 was held that  (i)  in  visit  appeals  the
    Article 8 decision on an appeal cannot be  made  in  a  vacuum.   Whilst
    judges only have jurisdiction to decide whether the decision is unlawful
    under  s.6  of  the  Human  Rights   Act   1998   (or   shows   unlawful
    discrimination) (see Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT
    00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)),
    the starting-point for deciding that must be the state of  the  evidence
    about  the  appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    immigration rules.


17. In addressing the questions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 I accept  that  the
    Appellants due to their length of residence  here  are  likely  to  have
    established  a  private  life  and  the  proposed  interference  is   of
    sufficient  gravity  to  engage  the  operation  of   Article   8,   the
    interference is in accordance with the law and necessary in a democratic
    society. The remaining question is therefore whether the interference is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


18. My starting point in terms of proportionality is whether the  Appellants
    can satisfy the Immigration Rules. The Appellants  did  not  advance  an
    argument either in the skeleton argument or  in  submissions  before  me
    that the first and second Appellants meet the requirements of  paragraph
    276 ADE (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules. Instead, they seek to rely on
    the rights of the third  Appellant.  In  PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT  00108  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of
    multiple  family  members  decision-makers  should   first   apply   the
    Immigration Rules to each individual applicant and, if appropriate, then
    consider Article 8 outside  the  Rules.  This  exercise  will  typically
    entail the consideration and determination of all claims jointly, so  as
    to ensure that all material facts  and  considerations  are  taken  into
    account in each case. In PD the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  given
    that, of the three Appellants, only the third could conceivably  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules, and turned their attentions to his claim at
    first.  I conclude similarly, that given that only the  third  Appellant
    can succeed under the Rules I should consider his claim first.


19. In view of the fact that he had been in the United Kingdom  for  over  7
    years at the date of the application I have considered whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK (paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv)).



20. The Court of Appeal gave the following guidance on  the  application  of
    the reasonableness test in MA (Pakistan) and Ors v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ
    705:




    "Applying the reasonableness test


    46.     Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that  a
       child has been here for seven years must be given significant  weight
       when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the Secretary
       of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of Immigration
       Directorate Instructions entitled  "Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
       parent) and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which it is  expressly
       stated that once the seven years' residence requirement is satisfied,
       there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave (para.  11.2.4).
       These instructions were not in force when the cases  now  subject  to
       appeal were determined, but in my view they merely  confirm  what  is
       implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period  of
       time the child  will  have  put  down  roots  and  developed  social,
       cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is likely to be
       highly disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK. That  may
       be less so when the children are very  young  because  the  focus  of
       their lives will be on their families,  but  the  disruption  becomes
       more serious as they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there  must
       be a very strong expectation that the child's best interests will  be
       to remain in the UK with his parents as part of a  family  unit,  and
       that must rank as a  primary  consideration  in  the  proportionality
       assessment.


    47.     Even if we were applying the narrow  reasonableness  test  where
       the focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow  that
       leave must be granted whenever the  child's  best  interests  are  in
       favour of remaining. I reject Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the  best
       interests  assessment  automatically  resolves   the   reasonableness
       question. If Parliament had wanted  the  child's  best  interests  to
       dictate the outcome of the leave application, it would have said  so.
       The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established  one.
       Even where the child's best interests are to stay, it  may  still  be
       not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That will depend upon
       a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links  in  the  UK
       and in the country where it is proposed he should return. What  could
       not be considered, however, would  be  the  conduct  and  immigration
       history of the parents.


    48.     In EV (Phillipines) Lord Justice  Christopher  Clarke  explained
       how a tribunal should apply  the  proportionality  test  where  wider
       public interest considerations are in play,  in  circumstances  where
       the best interests of the child dictate that he should remain in  the
       UK (paras. 34-37):


         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present,
         the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests  of
         the children, it is necessary to determine the  relative  strength
         of the factors which make it in their  best  interests  to  remain
         here; and also to take account of any factors that point the other
         way.


         35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c) how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d)
         to what extent they have become  distanced  from  the  country  to
         which it is proposed that they return;  (e)  how  renewable  their
         connection with it may be; (f)  to  what  extent  they  will  have
         linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to  life  in
         that country; and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will
         interfere with their family life or their  rights  (if  they  have
         any) as British citizens.


         36. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the need  to
         maintain immigration control may well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best  interests  to  remain,  but
         only on balance (with some factors pointing the  other  way),  the
         result may be the opposite.


         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the parents  may
         also be relevant e.g. if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."


    49. Although this was not in fact  a  seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
       construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would  apply  in
       such a case. However, the fact that the child has been in the UK  for
       seven years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
       proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first,  because  of
       its relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the  child's
       best interests; and second, because  it  establishes  as  a  starting
       point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful  reasons
       to the contrary."


   21. I have considered the best interests of  the  third  Appellant  as  a
       primary consideration. In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department [2013] UKSC 74;  [2013]  1  WLR  Lord  Hodge,  with  whose
       judgment Lady Hale and Lords Kerr, Reed and Toulson agreed,  approved
       the following seven principles which need to be borne  in  mind  when
       considering the interests of the child in the context of an Article 8
       evaluation (para.10):

           (1) The best interests of a child are an integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

           (2) In making that assessment, the best  interests  of  a  child
           must be a primary consideration, although not  always  the  only
           primary consideration; and the child's best interests do not  of
           themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

           (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed  by
           the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,   no   other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           (4) While different judges might approach the  question  of  the
           best interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to
           ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

           (5)  It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
           circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests  before
           one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed  by  the
           force of other considerations;

           (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful examination
           of all relevant factors  when  the  interests  of  a  child  are
           involved in an article 8 assessment; and

           (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she
           is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."



22. The third Appellant was born in the United Kingdom on 7 April  2007  and
    has therefore been in the United has been in the UK for over 10 years at
    the date of the hearing. He has travelled  outside  the  United  Kingdom
    twice for two months in 2007 and one month in August 2007.  Consequently
    I must give the length of residence significant  weight  because  it  is
    relevant to determining the nature and strength of his  best  interests.
    He has a close and loving relationship with both parents and  it  is  in
    his best interests to remain with them.  He has spent a number of  years
    in primary school in the UK and has not yet reached a critical stage  of
    his education. I bear in mind that the  Upper  Tribunal  has  held  that
    seven years from age four is likely to be more significant  to  a  child
    that the first seven years of life. Very young children are focussed  on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable. At the  age  of
    10 the third Appellant has started forming a private  life  outside  his
    immediate  family  and  I  accept  that  he  has  started  to  establish
    friendships in this country and will have developed social and  cultural
    ties. Further, having reached to  age  of  10,  he  is  entitled  to  be
    registered  as  a  British  Citizen.  There  is  no  suggestion  by  the
    Respondent that he is not of good  character  or  would  for  any  other
    reason not meet the requirements for citizenship. I accept that this  is
    a factor of significant weight in assessing his best interests.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal's findings,  which  I  have  not  found  were
       infected by an error of law, were that the third Appellant would  not
       have any language difficulties given that  English  was  one  of  the
       official languages of Mauritius and the prime medium  of  instruction
       in public schools. Further, he found on the evidence before him  that
       Mauritian citizens enjoyed free state  education  to  tertiary  level
       attaining consistently  high  results  in  examinations.   The  third
       Appellant has visited Mauritius but has no experience  of  living  in
       that country. However, the renewability of his connections there must
       be considered in the context of the fact that his parents lived there
       until 2004, would return after having spent a number of years gaining
       an education in the UK and have family in Mauritius.


   24. I accept that the Appellant has no current connections with Mauritius
       having never lived there. I also accept, having taken account of  the
       evidence relating to his education in the Appellant's bundle that  he
       has settled into school life here. Whilst there  are  no  medical  or
       linguistic factors which would cause him difficulty in Mauritius,  in
       view of his length of residence  here  and  the  recognition  of  the
       importance of 10 years residence enshrined in the British Nationality
       Act I find that it would be strongly in his best interests to  remain
       in the UK.


   25. As acknowledged in MA (Pakistan) 7 years residence is establishes  as
       a starting point that  leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are
       powerful reasons to the contrary. I have taken account the  words  of
       Lord Justice Elias at paragraph 103 of MA (Pakistan):


"103. In my judgment, the observation  of  the  judge  to  the  effect  that
    people who come on a temporary basis can be expected to leave cannot  be
    true of the child. The purpose underlying the seven year  rule  is  that
    this kind of reasoning ought not to be adopted in their case.  They  are
    not to be blamed for the fact that their parents  overstayed  illegally,
    and the starting point is that their status should be legitimized unless
    there is good reason not to do so. I accept that the position might have
    been otherwise without the seven years' residence, but that is a  factor
    which must weigh heavily in this case. The fact  that  the  parents  are
    overstayers and  have  no  right  to  remain  in  their  own  right  can
    thereafter be weighed in the proportionality  balance  against  allowing
    the child to remain, but that is after a recognition  that  the  child's
    seven years of residence is a  significant  factor  pointing  the  other
    way."


   26. At paragraph 42 of MA Lord Justice Elias stated:


"As Lord Justice Laws pointed out in In the matter of LC, CB (a  child)  and
      JB (a child) [2014] EWCA Civ 1693 para.15, it is not blaming the child
      to say that the conduct of the parents should weigh in the scales when
      the general public interest in effective immigration control is  under
      consideration. The principle that the sins of the fathers  should  not
      be visited upon the children is not intended to lessen the  importance
      of immigration control or to restrict what the court can consider when
      having regard to that matter. So if the wider construction relied upon
      by the Secretary of State is otherwise justified, this principle  does
      not in my view undermine it."


   27. Having established that it is the third Appellant's best interests to
       remain, I now consider whether it would be unreasonable to expect him
       to return to Mauritius taking into account the wider public  interest
       considerations.


   28. The first Appellant was here lawfully as a student from 2004 until 26
       May 2012. Thereafter she  has  remained  without  leave.  The  second
       Appellant has been here as a student dependent since January 2005 and
       similarly has been without leave since May  2012.  Since  that  point
       they have attempted on a number  of  occasions  to  regularize  their
       status. When they had leave their  stay  was  precarious  because  it
       depended on a further grant of leave.   Because  their  private  live
       has been established whilst they have been  here  first  precariously
       and then unlawfully I must therefore give it little weight.


   29. Neither the first or the  second  Appellant  can  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules as there are  not  very  significant  obstacles  to
       their integration as required by paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi). I accept
       that the first and second Appellant can speak English  having  passed
       the life in the UK test. There is no evidence before me to show  that
       they are financially independent but they can in any event obtain  no
       positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2) or
       (3), whatever the degree of fluency in English, or  the  strength  of
       their financial resources as  these  are  neutral  factors  (Rhuppiah
       [2016] EWCA Civ 803). I also  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
       maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.


   30. Nevertheless, despite the public interest in  removal,  I  find  that
       given the fact that it is strongly in the best interests of the third
       Appellant to remain here, the balance in the proportionality exercise
       has not been tipped against him by the public interest. I  have  born
       in mind also what the Mr Justice McCloskey has recently said  in  the
       case of Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)
       [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC), namely that the "little  weight"  provisions
       in Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  do  not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid
       measurement or concept; "little weight" involves  a  spectrum  which,
       within its self-contained boundaries, will result in the  measurement
       of the quantum of weight considered appropriate in the fact sensitive
       context of every case. In view of his length of  residence  here  and
       the strength of his ties to the UK and the  lack  of  connections  to
       Mauritius I find it would not be reasonable for the  third  Appellant
       to return to  Mauritius  and  that  he  has  proved  his  case  under
       paragraph 276 (1) ADE (iv). It follows that  the  firsts  and  second
       Appellants are the parents of  a  qualifying  child  and  the  public
       interest does not require their removal under section 117 B  (6)  and
       that the private and family life factors advanced by  the  Appellants
       outweigh the public interest to the extent that the impugned decision
       is disproportionate in respect of all three Appellants.

Conclusions:

I re-make the decision in this appeal by allowing it on Article 8 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a child and  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity direction to protect his interests. Unless and  until  a  Tribunal
or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellants
and to the Secretary of State.  Failure to comply with this direction  could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Dated 8 July 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

