
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19226/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                      mrs sandra elaine bell (mcleanE)
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Ms C Querton instructed by Anthony Ogunfeibo & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a Jamaican citizen, appeals with permission against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing her appeal against  the
    respondent's refusal of leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    Article 8 ECHR private and family life grounds  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE, alternatively outside the Rules on the basis  of  the  line  of
    decisions beginning with Nagre.



Background

 2. The appellant, who is 53 years old, came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor in 2001 and successfully applied  for  her  visit  visa  to  be
    extended to 21 March 2002, to enable her to care for  her  uncle  here.
    When her extended visit visa expired, the appellant did not embark  for
    Jamaica.

 3. She next applied for indefinite leave to remain outside  the  Rules  in
    June 2004, on the basis that her children were in the  United  Kingdom.
    That was  refused  with  an  in-country  right  of  appeal,  which  the
    appellant exercised.  Appeal rights were exhausted in January 2007, but
    again, the appellant did not embark for her country of origin.

 4. Over 6 years passed.  In November 2013, the appellant applied again for
    leave to remain on family and private life grounds.   The appellant has
    two children, a son who has indefinite leave to remain, and a daughter.
     The appellant is not living with  her  son.   She  also  has  a  step-
    daughter here.   Both her children and her step-daughter were adults at
    the date of decision. The appellant  asserted  that  she  had  a  heart
    condition for which she was receiving medication, but  no  evidence  of
    that  accompanied  her  application.   The  respondent  considered  the
    application, within the Rules and on exceptionality grounds outside the
    Rules, but in December 2013, she refused leave to remain, with  an  in-
    country right of appeal, which the appellant exercised.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter (paragraphs 20 to 32 of the decision).  Having considered  the
    evidence, and the submissions made, the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted
    the appellant's immigration history.  She had remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully for two years before making an application  in  2004
    for indefinite leave to remain which was refused and  on  which  appeal
    rights were exhausted in 2007.  The 2007 decision  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal is not before me and was not before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6. The judge found that the appellant had met  the  man  who  is  now  her
    husband in 2007, and that by 2010 or 2011, he was aware that  that  she
    was in the country  without  leave.   They  married  in  2013,  in  the
    knowledge on his part that the appellant did not have leave to  remain.



 7. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the relationship was genuine  and
    subsisting but considered that no evidence had been presented  to  show
    why family life could not continue in Jamaica.  The judge made an error
    of fact by directing himself that the appellant's husband had been born
    in Jamaica; he was born in the United Kingdom and is a British citizen,
    but has visited Jamaica twice, in the 1980s and 1990s.   The  appellant
    advanced no evidence to support the assertion that the family could not
    settle in Jamaica.

 8. The Judge found that  the  appellant,  and  her  husband,  were  living
    together with both her son and her  daughter,  as  well  as  her  step-
    daughter.    All of the children are adults.  The appellant  relied  on
    the mental health and social difficulties experienced  by  her  natural
    daughter, arguing that the dependency demonstrated was  sufficient,  on
    Kugathas principles, to amount to family life between mother and  adult
    child.

 9. The Judge then went on to deal  with  part  5A  of  the  2002  Act:  at
    paragraph 117A the court is required to determine  whether  a  decision
    made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's  right  to  respect
    for private and family life under Article 8 and would be unlawful under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  He applied section  117B  (see
    paragraph 40) and directed himself that the  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her husband 'cannot be considered'.  He  noted  that  the
    appellant and her husband did not yet have sufficient earnings to  meet
    the requirements of the Rules but that 'This is matter for  the  future
    application and cannot be relied upon as a factor warranting a decision
    in the appellant's favour'. He then directed himself at paragraphs [41]-
    [42] as to the test for the exercise  of  the  respondent's  discretion
    outside the Rules, but reached no clear  decision  thereon.  His  self-
    direction is not wrong but the decision is not complete: there seems to
    be a deciding paragraph missing.

Permission to appeal

10. Permission to appeal  was  given  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had arguably failed  adequately  to  address  Article  8
    ECHR, alternatively applied too high a test when considering family and
    private life between the appellant and her adult children.

Rule 24 Reply

11. The respondent opposed the appeal and filed a rule  24  Reply,  relying
    inter alia on the refusal of permission by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Astle.  The basis of the refusal of the  first  application  is  not  a
    proper challenge to a grant of permission on  the  renewed  application
    and I disregard that element of the Rule 24 Reply.

12. The core of the Reply is as follows:
         "2.  ... Judge  Khan  took  into  consideration  all  the  relevant
         evidence and it was based on accepted legal principles and relevant
         case law that the Judge declined to go further and consider a  free
         standing Article 8 claim.  It was open to the Judge notwithstanding
         the medical issues surrounding the  appellant's  daughter  to  find
         that the support did not  go  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties.
         Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]  EWCA
         Civ 31 (21 January 2003).
         3.   The grounds have no merit and merely disagree with the adverse
         outcome of the appeal.  The Judge considered all the evidence  that
         was available to him and came to a conclusion open to him based  on
         that evidence and the Rules, based on the  balance  of  probability
         and does not disclose any error. ..."

13. That was the basis on which this appeal came before  me.  I  note  that
    pursuant to the directions to parties issued by the Upper  Tribunal  on
    24 November 2015 no Rule 15(2A) application  has  been  made  to  admit
    further evidence, so I make this decision on  the  evidence  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.





Submissions

14. For the appellant, Ms Querton relied on  Vikas  Singh  v  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630,  Singh  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,  MM  &
    Ors, R (On the Application Of)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985, MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015]
    UKUT 90 (IAC).  She argued that the appellant's application should  not
    be regarded as damaged by the requirements in paragraph 117B(2) and (3)
    since she was fluent in English and had never  been  a  burden  on  the
    United  Kingdom  state.   Her  husband  worked  and  the  couple   were
    financially independent.  Her family life with her husband had not been
    taken into account: he was United Kingdom born and had lived  here  all
    his life, which was a strong and relevant consideration.

15. As regards her natural daughter, the appellant relied  on  the  medical
    evidence overlooked by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, which showed that
    she had anxiety and panic attacks, and that the  daughter  depended  on
    the appellant for moral support.  The Judge had not taken those matters
    into account.  Whether or not there was family life was  not  a  simple
    question and must be weighed properly, which  she  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to do.  Nor was  the  relationship
    with other family members properly analysed  and  taken  into  account:
    they were still living in the family home and those relationships  were
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

16. For the respondent, Mrs Willocks-Briscoe  argued  that  the  Judge  had
    given  adequate  reasons  and  that  there  was  no  evidence  in   the
    appellant's  bundle  regarding  circumstances  in  Jamaica.   All  that
    underpinned her argument was a bare assertion that the appellant  could
    not receive adequate treatment there  and  it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave her extended family in the United Kingdom to return
    to her country of origin.

17. Mrs Willocks-Briscoe accepted that the Judge had not gone on to  decide
    on Article 8 outside the Rules and relied upon paragraph  [27]  of  the
    decision of Mr Justice Edis in Sunassee, R (on the  application  of)  v
    Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2015] EWHC 1604
    (Admin), that 'a proper decision may seem mystifying  if  expressed  in
    unsuitable language'.  Reliance on paragraphs 117B(1) and (2)  did  not
    of itself dilute the public interest.  The  Tribunal  was  required  to
    consider whether weighty factors outside the Rules had been shown.

18. In reply, Ms Querton repeated her assertion that it was an error of law
    for the Judge to have failed to make any finding on Article  8  outside
    the Rules, despite having made a proper self-direction.

Discussion

19. I accept that this decision is not well drafted: the Judge  misdirected
    himself as to where the  appellant's  husband  was  born,  omitted  the
    medical evidence concerning the appellant's  daughter,  and  failed  to
    complete his Article 8 reasons outside the Rules.

20. The appellant's reliance on sub-paragraphs 117B(2)  and  (3)  does  not
    assist her case: compliance with those tests is not determinative of an
    application, as set out by the Upper Tribunal  in  AM  (S.117B)  [2015]
    UKUT 260 (IAC) at (2) in the judicial headnote:
         "(2) An appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave
         to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of  his
         fluency in English, or the strength of his financial resources."

21. Paragraph 117B(4) and 117B(5) deal with  the  weight  to  be  given  to
    certain relationships. The relevant sub-paragraph for  this  appeal  is
    sub-paragraph 117B(iv):
         "117B(iv)     Little weight should be given to a private life or  a
         relationship formed with a qualifying partner that  is  established
         by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
         unlawfully".

22. The appellant's partner is  British-born  and  a  British  citizen.  As
    regards the birthplace of the appellant's husband, that is a finding of
    fact not a finding of law, and is relevant only if weight is capable of
    being attached to the relationship. At  the  time  when  the  appellant
    formed her relationship with her husband,  in  2007,  she  was  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  Accordingly their family life can be  given
    little weight, and the error regarding his place of  birth  falls  away
    from consideration.

23. As regards private life, whether a person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully, paragraph 117B(4) or precariously, paragraph 117B(5) little
    weight can be given to such private life.

24. It is clear, therefore, that whether the claimed Kugathas dependency of
    the appellant's daughter is sufficient to  amount  to  family  life  is
    crucial to the appellant's attempt  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    because only if she has family life  with  her  adult  daughter,  which
    would not be affected by the statutory presumptions  in  section  117B,
    can the claim succeed.  The judge's reasons at paragraph 39 for finding
    that family life did not exist were based on the  material  before  him
    and the  oral  evidence  that  he  heard  from  the  parties  and  were
    unarguably open to him on that evidence.

25. I have considered whether a review of the medical evidence,  which  the
    Judge did not consider, avails the  appellant.   The  medical  evidence
    from South West London and St. George's Mental Health NHS Trust Service
    shows that in March 2014 the appellant's daughter was unable to  attend
    her College or undertake her coursework because  she  had  anxiety  and
    panic  attacks  for  a  period  of   3   weeks.    She   began   taking
    antidepressants, which  worked  well,  because  in  May  2014  she  was
    discharged  from  the   Trust's   mental   health   service,   with   a
    recommendation to keep using the strategies and ideas she had  learned:
    her scores on the PHQ-9 depression scale had reduced from 20 to  2  and
    on the GAD-7 anxiety scale from 17 to 2,  now  indicating  sub-clinical
    levels of depression and anxiety.  A report  from  her  College  stated
    that the  appellant's  daughter  "engaged  well  with  the  course  and
    regularly contributed to discussions".  She had the option of  a  three
    months' booster session and self-referral in future if  she  considered
    it appropriate.  The evidence is of a temporary  problem,  resolved  by
    treatment and with future support available.

26. By 2015, the evidence was that the  appellant's  daughter  was  working
    part-time, studying psychology and receiving counselling  and  now  had
    the support, not just of her father, brother, half sister  and  mother,
    but of her partner, with whom she planned to live in the  near  future,
    and with whose child she was pregnant.  The omitted evidence  does  not
    undermine the First-tier Tribunal's finding that the support needed  by
    the appellant's daughter from her  mother  amounted  to  no  more  than
    normal emotional ties.

27. Overall therefore, there is no relevant private or family life to which
    more than "little weight" can be given.

28. The next question is whether there are any  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules to which the  Nagre  principles  apply.
    In this respect, it is right that the Judge set out the test, but  made
    no  finding  whether  any  exceptional  or   compelling   compassionate
    circumstances exist.  I have been taken to the decisions of  the  Court
    of Appeal in Nagre at [29] and [49], MS (Nigeria) at [42] and [46],  MM
    (Lebanon) at [129] and [135], Dube at paragraph (e) of the  head  note,
    Sunassee at 27 and 36, Vikas Singh and Another at [24]-[25]  and  Singh
    and Khalid at [3] and [64] thereof.  The thrust of all of the Article 8
    authorities is that there must be something compelling over  and  above
    the matters covered by the Rules and that it is a question of fact  for
    the relevant decision-maker whether such factors exist.

29. The most useful formulation is probably in Singh and  Khalid  at  [63]-
    [64]:
         "63. The first case is the decision of this court in MM  (Lebanon).
             The only substantive judgment is that of Aikens LJ  with  whom
             the Vice-President, Maurice Kay  LJ,  and  Treacy  LJ  agreed.
             Most of the issues with which the case is concerned are wholly
             remote from those in this appeal, but in one  section  of  his
             judgment Aikens LJ had to consider Nagre.  In paragraph 129 he
             refers to Sales J having said that 'if a particular person  is
             outside the rule then he has to demonstrate, as a  preliminary
             to a consideration outside the rule, that he has  an  arguable
             case that there may be good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
             remain outside the rules': that is evidently a  paraphrase  of
             the second half of paragraph 29 of  Sales  J's  judgment.   He
             continues:
                  'I cannot see  much  utility  in  imposing  this  further,
                  intermediary, test.  If the applicant cannot  satisfy  the
                  rule, then there either is  or  there  is  not  a  further
                  Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by  the
                  relevant decision-maker.'
             Mr Malik submitted - this being his second ground of appeal in
             Ms Khalid's case - that  this  short  passage  undermined  the
             entirety  of  Sales  J's   point   about   a   full   separate
             consideration of Article 8 not always being necessary.
         64.  In my view that is a mis-reading of Aikens  LJ's  observation.
             He was not questioning the substantial point made by Sales  J.
             He was simply saying it  was  unnecessary  for  the  decision-
             maker, in approaching the 'second stage'  to  have  to  decide
             first whether it was arguable that there was a good Article  8
             claim outside the Rules  -  that  being  what  he  calls  'the
             intermediary test' - and then,  if  he  decided  that  it  was
             arguable, to go on to assess  that  claim:  he  should  simply
             decide whether there was a good claim  outside  the  Rules  or
             not.  I am not sure that I would myself have read Sales  J  as
             intending to impose any such intermediary requirement,  though
             I agree with Aikens  LJ  that  if  he  was  it  represents  an
             unnecessary refinement.  But what matters  is  that  there  is
             nothing in Aikens LJ's comment which casts doubt on Sales  J's
             basic point that there is no need to conduct a  full  separate
             examination of Article 8  outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the
             circumstances of a particular case, all the issues  have  been
             addressed in the consideration  under  the  Rules."  [Emphasis
             added]

30. It would have been open to the First-tier Tribunal to  decide  that  no
    separate Article 8 ECHR  examination  was  required,  or  to  insert  a
    further paragraph making the  decision  outside  the  Rules.   No  such
    paragraph exists and the next paragraph is the dismissal of the appeal.
     Given the other errors in the decision, in particular the  failure  to
    set out the medical evidence, I am not satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning is sufficiently sound to be  sustainable.   I  set
    aside the decision and proceed to  re-make  it  on  the  basis  of  the
    material before me.

Remaking the decision

31. As already stated, the Judge was entitled to find,  and  I  find,  that
    there was no family and private life unaffected by the 'little  weight'
    requirement in section 117B(4) and 117B(5).  Nor, on the evidence, were
    there exceptional or compelling  circumstances:  the  only  exceptional
    circumstances advanced relate to the appellant's adult daughter who has
    short-lived  problems  with   anxiety   and   depression   which   were
    successfully treated in 2014 and which were asserted, but not shown, to
    have recurred in 2015.

32. Any dependency by the appellant's  daughter  on  her  mother  does  not
    approach the high standard  required  for  Kugathas  dependency.   This
    young woman still lives at home  but  she  has  her  father,  also  her
    brother and her half-sister living there too, and in addition,  at  the
    date of decision, she was in a relationship with another  person  as  a
    result of which she is now a mother herself.   She can  depend  on  her
    partner, as well as other members of her family, should she need to  in
    the future, and she also has the support of her NHS Trust if required.

33.  Nor  do  I  consider  that  these  circumstances  are  exceptional  or
    compelling compassionate circumstances,  for  which  the  Secretary  of
    State should consider exercising her discretion outside the Rules.  The
    case is simply too weak and the evidence too  poor  on  that  point  to
    amount to exceptional circumstances.  I therefore substitute a decision
    dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision.  I  re-make
the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson    Date: 25 January 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
