
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19272/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 6 July 2015                        |                On 19 August 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   mr f k
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Dogra, Counsel instructed by Bukhari Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  5  April  1978  and  he
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  9  April
    2014 to refuse  him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph FM and paragraph 276ADE.

 2. The appellant claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  March
    2004 clandestinely hidden in a lorry and made no attempt to  regularise
    his stay.

 3. His wife joined him in the United Kingdom with their son  HK  in  2005.
    At the time of his arrival in the United Kingdom HK was  3  years  old,
    having been born on 29 July 2002.  Both his wife and  his  son  entered
    the UK illegally in 2005.  In December 2008 the  appellant  was  served
    with an IS151A when encountered trying to board a flight  to  Pakistan.
    On 28 May 2009 a second child was born in the UK.  The  appellant  made
    an application on  5  April  2012  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of his private life and his family  life
    in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused on 5 June 2013 and
    the appellant was given no right of appeal.  Following  an  application
    for judicial review the Secretary of State reconsidered the application
    and a further decision was issued on 9 April 2014.  This  afforded  the
    appellant a right of appeal.  The appeal proceeded on  the  basis  that
    there was no right of appeal granted to the wife and children  but  the
    matter has proceeded on the basis  that  they  are  dependants  on  the
    outcome of the appellant's appeal.

 4. The respondent refused the appellant's  application  having  considered
    Appendix FM.  It was accepted that the appellant  met  the  suitability
    requirements for his family and private  life  to  be  considered.   He
    could not succeed on the basis of his relationship with his partner  as
    she had no valid leave to remain in the UK and  therefore  he  did  not
    meet the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2-E-LTRP.1.12 under Appendix FM.

 5. Consideration was given to whether he had leave to remain as  a  parent
    under the Immigration Rules. In order to be eligible under Appendix  FM
    his child should have lived in the UK continuously for at  least  seven
    years immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph  EX.1
    applied (E-ELTRPT 2.2).

 6. It was considered that both of the children were under the  age  of  18
    and living in the United Kingdom, that neither were British citizens or
    settled in the UK.  His client's children  resided  with  him  and  his
    wife, also a Pakistan national, who was not settled in the UK  and  for
    this reason the appellant failed to meet the eligibility requirement as
    a parent.

 7. It was specifically stated in the notice of decision that the appellant
    had failed to meet the mandatory eligibility criteria of E-LTRP.1.2 and
    E-LTRPT.2.3.  Under E-LTRP.1.2 the appellant's partner must be either a
    British citizen present and settled in the UK or in the UK  with  leave
    as a refugee or humanitarian protection and under E-LTRPT.2.3 either -

         "(a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for  the
             child or the child normally lives with the applicant  and  not
             their other parents (who is a British Citizen  or  settled  in
             the UK); or

         (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be
             -

             (i)  a British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here  includes  a
                  person who has been in a relationship with  the  applicant
                  for less than two years prior to the date of application);
                  or

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                  to remain as a partner under this Appendix."

    The appellant did not have sole responsibility for his  child  and  the
    parent or carer with whom the child normally lived  did  not  meet  the
    requirements.

 8. Under paragraph 276ADE the appellant had not lived in the UK for twenty
    years.  It was not accepted that  he  had  no  ties  including  social,
    cultural or family with the country to which he would have to go if  he
    is required to leave the UK.

 9. The circumstances of HK, the son, were considered as he was alleged  to
    have lived in the UK continuously for seven years and it was considered
    whether at his stage of development it would be reasonable for  him  to
    be returned to Pakistan.  He was 11 years old  and  just  embarking  on
    secondary education.  However, at this early stage of his education  it
    would be reasonable to expect him to continue his studies  in  Pakistan
    where he could continue to build on educational foundations  forged  in
    the UK.  He had spent his life in the UK but he was  with  his  parents
    who were both Pakistani nationals.  This would have a  major  influence
    during his formative years.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne heard the appeal on 31 July  2014
    and dismissed the appeal.

11. An application for permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bird on the basis that the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate weight to the fact that HK had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since the age of 3 and the judge had failed to take  into  account  and
    consider the best interests of the younger child at  all.   This  child
    had never lived in Pakistan.

12. An error of law was found on the basis that the judge had indeed failed
    to consider the best interests of both of the children and  despite  an
    otherwise comprehensive judgment that the judge approached the evidence
    without an assessment of both of the children.

The Hearing

13. At the hearing I made it clear that the  hearing  was  confined  to  an
    assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  how  that
    assessment would affect any decision made in relation to the parents.

14. F K attended and gave oral testimony and adopted his statement dated 31
    July 2014.  First he stated that his son was due to start his GCSEs  in
    September 2015.  He then stated he was in year 8 and he  was  not  sure
    when he was due to start his GCSEs.

15. Under  cross-examination  he  confirmed  that  his  son  was  attending
    secondary education at Kings Heath School and  he  attended  there  two
    months ago.  Before that he was attending  an  Islamic  school.    When
    asked he claimed he did not know the school his son was  attending  was
    an Islamic school: he said it was convenient and near their home he was
    asked the name of it and  he  said  it  was  the  'Islamic  Centre'  or
    something like that.  He confirmed that they spoke Urdu and  Pashtu  at
    home.

16. The language of instruction in the Islamic Centre was in  Urdu,  Arabic
    and English.  He confirmed that HK attended primary school until year 5
    and then attended Islamic School for one year.

17. The appellant confirmed he had no right to work in the UK and  he  only
    became aware when solicitors told him he had no right to work here, but
    he needed to support himself and he worked with  a  friend,  part-time.
    There were less opportunities for work available in Pakistan.

18. Mrs F K attended and confirmed  that  HK  had  only  gone  to  a  state
    maintained secondary School in year 8.  Prior to that  he  attended  an
    Islamic School for a full year of 7 and half a year of Year 8  and  had
    left in April 2015.  Before then he had attended the LL Primary School.
     He was due to commence his GCSE course in September 2016.  He was sent
    to the Islamic School because his friend said it was very good.

19. The youngest child was at full-time school.  She stated that they spoke
    Pashtu at home and the children replied in English.

20. Mr Tufan made  his  submissions.   The  key  question  whether  it  was
    reasonable to request that these appellants be  returned  to  Pakistan.
    There was evidence that the children spoke  in  two  languages  in  the
    household, that was Urdu and Pashtu.  The elder child had been  exposed
    to an Islamic school and therefore had been  exposed  to  Urdu  and  to
    Islamic culture.  He submitted that the child had been taken out of the
    school to give the impression that he was  culturally  integrated  into
    the UK.

21. He referred to EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 particularly paragraphs 58 and 60.

22. AK was born in 2009 and recently turned 6  years  old.   She  had  been
    exposed to a language at home and her best interests were to stay  with
    the parents wherever that was.

23. Ms Dogra made submissions and accepted that the  appellants  could  not
    comply with Appendix FM.  However paragraph  276ADE,  sub-Section  (iv)
    applied to HK.  He would be under the age of 18 but had lived in the UK
    for seven years.  He had now been in  the  UK  for  almost  ten  years,
    having arrived in 2004.  Some of the language being spoken at home  was
    not sufficient to suggest that it was reasonable he could  return.   He
    might have some understanding of the mother tongue  but  it  was  clear
    from the evidence his primary language was English.  He would have  had
    to adapt to education back in Pakistan.  The school he had attended was
    an Islamic school but this  did  not  necessarily  expose  him  to  the
    cultural norms of his country.  He had been in the UK since the age  of
    3 and he was not likely to remember Pakistan.  EV (Philippines)  raised
    the factor of costs  but  this  was  only  one  issue  in  the  overall
    assessment.

24. With respect of AK she had lived all her life in the UK and  had  never
    been to Pakistan.  It  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  her  to
    Pakistan under Article 8  and  if  that  were  the  case  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove the parents.

25. Under Section 117 she submitted that family life should  be  considered
    in relation to the children.  The test was  the  same  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276 and Section 117 in  relation  to  the  reasonableness  of
    return.

Conclusion

26. Paragraph 276ADE sets out that   the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an
    applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK
    are that at the date of application, the applicant:

         "(i) Does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             discounting any period of imprisonment; or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK for at least 7 years discounting any period of imprisonment
             and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  applicant  to
             leave the UK; or

         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             discounting any period of imprisonment; or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph 2, is aged 18  years  or  above,  has
             lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than   20   years
             discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment  but  has  no  ties
             including social, cultural or family with the country to which
             we would have to go if required to leave the UK."

27. Following ZH (Tanzania)   v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  the  Supreme  Court
    acknowledged that the best interests of a child  should  be  a  primary
    consideration and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 74 outlines the seven steps  which  should  be  taken  into
    account when assessing the best interests.  Those best interests I have
    addressed as my starting  point  and  before  deciding  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect HK and AK to relocate outside the United  Kingdom.
    I note that although the best interests of the child can be  outweighed
    by a cumulative effect of other considerations no  other  consideration
    can be treated as inherently more significant.  Zoumbas confirmed  that
    the children should not be held responsible for the  actions  of  their
    parents.

28. HK entered the UK with his mother  in  2005  both  entering  illegally.
    Since that time he has lived with his parents and has not  returned  to
    Pakistan.  I note from Azimi-Moayed and others (
    decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  00197  (IAC)
    that as a starting point it is in the best interests of children to  be
    with both their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the
    United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
    dependent children who form part of their household  unless  there  are
    reasons to the contrary.   That  said  it  is  generally  also  in  the
    interests of children to have stability and continuity  of  social  and
    educational provision.

29. E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00315
    (IAC) recognised


    'that in  the  course  of  such  time  roots  are  put  down,  personal
    identities are developed, friendships are formed  and  links  are  made
    with the community outside the family unit. The degree to  which  these
    elements of private life are forged and  therefore  the  weight  to  be
    given to the passage of time will depend upon the facts in each case'.

     And that


     'adaptability of the child in each case must be assessed and is not  a
    conclusive consideration on its own'.

30. HK has experienced a substantial period  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and in the normal course of events I would have considered that
    he would have  put  down  considerable  roots  and  friendships  but  a
    striking factor in this is that he was removed from his primary  school
    in year 5 and placed for year 6 and most of year 7  in  another  school
    which is an Islamic School.  His father at first stated, which I do not
    believe, that he did not know that this was an Islamic School.   Merely
    from the name of the school it is clear that  the  school  is  Islamic.
    Indeed his father confirmed that he was  taught  in  Urdu,  Arabic  and
    English at that school and his mother confirmed that the fees were paid
    privately and at home the children were spoken to in  Pashto.   I  find
    both children are exposed to Urdu and Pashto.    I  take  into  account
    that HK was, at the date of the hearing, nearly 13 years  old  and  the
    evidence given, although it was contradictory between  the  mother  and
    the father, that he was entering his GCSE period of study in  September
    2016.  He had spent a year and a half,  in  fact  nearly  two  academic
    years, at the privately funded Islamic School in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He has not yet commenced his formal GCSE education.

31. This does  suggest  to  me  that  although  he  may  have  forged  some
    friendships he is adaptable and that he has  been  exposed  to  Islamic
    culture both at home and at school.  He is still in his early years and
    although I take into account the reports from his previous school LL  I
    was supplied with no up-to-date school reports from either Kings  Heath
    or from the Islamic School.

32.  The social and educational provision for  HK  is  such  that  he  will
    remain with his parents and, as I have stated above, has been attending
    a private Islamic School which he could do in  Pakistan.   Although  he
    has had lengthy residence in this country I am not  persuaded  that  in
    fact his social, cultural and educational ties would be  so  disrupted.
    Policies have identified that seven years is a relevant period and that
    seven years from the age of 4 is likely to be  more  significant  to  a
    child than the first seven years of life as  very  young  children  are
    focused on their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable  but
    it is clear from the educational  history  of  HK  that  he  is  indeed
    adaptable and sociable.

33. I find it would also be in the best interests of HK to  stay  with  his
    parents and  his  sister,  receive  an  education  and  experience  the
    cultural heritage of the country of his nationality.

34. Both his parents and his sister are Pakistan nationals and he has  been
    brought up  by  his  parents  who  have  lived  in  Pakistan  for  some
    considerable time.  A submission was made that HK has  grown  up  in  a
    different environment with different cultural  understandings  than  he
    would have in Pakistan.  However he has been brought up by his  parents
    who would have introduced  him  to  their  cultural  way  of  life  and
    confirmed that they speak to him in Urdu.  Indeed it was  the  parents'
    friends who told them to send him to the local Islamic School.

35. It was suggested that HK had developed his own network and private life
    outside school but the evidence produced from LL School dated from 2012
    to 2013, which was sometime ago and although the report described as  a
    popular boy, this suggests that he would be able to adapt and make  new
    friendships on his return.

36. There was no statement from HK himself or  evidence  from  his  friends
    although I do note that he had an achievement certificate  awarded  for
    perfect attendance during April 2015.

37. Despite the fact that his parents stated in their witness statement  of
    31 July 2014 that private education could not be afforded in  Pakistan,
    nonetheless private education was being funded in the UK for a year and
    a half and I have no doubt from the evidence  that  was  provided  that
    private education would be available in  Pakistan  albeit  at  a  cost.
    Failing that there was no evidence  that  there  was  no  education  or
    health systems in Pakistan.

38. I can understand that HK  will  face  some  practical  difficulties  in
    relocating but he will be with his parents who, no doubt, will  support
    him.

39. He is clearly an intelligent boy who could be expected to  adapt  to  a
    new country and a new environment and make new friends.  It is not  the
    case that he would be required  to  learn  a  second  language  as  his
    evidence was given that Pashtu and Urdu were both spoken  in  the  home
    and indeed he has attended a school which has taught in languages other
    than English and to which he adapted.

40. HK is still at a young age and although he has been in the UK for  over
    seven years and been in education he has been removed  from  mainstream
    education in this country and placed in an Islamic School.  That is not
    a criticism of that decision but it has shown that he is  flexible  and
    has been exposed to at  the  least  an  educational  culture  which  is
    predominant in Pakistan.  He has not reached an education stage whereby
    he is about to commence his GCSEs and I have no doubt  that  there  are
    courses that he can follow in Pakistan.  Lastly, this course of  return
    will not interfere with his family life because  his  family  would  be
    returned together subject to what I have to say about AK.

41. Although the point was not taken, there was no  indication  of  exactly
    when the mother entered the United Kingdom with HK, and nonetheless the
    respondent appeared to proceed on the basis that he did enter  in  2005
    and thus applied Paragraph 276 ADE (the child must be  in  the  UK  for
    seven years preceding the application which was made  in  April  2012).
    This  will,  however,  have  implications   should   he   attempt   any
    registration for citizenship.  My only use of this point is that  there
    was no indication that either of the children were British citizens.

42. I turn to a consideration of AK.  She was born in  the  United  Kingdom
    and has lived here continuously for six years (rather  than  the  seven
    years required by Paragraph 276ADE) and attends school.   I  note  that
    she has never been to Pakistan.

43. I find her best interests are to remain with both her parents  and  her
    brother,  to continue with education whether in the United  Kingdom  or
    in Pakistan and to know her cultural background and heritage.

44. Although the papers indicated that she had  some  speech  and  language
    difficulties she has undergone significant treatment.  I note from  the
    speech and language report of Esther Ryan dated 18 June  2014  that  AK
    underwent  speech  and  language  therapy  reassessment  and   it   was
    considered that she had made significant progress and her communication
    difficulties are now moderately delayed.  It was further stated she:

         "shall continue to progress well as she matures  with  the  ongoing
         support of you and good language models from school staff."

45. There was no indication to suggest that AK could not adjust or that she
    had significant special educational needs.  She is  young,  in  primary
    education and because of her age adaptable. Both of the parents at  the
    hearing availed themselves of an Urdu interpreter and I was  told  that
    the children also speak Pashtu at  home.   She  too  must  be  flexible
    linguistically as  she  will  be  taught  in  English  and  have  other
    languages spoken to her at home.

46. Although the educational and health systems may be  preferable  in  the
    United Kingdom there was no evidence  that  the  appellants  could  not
    avail their children of the benefits of those systems in Pakistan.

47. Had HK spent time only in one school I would have been less inclined to
    find that moving his educational career abroad was acceptable  but  for
    the reasons given above his interests are like his sister to remain  in
    the family unit and to retain their cultural heritage which can be done
    by returning abroad.

48. In my consideration of whether it is reasonable to expect HK to  return
    home, I enlist EV (Philippines), paragraph 58 to 60  where  Lewison  LJ
    stated
    '58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
    the children must be made on the basis that the facts are as  they  are
    in the real world. If one parent has no right to remain, but the  other
    parent does, that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
    conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is  the
    background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate
    question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child  to  follow  the
    parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?
    59. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children  to
    follow their mother to Tanzania, no least because the family  would  be
    separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up in
    the country of which they were citizens'.
    60. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none  of
    the family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain  in  this
    country. If the mother is removed, the father has no independent  right
    to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is  entirely  reasonable
    to expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge  found
    it is obviously in their best interests to remain with  their  parents.
    Although it is, of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I cannot
    see that the desirability of being educated at public expense in the UK
    can outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
    parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,  so
    we cannot educate the world."

49. Neither of the parents in this case entered the United Kingdom  legally
    and despite their lengthy residence in the United Kingdom,  has  always
    known that their status here was  not  only  precarious  but  unlawful.
    None of the family can comply with the immigration rules and,  for  the
    reasons given above, I conclude that it is reasonable to expect HK  and
    his sister to return with their parents. Further to  SS  Congo  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 317 my starting point is the immigration rules.

50. For completeness following Singh v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  and  to
    ensure that all relevant factors have been addressed, particularly with
    regards the children, I have applied principles enunciated in Razgar  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  I do not accept that there is family life in  the
    United Kingdom but I can accept that the family have engaged a  private
    life in the UK and the threshold for the  engagement  of  that  private
    life has been reached.  The refusal decision taken by the Secretary  of
    State, for the reasons given above, in relation  to  HK  and  paragraph
    276ADE (which does not apply to AK) was taken in  accordance  with  the
    law and for a legitimate purpose, that  is  protection  of  rights  and
    freedoms of others through the maintenance of immigration control.

51. I have taken into account and must take into account  Section  117B  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  when  assessing  the
    weight to be accorded to the public interest and the proportionality of
    the Secretary of State's decision

    Section 117B  Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
                all cases

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

               (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a qualifying child, and

               (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                     leave the United Kingdom."

52. The appellant and his wife had interpreters, at  court  and  there  was
    evidence  that  the  appellant  was  working  illegally  and  thus   no
    information on whether he was paying tax.  It was  the  case  that  the
    children were both at school and it would appear that  the  family  are
    accessing care from the NHS (AK has been accessing speech and  language
    services) and thus  I conclude that the family are a burden on the  tax
    payer. At all times the appellant has remained in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.  I take these factors into account.

53. Section 117B(6) specifically states
         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


54. I have explored the reasonability of whether  either  of  the  children
    should be  expected  to  return  to  Pakistan  and  found  that  it  is
    reasonable for them to do so for the reasons outlined and  despite  the
    length of time HK has spent in the United Kingdom.

55. When considering the proportionality of the decision I have  considered
    any other factors and in particular any delay in relation to the  claim
    beyond the parents' control. Bearing in mind the number of claims  that
    the respondent needs to process I am not minded to consider that  there
    has been any significant delay on the  part  of  the  respondent  as  a
    result of a dysfunctional system, EB Kosovo v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41, such
    as to reduce the weight to be accorded  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position.  The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2004  and
    failed to make any attempt at regularising his  stay  until  2012  some
    eight years after entry.

56. The question I must ask in relation to Article 8 is most succinctly set
    out in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11

    'In an article 8 case where this  question  is  reached,  the  ultimate
    question for the appellate immigration authority is whether the refusal
    of leave to enter or remain, in circumstances where  the  life  of  the
    family cannot reasonably be expected to be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking
    full account of all considerations weighing in favour of  the  refusal,
    prejudices the family life of the applicant in  a  manner  sufficiently
    serious to amount to a breach of the  fundamental  right  protected  by
    article 8. If the answer to this question is affirmative,  the  refusal
    is unlawful and the authority must so decide. It is not necessary  that
    the appellate immigration authority, directing itself along  the  lines
    indicated in this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case  meets
    a test of exceptionality'.

57. I do not accept that there would be  significant  difficulties  in  the
    appellant's return.  He and his wife have spent the majority  of  their
    lives in Pakistan and been educated there.   He  and  his  wife  retain
    their linguistic skills, he worked in Pakistan before his arrival  here
    and neither have any  significant  health  issues.   They  will  return
    together as a family and can never have had an expectation of remaining
    here. This decision was specifically focussed on the interests  of  the
    children and an assessment of the reasonableness of their return.

58. I find that the decision of the Secretary of State  was  a  lawful  and
    proportionate decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  Human  Rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  is
because minors are involved.



Signed                                  Date 14th August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



FEE ORDER

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 14th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





























