
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/19415/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 February 2015                           |On 5 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                              Miss Olivia Hlalo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr A Corban (Counsel instructed by Corban
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant whose date of birth is  6  July  1961  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe. In a determination promulgated on 26 November 2014 the First-
    tier Tribunal (J D L Edwards) dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds and under the Immigration Rules.



Background

 2.   She entered the UK on 28 November 2001 as a visitor with  leave  valid
    until 28 May 2002.  Thereafter she applied for leave  to  remain  as  a
    student and five extensions of leave were granted.  On 26  August  2010
    she applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student which was
    refused and she was appeal  rights  exhausted  on  2  March  2011.   An
    application for leave outside of the Rules was made and refused  on  26
    July 2011.  The present application under Article 8 of the Human Rights
    Convention, was refused  by  the  respondent  on  8  April  2014.   The
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(i) and (ii) but  not
    (iii)-(iv) as she had lived in  the  UK  for  a  period  of  less  than
    thirteen years and failed to demonstrate that she has no ties including
    social, cultural or family in Zimbabwe.

Grounds of application

3.   An application for permission was made  contending  that  the  Tribunal
    erred by misdirecting itself in relation  to  the  relevant  Rules  and
    confused the requirements  under  paragraph  276ADE  with  those  under
    Appendix FM (which were not relevant).  Secondly, it was contended that
    the Tribunal failed to apply the principles in Ogundimu  (Article  8  -
    new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).  Further, the Tribunal  failed
    to consider the best interests of the appellant's niece  under  Section
    55 of the UKBA Act 2009 and failed to give adequate reasons for finding
    that family life was not engaged as between the appellant,  her  sister
    and niece.  The Tribunal further failed to take  into  account  that  a
    substantial part of the period of residence (over 9 years)  was  lawful
    and the only factor weighing in favour of the removal decision was that
    the appellant had overstayed her leave to remain some three years ago.

Permission

4.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies on 13 January 2015.  He stated that  the  Tribunal  appeared  to
    have misdirected itself regarding the application of 276ADE and further
    that the Tribunal had not given the evidence the anxious scrutiny  that
    is required particularly in relation to the Article 8 claim.

Error of Law Hearing

5.   At the hearing Dr Corban relied on the grounds in the  application  for
    permission to appeal and expanded on the same.

6.   Ms Holmes produced and relied on a Rule 24 response  dated  22  January
    2015 which had not appeared  in  the  Tribunal  file.   The  Respondent
    accepted that whilst the Tribunal may have incorrectly referred to  the
    requirements to be a partner or a parent (under Appendix FM), this  was
    not a material error given  that  there  was  no  indication  that  the
    appellant could succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Tribunal's use of language  raised  some  concerns  in  its
    consideration  of  family  life  as  between  adults  and  Section   55
    considerations, but such matters were not material to  the  outcome  of
    the  appeal.  Further  the  findings   as   regards   Article   8   and
    considerations of relevant factors were open to the judge to make.  The
    grounds were no more than an  argument  with  the  findings  made.   Ms
    Holmes acknowledged that whilst there were  some  shortcomings  in  the
    determination it could not be shown that they were material  errors  of
    law.

7.    Dr Corban responded that it was clear the Tribunal  had  not  properly
    taken into account the nine to  ten  years'  lawful  leave  and  indeed
    referred to a "poor immigration history" which was clearly contrary  to
    the evidence.

Discussion and decision

8.   The appellant's grounds have been made out. I am satisfied  that  there
    are material errors of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and
    reasons such that the decision should be set aside.  It is  clear  that
    the Tribunal misdirected itself in relation to the requirements of  the
    Rules when it referred to "she is neither a partner nor a parent" which
    are relevant to Appendix FM and not to paragraph 276ADE which was under
    consideration and was the only reason given  for  concluding  that  the
    requirements could not be met [21].  The Tribunal failed to demonstrate
    that it gave proper consideration to the provisions under paragraph 276
    ADE. I reject the Secretary of State's submission that  the  error  was
    not material given that the appellant was not able to show that she met
    the requirements under paragraph 276ADE. Even if that were the case the
    Tribunal went on to consider Article 8 ECHR but that consideration  was
    flawed and inadequate, notwithstanding that the Tribunal placed  weight
    on the public interest factors in "section 5A of the 2002 act"[22].  In
    the decision  the  Tribunal  placed  weight  on  the  appellant's  poor
    immigration history finding that her leave to remain expired some three
    years ago and that she had remained in the UK since. It  further  found
    that private life was acquired whilst unlawfully in the UK (22).  There
    was no consideration, apart from at [3], given to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant lawfully entered the UK in 2001 and remained lawfully in  the
    UK as a student until 2 March 2011.

9.   Finally, the Tribunal has in my view simply disregarded  the  issue  of
    "special dependency" and made  no  adequate  findings  or  reasons  for
    "disregarding" the claim that the appellant has been a second mother to
    her sister's children aged 23 and 17 years at the date of decision. She
    lived in their household in Zimbabwe and  her  sister  is  present  and
    settled in the UK. Further the Tribunal failed to follow  the  step  by
    step approach to Article 8 as identified by Lord Bingham in R  (Razgar)
    v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

Decision

10.  The Tribunal erred materially for the reasons  identified.  The  appeal
    is allowed. I set aside the decision pursuant to  Section  12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  Bearing  in  mind  the
    nature and extent of the findings to  be  made  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and further  to  27.2(b)  of
    the Presidential Practice Statement.

11.  The matter will be re-remitted to Hatton Cross (excluding Judge J  D  L
    Edwards) on a date to be fixed with a time estimate of two  hours  (two
    witnesses to be called) and no interpreter is needed.

No anonymity order.



Signed                                  Dated 4.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.






Signed                                  Date 4.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

