
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19860/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 4 November 2016                 |On 15 November 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                     LOUIS JOSEPH RONALD DELARY SIMPSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar (counsel) instructed by Stocker & Co LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Walker promulgated on 23 February 2016, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.   The Appellant was born on 13/08/1946 and is a  national  of  Australia.
The appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 11 September  2014  with  leave
to enter until 11 June 2015. On  2  March  2015the  appellant  submitted  an
application for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a person  present
and settled in the UK.

4.   On  12  May  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Walker ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  21  September  2016  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating

         "1.  At paragraph 31 of the decision  the  judge  has  stated  "for
         completeness sake I will now deal with the appellant's appeal as  a
         freestanding article 8 issue"

         2.   It is arguable that in dealing with article 8  the  judge  has
         failed to set out a sufficient analysis and failed to set  out  the
         application of the criteria pursuant to section 117. It is arguable
         that the judge's analysis of  proportionality  is  inadequate.  The
         appeal has been dismissed on human rights grounds  in  addition  to
         being dismissed under the immigration rules. It is arguable that in
         the absence of a sufficient analysis it is unclear what weight  has
         been attached to which factors and the degree  of  such  weight  in
         reaching the conclusion set out.

         3.   At paragraph 32 of the decision the judge has found  that  the
         appellant's return to Australia or elsewhere  will  not  result  in
         interference with his right to respect for his  family  or  private
         life of such gravity as to engage article 8. The  judge  refers  to
         having dealt with this matter. Nevertheless, despite  finding  that
         article 8 is not engaged the  judge  has  continued  to  apply  the
         remaining Razgar criteria.

         4.   It is  unclear  in  these  circumstances  why  the  judge  has
         proceeded to refer to carrying out a careful balancing exercise  in
         relation  to  proportionality,  without  setting  out  an  arguably
         sufficient analysis. The judge has not referred  to  proceeding  to
         consider the remaining Razgar criteria on a further or  alternative
         basis"

The Hearing

6.(a)    Ms Iengar for the  appellant  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
reminded me that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules because he entered the UK as a  visitor  and  applied  for
leave to remain before his existing leave to enter  as  a  visitor  expired.
She accepted that the appellant  cannot  therefore  benefit  from  paragraph
EX.1. Told me that the appellant's claim for leave to remain  on  article  8
ECHR grounds out proceeds out-with the rules.

(b)  Ms Iengar took me to [30] of the decision and told me that it is  there
that the Judge  starts  to  consider  article  8  out-with  the  rules.  She
reminded me that the decision is  34  paragraphs  long,  and  told  me  that
between [30] and [34]  the  Judge  gives  inadequate  consideration  to  the
proportionality of the respondent's decision. She reminded me that  at  [30]
the Judge found that there  are  no  serious  and  compelling  circumstances
which prevent the appellant from making an application for  leave  to  enter
from  abroad.  She  told  me  that  there  are  no  findings  of  compelling
circumstances in relation to the appellant's article 8 claim.

(c)  Ms Iengar reminded me that at [31] the Judge  cites  R(Razgar)  v  SSHD
[2004] UKHL 27, but argued that despite referring to  that  case  the  Judge
did not conduct a proportionality assessment. It is only at  [34]  that  the
Judge properly makes reference  to  proportionality,  but  there  he  simply
makes a bald statement that he has

         "carried out a careful balancing exercise ..."

Ms Iengar told me that the decision discloses that the  Judge  did  not,  in
fact, carry out that exercise

(d)  Ms Iengar told me that is not  clear  from  the  decision  whether  the
Judge had taken account of section 117B of the 2002 Act. She  told  me  that
the appellant and his wife could meet the requirements of the rules  because
they are in a genuine and subsisting marriage and  their  joint  income  far
exceeds the financial requirements.

(e)  Ms Iengar reminded me of the case of Beoku-Betts (FC) v SSHD 2008  UKHL
38. She told me that no consideration at all has been given  to  the  impact
of the decision on the appellant's wife, nor  has  the  Judge  factored  the
appellant's wife's article 8  rights  into  any  proportionality  assessment
that he may have carried out. She urged me to allow the appeal & to set  the
Judge's decision aside.

7.(a)    For the respondent, Mr Jarvis told me that the  decision  does  not
contain  any  errors,  material  or  otherwise.  He   told   me   that   the
proportionality assessment carried out  concludes  that  article  8  is  not
engaged, & that is the fulcrum of this decision. He told  me  that  at  [32]
the Judge finds that the interference with family or private life is not  of
such gravity as to engage article 8. It is there that  the  judge  specifies
that his findings from [26] to [30] drawn him to that conclusion.

(b)  In relying on the case of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC),  Mr
Jarvis argued that section 117B considerations  are  irrelevant  because  at
best they are neutral, at worst they worked against the appellant - so  that
the absence of reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act is  immaterial.  He
told me  that  at  [30]  the  Judge  finds  that  there  are  no  compelling
circumstances. He argued that, structurally, that finding is out  of  place,
but that is an argument of style over substance. The fact that  the  finding
is there is sufficient.

(c) Mr Jarvis urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the Judge's  decision
to stand.

Analysis

8.   In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)  it  was
held that (i) Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to  return  to
his home country to make an entry clearance application  to  re-join  family
members in the U.K. There may be cases in which there are no  insurmountable
obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where  temporary
separation to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an  application  for  entry
clearance may be  disproportionate.  In  all  cases,  it  will  be  for  the
individual to place  before  the  Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such
temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately  with   protected
rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon  the  case-law  concerning
Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. (ii) Lord  Brown  was  not  laying  down  a
legal test when he suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant to  make
an application for entry clearance  would  only  "comparatively  rarely"  be
proportionate in a case involving children (per Burnett J, as he  then  was,
in R (Kotecha and Das v SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin)).   However,  where  a
failure to comply in a particular capacity is the only issue so far  as  the
Rules are concerned, that may well be an insufficient  reason  for  refusing
the case under Article 8 outside the rules.

9.   For the appellant, it is argued that his wife is a British citizen  and
that the appellant can make  a  successful  application  from  Australia  or
elsewhere, so no purpose is served in forcing temporary separation  on  this
family.

10.  The facts in this case are that the appellant is married to  a  British
citizen. When the appellant entered the UK he intended  to  travel  back  to
either Malaysia or Australia.

11.  As the appellant entered the UK  as  a  visitor,  he  cannot  meet  the
requirements of appendix FM  (paragraph  E-LTRP2.1).  The  appellant  has  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with his British citizen wife.

12.  The effect of the respondent's decision might  be  that  the  appellant
returns to Malaysia or Australia. The importance of the  appellant's  wife's
job has been emphasised. She is a British citizen; she can remain in the  UK
and pursue her career. She can visit the appellant in  either  Australia  or
Malaysia and can maintain contact with him by instantaneous communication.

13.  The other option is that both the appellant  and  his  wife  return  to
Australia or Malaysia and live together for six months while they  wait  for
the appellant's application for entry clearance to  be  considered.  If  the
appellant and his wife follow this option, then they remain together.  Their
entire case is plead on the basis  that  they  cannot  face  any  degree  of
separation. If  that  is  their  "worst  case  scenario",  then  the  simple
decision that they have to make is that the appellant's wife  gives  up  her
employment to honour the commitment she recently made to  the  appellant  in
the knowledge that he had no right to remain in the UK.

14.  The worst that can happen to the appellant and his wife is  that  there
might be temporary separation. If what is said by the appellant is  entirely
true, then the choice that will be made by the appellant  and  his  wife  is
that the  appellant  will  return  to  Malaysia  or  Australia  and  have  a
temporary absence from the UK of perhaps six months.

15.  The Judge's balancing exercise is  unambiguously  carried  out  between
[27] and [30] of the Judge's decision. At [30], after considering the  facts
and circumstances of the appellant's case, the Judge finds  that  there  are
neither serious nor compelling circumstances  which  prevent  the  appellant
from making an application for entry clearance from abroad.

16.  It is true that the Judge uses confused language and his logic  appears
to wander  between  [30]  and  [34],  but  despite  that  apparent  lack  of
discipline,  the  Judge  arrives  at  the  correct  conclusion.   He   takes
appropriate guidance from the case of Chen, and  directs  himself  (in  law)
properly before reaching evidence based conclusions. There is  no  merit  in
any criticism of the Judge's fact finding exercise.

17.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the Judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

18.  It is a matter of concession  that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the
requirements of the Immigration rules. The Judge makes it clear  that  there
are  neither  compelling  nor  compassionate   circumstances   which   merit
consideration of the appellant's article 8 rights out-with  the  Immigration
rules. In any event, if this appellant has established family  life  in  the
UK within the meaning of article 8 of the 1950 Convention,  then  the  Judge
finds find that (on the facts of this case)  the  respondent's  decision  is
not a disproportionate interference with those rights.

19.  The Judge's decision is not beyond criticism, but it does  not  contain
a material error of law.

CONCLUSION

No errors of law have been established and the Judge's decision  promulgated
on 23 February 2016 stands.

DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date 12
November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

