
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 December 2014               |On 13 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                               MISS CHAO CHEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  her  leave
    and to remove her from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Oakley  ("the  judge"),  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3 October  2014.   The  adverse  decisions
    were made in the light of the Secretary of State's finding that  taking
    into account the level 8 doctoral  diploma  course  the  appellant  had
    enrolled on, the total period of time spent studying at degree level or
    higher in the United Kingdom would be  greater  than  five  years.   As
    such, her application fell to be refused under paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of
    the Immigration Rules ("the rules").

2.   Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant (who appeared in  person)
    argued that her level 8 doctoral diploma in strategic business research
    and leadership direction would lead to the award of a PhD  and  so  she
    fell within one of the exceptions to the rules  and  was  permitted  to
    study for more than five years as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant.
    The judge concluded in the light of the evidence before him that  there
    was nothing to show that the appellant's course would lead to the award
    of a PhD.  He also found that a PhD is different from a doctorate in  a
    particular subject as it is in its own right a doctorate of philosophy.
     He dismissed the appeal.

3.   The appellant was given permission to appeal, on the basis that it  was
    arguable that the judge may have made a perverse or irrational  finding
    on a material matter, in defining a PhD as he did.  The level 8 diploma
    course was at a doctoral level.

4.   In a Rule 24 response, dated 26 November 2014, the appeal was  opposed.
     The Secretary of  State  had  expressly  found  that  the  appellant's
    application for leave was to enable her to study for a level 8 diploma,
    not for a doctorate.  It followed that refusal of the  application  was
    correct, as was the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal.

5.   The appellant provided  a  supplementary  bundle,  in  support  of  her
    grounds.   This  consisted  of  an  extract  from  the  Oxford  English
    Dictionary, notes provided by De Montfort University  to  undergraduate
    students and material downloaded from  Future  College's  website  (her
    course provider).  Save for the  extract  from  the  dictionary,  these
    items were before the judge at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   I explained the  procedure  to  be  followed  to  the  appellant.   She
    attended with a colleague who acted as a Mackenzie  friend  (Mr  Melvin
    had no objection to the colleague assisting the appellant).  Mr  Melvin
    handed up a copy of the judgment of the High Court in Syed [2013]  EWHC
    984.

7.   Miss Chen said that, as explained in her application for permission  to
    appeal, the judge considered that a PhD was different from the doctoral
    qualification she sought.  It was  clear,   however,  from  the  Oxford
    English Dictionary that they were the same. A doctorate was the highest
    degree awarded.  She considered that her level 8 doctoral  diploma  was
    the same as a PhD.   Courses at level 8 were regarded  as  at  doctoral
    level.   Miss Chen would receive a doctoral diploma and  this  met  the
    requirements of the rules.  The attachments from Futures College and De
    Montfort University supported her case.

8.   What the Home Office required was a course leading to a PhD and  not  a
    PhD course.  The course Miss Chen had enrolled on  led  to  a  level  8
    doctoral diploma and there was no distinction between this and  a  PhD.
    This was why she fell within one the exceptions to the rules, which the
    Secretary of State set out in the letter giving reasons for the adverse
    decisions, on the second page at the  top.   There  was  no  difference
    between a PhD and a doctoral diploma.  Futures College was approved  by
    the Secretary of State.

9.   Mr Melvin said that there was no issue with the appellant's  choice  of
    college or  course.   However,  the  course  she  had  chosen  had  the
    consequence that at the end of it she would have studied for more  than
    five years at degree level or above.  That was why her application  for
    further leave was  refused.   There  was  nothing  in  the  documentary
    evidence showing that at the end of her course  she  would  be  awarded
    anything other than  a  diploma  in  strategic  business  research  and
    leadership direction.  The exception in the rules which she relied upon
    required her to follow a course leading to a PhD.  If the Secretary  of
    State had in mind a course leading to a level 8 doctoral  diploma,  the
    rules might have said so.  The particular course, albeit  at  level  8,
    did not lead to the award of a PhD.  There was an analogy with Syed and
    ACCA qualifications, although that case was not exactly  on  all  fours
    with the present appeal.  The court found that  an  ACCA  qualification
    could not be considered as a degree for  the  purposes  of  the  rules.
    Similarly, a level 8 diploma would not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rules, as a PhD award was identified as the required end result.

10.  It followed that the judge had made no material error of law.

11.  In a response, Miss Chen said that she was told  by  the  college  that
    students in similar circumstances were given visas.  The course she had
    enrolled on ought not to be taken into account in calculating the  five
    years.  She consulted education agents and was told that so long as the
    level 8 course was recognised, she should get the visa.  Miss Chen said
    that she had decided to apply for a doctoral diploma so that she  could
    pursue her ambition to become an academic researcher.   The  Syed  case
    concerning the ACCA  qualification  was  wholly  different.   The  ACCA
    qualification was a professional one, equivalent to  a  degree,  albeit
    not a degree in itself.  She did not intend to study on a  professional
    course at all.  The judge had made a mistake because the diploma course
    at level 8 led to a PhD and so she could rely on the exception  to  the
    rules.  She had a very good academic record.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  There is no reason to doubt that Miss Chen is anything  other  than  an
    accomplished student.  She intends to become  an  academic  researcher.
    She enrolled on a level 8 doctoral diploma course, at Futures  College,
    but her application for further leave was refused by the  Secretary  of
    State as her course would result in her spending more than  five  years
    studying in the Tier 4 category at degree level or above.

13.  Miss Chen sought to show that she fell within one of the exceptions  to
    the rules, contending that her course would lead to  the  award  for  a
    PhD.  The judge disagreed, finding in paragraph 13 of his determination
    that the documentary evidence did not show  that  Miss  Chen  would  be
    awarded a PhD at the end of her course.  I conclude that  this  finding
    by the judge was open to him and that he did not err in  this  respect.
    This is so even if he did err in describing a PhD as different  from  a
    doctorate.  That observation was not material to  his  primary  finding
    that Miss Chen's course would not lead to the award of a PhD.

14.  The rules themselves are clear and expressly refer to the  award  of  a
    PhD.  The material before the judge from  De  Montfort  University  and
    from Futures College shows, also very  clearly,  that  the  appellant's
    course does not lead to the award of a PhD.   It  leads  instead  to  a
    level 8 doctoral diploma.   The  material  from  the  college  and  the
    university do not seek to describe the diploma as a degree.  Miss  Chen
    relied upon an extract from the  Oxford  English  Dictionary,  where  a
    doctorate is defined as "the highest degree  awarded  by  a  university
    faculty or other approved educational organisation"  and  a  doctor  of
    philosophy as "a person holding a doctorate in any faculty except  law,
    medicine or sometimes theology".  It is clear, however, that  a  degree
    and a diploma are not the same, even if both have been assessed in  the
    Qualifications Framework as being  at  level  8.   A  course  overview,
    learning objectives,  and  method  of  assessment  all  appear  in  the
    material downloaded from Future College's website but in none  of  that
    material is there any suggestion that the diploma on offer is the  same
    as a degree.  Indeed, the entry requirements make a  clear  distinction
    between holders of a degree and holders of a diploma.  There was simply
    no documentary evidence before  the  judge  (or  before  me)  that  the
    appellant's course is one which  leads  to  a  qualification  which  is
    anything other than a diploma, albeit at doctoral level.

15.  Miss Chen said that students in similar circumstances to hers  received
    visas.  There were no details of any individual cases before me but, of
    course, she is entitled to draw any such  cases  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's attention,  perhaps  in  support  of  another  application.   I
    conclude, however, that the judge made no error of law in  his  primary
    finding that the course she enrolled on was not one which led to a PhD.
     I reach that conclusion even though the judge's description of  a  PhD
    as being different from a doctorate  is  not  on  all  fours  with  the
    definition Miss Chen has found in the Oxford English Dictionary.

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law.  The decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.

DECISION

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

18.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no order on this occasion.



Signed        Date 23 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
