
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Given extempore on                   |                                     |
|19th September, 2016                 |22nd September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Rosalinda Verte Price
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Claimant:     Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  and  to  avoid
    confusion I shall refer to her as being "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a  citizen  of  the  Philippines.   She  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 8th October, 2005 as a category C visitor on  a  visa
    valid from 13th September, 2005 expiring  on  13th  March,  2006.   The
    respondent sought a Certificate of Approval (marriage) on  22nd  April,
    2010, which was issued on 21st June, 2010.  She was  served  with  form
    IS.151A administrative removal papers on 28th April, 2010.  She  sought
    application for leave to remain as the spouse of a  settled  person  on
    16th November, 2010, which was refused on 20th December, 2015  with  no
    right of appeal.  There was of course no right of appeal,  because  the
    respondent had become an overstayer when her leave  expired  in  March,
    2006.

3.   On 16th December, 2013, the respondent sought  a  derivative  residence
    card.  On 14th April, 2014, the claimant refused to issue a  derivative
    residence card, because she said, the respondent failed to  demonstrate
    that  she  met  the  relevant  conditions  of  Regulation  15A  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("regulations").

4.   The respondent appealed that decision  and  her  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Munonyedi at Taylor House on  13th  December,
    2015.  She noted that the respondent had married a British citizen,  Mr
    David Price ("sponsor"), on 27th July, 2010.  Unfortunately, an earlier
    application for leave to remain as a  spouse  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent was refused because the claimant did not  believe  that  the
    marriage was genuine or subsisting.

5.    In  the  judge's  determination  she  made  some  findings  which  the
    Secretary of State may wish to consider in the event of  undertaking  a
    review of what is to happen to the respondent.

6.   The judge found that the sponsor's condition required  him  to  take  a
    large dose of medication on a daily basis.  The judge had before her  a
    report by a senior physiotherapist at Queen  Mary  Hospital,  Elizabeth
    Forsythe,  dated  5th  April,  2013  where  she  explained   that   the
    respondent's husband had a two year history of symptoms with  recurrent
    right side lumba  spine  and  right  leg  pain.   Those  symptoms  were
    aggravated when he sat for twenty minutes, sat in a  low  chair,  stood
    for five minutes, walked 200 yards, when he put on his shoes and socks,
    when he turned in bed, when he coughed  or  sneezed,  when  he  carried
    shopping and when he lifted objects and getting into and out  of  bath.
    The report spoke of the respondent being a great help both with regards
    to his sedentary and personal activities of daily living.

7.   The judge also had before her a report from a  consultant  anaesthetist
    in pain management, Dr Elizabeth Roberts, dated 19th July,  2013.   The
    judge found that the doctor reported a  clinical  impression  that  the
    sponsor has a disc  bulge,  probably  at  lower  4/5  with  nerve  root
    irritation.   She  noted  that  he  had  suffered  several  falls   and
    complained of being dizzy which caused him to fall.

8.   Dr Pia Sweet, a consultant in pain management, examined the sponsor  on
    7th November, 2013 and  expressed  concern  that  he  may  suffer  from
    vertigo because  of  his  frequent  falls  and  possibly  glaucoma  and
    referred him for an ophthalmology opinion.

9.    The  sponsor  applied  for  Employment  and  Support  Allowance  which
    initially was refused but, it was allowed on appeal on 1st August, 2013
    by  First-tier  Judge  Fagg.   Tribunal  Judge  Fagg  found  that   the
    respondent's  husband  was  entitled  to  an  Employment  and   Support
    Allowance with support component.   In  applying  the  work  capability
    assessment, 15 points were scored from the activities and  descriptions
    in Schedule 2 of the ESA Regulations 2008 made  up  of  the  following,
    mobilising (a) 15 points.  The following activity and  descriptor  from
    Schedule 3 of the ESA Regulations applied: mobilising.  As a result, Mr
    Price was awarded a Disability Living Allowance and  for  mobility;  he
    was awarded the higher  rate  on  the  basis  that  he  was  unable  or
    virtually unable to walk.  In respect of his care, he was  awarded  the
    middle rate as he needed help  with  his  personal  care  from  someone
    several times through the day.

10.  The judge noted that the Department for Work and  Pensions  found  that
    Mr  Price  needed  help  getting  around  outdoors  and  had   physical
    difficulties walking and needed help with personal  care.   During  the
    day, he required attention to get in and out of bed, using a shower  or
    bath, to dress, to undress, to get in and out of  a  chair  and  needed
    help several times during the night although the attention he  required
    at night was probably not more than once a night and not more than  for
    twenty minutes.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also had before  her  a  report  from  Dr
    Holly Hudson from the Barnard  Medical  Group,  who  is  the  sponsor's
    general medical practitioner.  In her letter of 15th October, 2015, she
    indicated that she was writing  to  support  Mr  Price,  who  had  been
    married to the respondent for five years.  His wife was his carer.  The
    respondent's husband has type 2 diabetes with  chronic  back  pain  and
    mobility problems due to his back  pain.   He  requires  assistance  in
    activities of daily living including washing,  showering,  bathing  and
    dressing.  He also suffers BPPV and is at risk of falls.  Currently  Mr
    Price's wife, the respondent, performs these duties as  his  carer  and
    were she to be removed from the United Kingdom then  he  would  require
    assessment for a care package.

12.  The judge also found that Mr Price suffers  from  depression  and,  not
    surprisingly, is finding  the  stress  of  the  Tribunal  significantly
    affecting his emotional state.  He is reviewed regularly in the surgery
    for his depression and is on ongoing  regular  medication.   The  judge
    said at paragraph 27:

         "Having carefully considered all the evidence before me namely  the
         oral evidence of the [respondent], Mr Price, Margaret  Price,  Anne
         Underwood, the medical evidence in particular the  letter  from  Dr
         Hutson, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that  David
         Price is a man  with  multiple  and  complex  medical  needs.   His
         disability, poor physical and emotional and mental state means that
         he requires constant and full-time care  every  hour  of  the  day.
         Such care if provided by the [respondent].  I am satisfied that  on
         the balance of probabilities that without the  care  given  by  the
         [respondent] David Price  would  not  be  able  to  function.   The
         [respondent] in my view  provides  him  with  loving  physical  and
         emotional care.  He suffers from depression and he told me that the
         [respondent] is able to help him overcome his depressive moods."

13.  At paragraph 28 of her determination she found herself  satisfied  that
    the respondent is the primary carer for her husband and she noted  that
    the respondent had told her that she loves her husband very dearly  and
    takes her marriage vows to look after her husband in  sickness  and  in
    health, very seriously.  The judge  found  that  the  respondent  is  a
    practising Christian who takes all her marriage vows seriously.

14.  At paragraph 29 the judge said this:

         "I found the [respondent] to be an impressive woman who has put the
         needs of her husband first.  Her excellent care of her husband  has
         meant that the full-time, 24 hour care that he  requires  has  been
         provided.  It is my finding that  without  the  unquestioning  care
         given to Mr Price by the [respondent], Mr Price would not  be  able
         to continue living here.  Mr Price has not been able to claim for a
         carer's allowance or a carer's credit because of the [respondent's]
         precarious immigration status.  Mr Price has not been assessed  for
         a care package because his care is given by the [respondent]."

15.  At paragraph 8 of her determination she had recorded  the  evidence  of
    the respondent including the  fact  that  the  respondent  was  of  the
    opinion that her husband could not go to the Philippines to live.   She
    also recorded the evidence of the sponsor's cousin, Margaret Price, who
    said that were the respondent to go back to the  Philippines  it  would
    kill him, meaning it would kill the sponsor.  The judge noted that  Mrs
    Price also said that his poor health means that he could  not  possibly
    go to the Philippines to live.

16.  The judge allowed the appeal, finding  that  the  respondent  satisfied
    Regulation 15 and  in  particular  Regulation  15A(4A)(c).   Regulation
    15A(4A)  says  that  the  applicant  satisfies  the  criteria  in  this
    paragraph if the [respondent] (a) is the primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen, and clearly here the judge found that the respondent  was  the
    primary carer of a British citizen, Mr  Price,  her  husband,  (b)  the
    relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom, and here of
    course Mr Price is living with his wife in  their  home,  and  (c)  the
    relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in  the  UK  or  in
    another EEA state if the applicant were required to leave.   The  judge
    found that that  requirement  was  satisfied.   Unfortunately,  on  the
    evidence before her I believe that she erred in  law  in  finding  that
    requirement satisfied.

17.  In granting permission to  appeal  to  the  respondent  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede said that arguably this is a case which  raises  the  same
    considerations as in the case of Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A -
    Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 and as found in that case involves a  claim
    which would more readily be conceived in terms  of  Article  8,  rather
    than as fulfilling  the  criterion  in  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

18   I have concluded that the judge's determination cannot stand, being  as
    it is materially flawed.  I replace her decision with mine.   I  regret
    to say that  the  respondent  fails  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15A(4A)(c) of the EEA Regulations and  her  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

19.  I add this.  I hope that in any further application that  may  be  made
    by or on behalf of the respondent the Secretary of State will  bear  in
    mind the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Munonyedi  and  the
    fact that the respondent was unrepresented.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed on under the immigration rules.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


