
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19792/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2017                   |On 1 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE bAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     AMA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Amino, Solicitor, Martyns & Rose Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  order.  I  have  not  been
    invited to rescind that order. The order remains appropriate.



Introduction

2.    This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Manyarara (hereafter "the  FtTJ"),  promulgated  on  10  April
    2017,  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision of 13 May 2015 to  refuse  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules on human rights grounds.

Factual Background

3.    The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1969.  She  claims
    to have entered the United Kingdom in 2000 with the  assistance  of  an
    agent.  Following  two  unsuccessful  applications  to  regularise  her
    immigration status, on 13 February 2015, she  sought  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules. She claimed  to  suffer  from  mental
    health problems and complained that her removal would infringe  Article
    3 & 8 of the ECHR.

4.    The appellant  has  received  a  diagnosis  of  Post-Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder (PTSD), severe depression and generalised anxiety disorder  on
    account of her past experiences in Nigeria. The  medico-legal  evidence
    she relied on to support her claim  emanating  from  reports  from  the
    following three sources:

    (a)    Dr Amir Bashir, Consultant  Psychiatrist  (report  dated  5  May
    2012);

    (b)    Mr  Graham  Rogers,  Consultant  Psychologist  (report  dated  4
    January 2015); and

    (c)    Ms Leah Martini, Social Worker (letters dated 8 May 2015 and  24
    May 2016).

5.    In refusing the application the respondent concluded that  there  were
    no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  in
    Nigeria.  The  respondent  considered  the  appellant's  mental  health
    problems  could  be  appropriately  managed  in   Nigeria   and   after
    considering evidence relating to  the  availability  of  mental  health
    treatment in  her  home  country  and  the  availability  of  financial
    support, she was of the view that  the  appellant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would not infringe her human rights contrary to  Article
    3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The Decision of the FtTJ

6.    The appellant was present at the  hearing  but  did  not  provide  any
    written testimony and was not called to give evidence. Before the  FtTJ
    were two witness statements from the appellant's unmarried partner  and
    her half-sister; both gave oral  evidence  at  the  hearing.  The  FtTJ
    summarised the evidence from the witnesses, which  included  assertions
    that they provided the appellant with emotional and  financial  support
    and that she would have no support or family  in  Nigeria  which  would
    worsen her  illness.  The  appellant's  half-sister  and  partner  both
    claimed that the support they  provided  could  not  be  replicated  in
    Nigeria.

7.    The FtTJ made a number of detailed findings, extending  from  [28]  to
    [124], based on the evidence before  her,  including  the  medico-legal
    evidence as set out above. The following findings are, for the purposes
    of this  decision,  particularly  relevant.  The  FtTJ  found  that  no
    reliance  could  be  placed  on  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses   as
    representing a truthful account of  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    Nigeria and the United Kingdom; both gave inconsistent  and  misleading
    evidence [28] to [45]. The extent of the inconsistencies led  the  FtTJ
    to doubt the relationship between the appellant and her half-sister and
    between the appellant and her partner. Having rejected their  evidence,
    the FtTJ turned to consider the medical evidence. She directed  herself
    appropriately at [47] to [66] by reference to the judgements  in  N.  v
    the United Kingdom (App no. 26565/05) and D. v the  United  Kingdom  (2
    May 1997) in addition to several other  recent  authorities.  The  FtTJ
    then turned to consider the appellant's claim that she was  "critically
    ill" and thus met the high threshold required  in  cases  concerning  a
    breach of Article 3 on medical grounds. The FtTJ noted that the  report
    prepared by Dr Bashir was dated 5 May 2012. Dr Bashir referred  to  the
    appellant's symptoms of depression, anxiety  and  PTSD  and  noted  the
    absence of suicidal ideation.  At [71] to [72] the FtTJ said this:

         "Having considered the report in  its  entirety,  I  find  that  Dr
         Bashir does not address the questions put to him by the appellant's
         legal  representatives.  In  relation  to  the  prognosis  if   the
         appellant is returned  to  Nigeria  and  the  availability  of  any
         medical treatment there, Dr Bashir simply states the following,  at
         paragraph 13.9 of his report:

             "Although medications may be available  in  various  parts  of
             Nigeria I am not sure if there is expertise to  treat  complex
             mental illness like hers."

             "I  am  not  aware  of  the  availability  of  evidence  based
             treatment of her psychiatric problem in Nigeria. It's  however
             not the availability of the medications but the probability of
             her receiving treatment."

             [My emphasis]

         I find that  these  statements  by  Dr  Bashir  is  not  conclusive
         evidence of a lack of treatment in  Nigeria.  Dr  Bashir  does  not
         refer to any lines of  enquiries  he  has  taken  in  reaching  his
         conclusion that there is  no  expertise  to  treat  complex  mental
         illnesses like the appellant's. He does not refer to experience  of
         either working in Nigeria, or having contacts in the mental  health
         services there. There is no reference to the sources he  considered
         and his  clear  expression  of  uncertainty  does  not  answer  the
         questions as to prognosis on return, or availability of  treatment.
         I find that Dr Bashir's report does not  assist  in  resolving  the
         issue concerning the prognosis on return.  Dr  Bashir's  report  is
         however now almost five years old. There are no further reports  or
         opinions from consultant psychiatrists involved in the  appellant's
         care."

8.    The FtTJ then turned her attention to the report of Mr Rogers and  the
    evidence of Leah Martini and stated thus at [74] to [77]:

         "The only other consultant's report is  that  from  Graham  Rogers,
         Consultant Psychologist. Graham Rogers refers to diagnoses of PTSD,
         severe depression, generalised anxiety disorder and psychosis.  His
         report does not refer to the prognosis on return to Nigeria, or the
         availability of treatment there. Graham Rogers refers to  the  lack
         of "free" health care in Nigeria, the institutional stigma and  the
         lack of training. The sources he refers to are however considerably
         out of date.

         Mr Rogers further refers to the appellant  as  having  a  cognitive
         impairment. This is not however a matter that was  included  by  Dr
         Bashir in his report. Dr Bashir  refers  to  having  been  able  to
         obtain an account from the appellant. There is no reliable evidence
         to suggest that the appellant lacks mental capacity. Graham  Rogers
         has reached the majority of his  findings  on  the  outdate  report
         prepared by Dr Bashir. There  is  no  reference  to  any  lines  of
         enquiry in  respect  of  the  situation  should  the  appellant  be
         returned to Nigeria.

         The only other evidence is from Leah Martini, Social Worker.  There
         is no suggestion that her long-standing mental health problems have
         deteriorated since she made an application in 2012. While there  is
         refence to medication and therapy, there is no  indication  of  any
         treatment that is only available in the United Kingdom.

         The medical evidence is  considerably  outdated  and  there  is  no
         suggestion  that  the  appellant's  mental  health   condition   is
         deteriorating. The appellant has long-standing mental health issues
         and she was already suffering from mental health problems when  she
         arrived in the United Kingdom."

9.    Having regard to all of this, the FtTJ rejected  the  submission  that
    the  "appellant  is  close  to  death."  The  FtTJ  observed  that  the
    appellant's representatives had not served any evidence in relation  to
    the availability of treatment in Nigeria and had not responded  to  the
    issues raised by the respondent in the refusal. On the other hand,  the
    respondent could refer to background information on the availability of
    treatment for mental health conditions and made specific reference to a
    hospital in Nigeria that catered for persons with such  problems  [79].
    While the FtTJ was prepared to accept that  the  appellant  had  mental
    health problems she found  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    support a finding that the Article 3 threshold had been  reached  [80].



10.   The FtTJ proceeded to consider whether  the  appellant  qualified  for
    leave on private  life  grounds  under  paragraph  276ADE1(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and  having  satisfied  herself  that  she  did  not,
    proceeded to consider whether there were  compelling  circumstances  to
    warrant a grant of leave outside of the Immigration Rules by  reference
    to the step-by-step approach enunciated in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

11.   The FtTJ found that "whatever  the  biological  relationship  may  be"
    between the appellant  and  her  claimed  half-sister,  the  ties  that
    existed between them were no more than the normal emotional ties [104].
    She considered that the evidence did not support a conclusion that  the
    appellant and her claimed partner were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  [105].  While  there  is  no  express  finding  that  the
    appellant had established a private life in the United  Kingdom  it  is
    clear that the FtTJ did not accept that the appellant's  removal  would
    amount to an interference with her private life. The FtTJ revisited the
    medical evidence and further examined the evidence  from  Leah  Martini
    and stated thus:

         "108.    The letter from Leah Martini (Social  Worker)  shows  that
         the appellant was seen by a Consultant  Psychiatrist  on  28  April
         2015. She then had a general mental health assessment with a social
         worker on 8 May 2015. The working diagnosis was one  of  depression
         and PTSD. The Care Plan was to increase the appellant's medication,
         refer her to psychotherapy and long-term care, and a  crisis  plan.
         The nature of the long-term care is unspecified  and  there  is  no
         suggestion that the appellant has been hospitalised as a result  of
         her mental health problems. She is not living in supported  housing
         and there is a lack of clarity in relation to the nature and extent
         of the contact that she has with the witnesses who attended.

         109.     The social worker states that travel to Nigeria  would  be
         detrimental to the appellant's mental health and safety as a result
         of  the  historical  trauma.  The  social  worker  is  not  however
         registered under the Mental Health Act  to  provide  a  psychiatric
         opinion of this nature.

         110.     A further letter from Leah Martini,  dated  24  May  2016,
         shows that the appellant has been involved with the  Mood,  Anxiety
         and Personality Team Community  Mental  Health  Services,  Lambeth,
         since March 2015. There is however no evidence about the extent  of
         her involvement with the community mental health team and there  is
         no further information about which psychiatrist the  appellant  saw
         in April 2015, as Dr Bashir's report  is  dated  2012.  The  social
         worker does not elaborate on the reasons why the appellant's health
         and safety would be at risk in Nigeria. The refusal  decision  took
         issue with the absence of any evidence from an NHS consultant.

         111.     The appellant's representatives have not responded to  the
         refusal decision in respect of the availability  of  treatment  for
         mental health  conditions  in  Nigeria.  I  find  that  whilst  the
         appellant is suffering from mental health problems,  the  appellant
         is in receipt of medication which serves the purpose of controlling
         the symptoms. There has been a  complete  failure  to  provide  any
         helpful or reliable information from independent sources about  the
         situation in  Nigeria,  where  the  appellant  has  lived  for  the
         majority of her life. Dr Bashir's report shows that  the  appellant
         does not lack mental capacity in  relation  to  her  life  and  the
         appellant expressed a desire to live  and  do  something  with  her
         life. Graham  Rogers  and  Leah  Martini  have  departed  from  the
         conclusions reached by Dr Bashir in circumstances where  Dr  Bashir
         is a psychiatrist who was giving his views on  matters  within  his
         expertise. It is difficult to reconcile  the  cognitive  impairment
         identified by Graham Rogers when a consultant psychiatrist has  not
         suggested that the appellant lacks mental capacity."

12.   The  FtTJ  indicated  that  she  took  into  account,  when  assessing
    proportionality, the factors set out in sections 117B of the  2002  Act
    and concluded, having indicated that she considered all  the  evidence,
    that there were no very compelling circumstances sufficient to outweigh
    the public interest that would require a grant of leave outside of  the
    Immigration Rules. The appeal was dismissed.

The criticism of the FtTJ's decision and discussion

The grounds

13.   The  grounds  of  appeal  are  essentially  two-fold.  It  is  firstly
    contended that the FtTJ erred in law by rejecting the evidence  of  the
    witnesses and  failed  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  received
    personal support from  her  half-sister  and  partner.  Second,  it  is
    contended that  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  the  expert  evidence  was
    erroneous. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    in respect of the first ground but granted in respect of the second the
    particulars of which are pleaded  at  paragraphs  [2]  to  [6]  of  the
    grounds.

Submissions

14.    In  amplifying  the  grounds  Mr  Amino  remained  faithful  to   the
    limitations of the grant of permission  to  appeal  and  addressed  the
    second ground. His brief oral submissions can be summarised as follows.
    Mr Amino complained that the FtTJ's assessment of the medical  evidence
    was inadequate. He referred to paragraph [74] and [75]  of  the  FtTJ's
    decision and to paragraph 3 and 4 of Mr  Rogers  report.  He  submitted
    that the FtTJ was wrong to assert that he had not given a prognosis. Mr
    Amino further criticised the approach of the  FtTJ  in  preferring  the
    evidence of Dr Bashir to that of Mr Rogers at [75] and [111].

15.   Mr Walker briefly submitted that the FtTJ's decision was  not  tainted
    by irrationality. The FtTJ considered all the evidence  and  reached  a
    decision that was open to her on the evidence.

The Law

16.   The Strasbourg court in Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR 205  at  paragraph
    47 stated as follows:

         "'Private life' is a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to  exhaustive
         definition.  The court has  already  held  that  elements  such  as
         gender identification, name and sexual orientation and sexual  life
         are important elements of the personal sphere protected by  Article
         8.  ...  Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial  part  of
         private  life  associated  with  the  aspect  of  moral  integrity.
         Article 8 protects a right to identity  and  personal  development,
         and the right to establish and  develop  relationships  with  other
         human beings and the outside  world.  The  preservation  of  mental
         stability is in  that  context  an  indispensable  precondition  to
         effective enjoyment of the right to respect for private life."

17.   Paragraph 61 in Pretty v UK [2002] 35 EHRR 1 states:

         "As the court has had previous occasion to remark, the  concept  of
         'private life' is  a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to  exhaustive
         definition.  It covers the physical and psychological integrity  of
         a person. It can  sometimes  embrace  aspects  of  an  individual's
         physical and social  identity.   Elements  such  as,  for  example,
         gender identification, name and sexual orientation and sexual  life
         fall within the personal sphere protected by Article 8.  Article  8
         also protects a right to personal development,  and  the  right  to
         establish and develop relationships with other human beings and the
         outside world. Although no previous case has  established  as  such
         any right to self-determination as being contained in Article 8  of
         the Convention, the court considers that  the  notion  of  personal
         autonomy is an important principle underlying the interpretation of
         its guarantees."

18.   At 65 the court stated:

         "The very essence of the Convention is respect  for  human  dignity
         and human freedom.  Without in any way negating  the  principle  of
         sanctity  of  life  protected  under  the  Convention,  the   court
         considers that it is under Article 8 that notions of the quality of
         life take on significance."

    The core value protected by Article 8 is the quality of life,  not  its
    continuance.

19.   A failure under Article 3 health grounds does not  necessarily  entail
    failure under Article 8.  I consider what the Court of Appeal stated in
    GS (India) & Ors v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40:

         "86.     If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does
             here), Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or
             additional factual element which brings the  case  within  the
             Article  8  paradigm  -  the  capacity  to  form   and   enjoy
             relationships - or a state of  affairs  having  some  affinity
             with the paradigm.  That approach was,  as  it  seems  to  me,
             applied by Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ and the Master  of
             the Rolls agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  279  at
             paragraph 23:

                  'The only  cases  I  can  foresee  where  the  absence  of
                  adequate medical treatment  in  the  country  to  which  a
                  person is to be deported will be relevant to Article 8, is
                  where it is an additional factor  to  be  weighed  in  the
                  balance, with other factors  which  by  themselves  engage
                  Article 8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  Appellant  had
                  established firm family ties in  this  country,  then  the
                  availability of continuing medical treatment here, coupled
                  with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for  support,
                  together establish 'private life' under Article  8.   That
                  conclusion would not involve a comparison between  medical
                  facilities here and those in  Zimbabwe.   Such  a  finding
                  would not offend the principle expressed  above  that  the
                  United  Kingdom  is  under  no  Convention  obligation  to
                  provide medical treatment here when it is not available in
                  the country to which the Appellant is to be deported.'

         87.      With great respect this seems to me to be entirely  right.
             It means that a specific case has to be made under Article  8.
             It is to be noted that  MM  (Zimbabwe)  also  shows  that  the
             rigour of the D exception for the purpose of Article 3 in such
             cases as these applies with no less force when  the  claim  is
             put under Article 8:

                  '17. The essential principle is that  the  ECHR  does  not
                      impose any obligation on the  contracting  states  to
                      provide those  liable  to  deportation  with  medical
                      treatment lacking in their  'home  countries'.   This
                      principle applies even where the consequence will  be
                      that  the  deportee's  life  will  be   significantly
                      shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N  v  Home  Secretary
                      [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008]  47  EHRR
                      885 (paragraph 44)).

                  18.  Although that principle was expressed in those  cases
                      in relation to Article 3, it  is  a  principle  which
                      must apply to Article 8.  It makes no sense to refuse
                      to recognise a 'medical care' obligation in  relation
                      to Article 3, but to acknowledge it  in  relation  to
                      Article 8.'"

20.   The court in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813  considered  very  significant
    obstacles albeit in the context of deportation and stated;

         "14.      In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
         "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that  he  be
         deported, as set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a
         broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job  or
         to sustain life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
         appropriate to treat the statutory  language  as  subject  to  some
         gloss and it will usually be sufficient for  a  court  or  tribunal
         simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen  to
         use. The  idea  of  "integration"  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family."

Conclusions

21.   The FtTJ did not err. She considered all  the  evidence  and  attached
    appropriate weight to it. It is clear from  a  proper  reading  of  the
    decision that the FtTJ considered the appellant's mental health in  the
    context of Article 3 and 8. She was not assisted by the failure of  the
    appellant's representatives to set  out  a  detailed  rebuttal  to  the
    refusal letter and a comprehensive and sequential account of  treatment
    and medical  opinion  to  date.  The  criticisms  made  of  the  FtTJ's
    evaluation of the evidence must be judged bearing this in mind  and  in
    the context of her overall findings and conclusions.

22.   The FtTJ's credibility findings are unassailable. The evidence of  the
    witnesses was "completely lacking in credibility"  [28]  and  the  FtTJ
    noted many contradictions in the evidence. Such was the deficiencies in
    the evidence of the witnesses that the FtTJ  had  sufficient  cause  to
    doubt the relationships were as claimed [28] and [44].  The  FtTJ  gave
    several reasons for doubting the claim that no family members  remained
    in Nigeria and further noted that the evidence did not accord with  the
    suggestion that the appellant was incapable of independent  living  and
    noted that she was suffering from mental health problems prior  to  her
    arrival in the United Kingdom [41].

23.   The FtTJ noted Dr Bashir's diagnosis of depression, anxiety and  PTSD,
    but also noted his failure to address the questions put to him  by  the
    appellant's representatives  in  relation  to  prognosis  if  returned,
    availability of treatment and suicide risk. The FtTJ  stated  that  she
    was not assisted by this failure and further  noted  that  Dr  Bashir's
    report was almost five years old [72] and that no  updated  report  had
    been obtained [73]. The FtTJ noted that while Mr Rogers referred  to  a
    diagnosis of PTSD, severe depression, generalised anxiety disorder  and
    psychosis, his report did not refer  to  the  prognosis  on  return  to
    Nigeria or the availability of  treatment  there  and  noted  that  the
    sources he referred to in respect of healthcare,  institutional  stigma
    and lack of training were considerably out of date [74]. The FtTJ  also
    noted that there was no suggestion the appellant's  mental  health  had
    deteriorated since she made an application in 2012 [76] and [77].

24.   The FtTJ rejected the submission  that  the  appellant  was  close  to
    death and noted that Dr Bashir did not opine that there was a  risk  of
    suicide [78]. The FtTJ accepted the appellant was suffering from mental
    health problems, but the dearth of evidence led her  to  conclude  that
    the Article 3 threshold was not met [80].

25.   The FtTJ noted the appellant's long-standing mental health issues  did
    not inhibit her ability to live an independent life in Nigeria [89] and
    there was no evidence to  support  a  finding  that  she  would  suffer
    destitution on return to Nigeria where  she  had  cultural  and  social
    attachments [90]. The FtTJ further observed that the nature of any long-
    term care was unspecified, the appellant had not been  hospitalised  on
    mental health grounds and she was not living in supported housing.  The
    FtTJ noted the opinion of Ms Martini that travel to  Nigeria  would  be
    detrimental to the appellant's mental  health,  but  noted  a  lack  of
    detail  supportive  of  that  conclusion  and  concluded  she  was  not
    qualified to provide a psychiatric opinion [109] and [110].

26.   Mr Amino maintains that the  FtTJ's  evaluation  of  the  evidence  is
    materially flawed. Specifically, the FtTJ is criticised for stating  at
    [74] that Mr Rogers did not answer the question of prognosis on  return
    or the availability of treatment in Nigeria when at paragraph 3  and  4
    of his report he had dealt with these issues. Mr Amino  submitted  that
    this error significantly influenced the FtTJ's decision. I reject  that
    submission. The FtTJ was ceased inter alia with the task  of  assessing
    the evidence of the extent to which the appellant's mental health would
    deteriorate in the event of a return to Nigeria. Mr Rogers opinion that
    the appellant "will remain learning disabled for  life"  and  that  her
    "depression will deteriorate as  will  the  voices  and  their  impact.
    Between an increase in depression, plus  voices  telling  her  to  kill
    herself, one can see the future" are incoherent and lack cogency and is
    not a  prognosis  within  the  context  of  the  issues  the  FtTJ  was
    attempting to assess on the limited evidence  made  available  to  her.
    Further, at paragraph 4 Mr Rogers does not specifically deal  with  the
    availability of treatment that this appellant  requires  and  the  FtTJ
    rightly noted that the sources quoted were considerably out of date.

27.   Second, Mr Amino submitted that the FtTJ was in  error  in  dismissing
    Mr Roger's assessment (in 2015) that  the  appellant  had  a  cognitive
    impairment (mild learning disability) when Dr Bashir had not identified
    such an impairment (in 2012). While there is some justification in this
    criticism as I see no reason why Mr Roger's  given  his  expertise  and
    experience would be unable to conduct a  neuropsychological  assessment
    in order to assess the appellant's brain functioning, I  consider  that
    the error is not material. The FtTJ considered the report of Mr  Rogers
    and identified other deficiencies in that report which did  not  assist
    her in determining the appellant's fate on return to Nigeria. The  FtTJ
    noted that the sources quoted, of which there were  few,  were  out  of
    date. On any reading of the medical evidence, the reports of Dr  Bashir
    and Mr Rogers (both out of date by the date of hearing before the FtTJ)
    did not establish a prima facia case on  medical  grounds  and,  in  my
    view, the deficiencies in the reports identified by the  FtTJ  and  her
    adverse credibility findings meant that this appeal was bound to  fail.



28.   There was no evidence the appellant was suicidal  or  that  there  had
    been any previous attempt(s) by the appellant to  take  her  life.  The
    evidence of her prognosis on return to Nigeria or the  availability  of
    treatment  there  was  fundamentally  lacking   in   detail   and   was
    considerably out of date [74]. The evidence did not reach the threshold
    required in Article 3 cases as noted  by  the  FtTJ  and  she  properly
    rejected the submission that the appellant is "close to  death".  There
    is no cogent challenge to the FtTJ's findings that there  would  be  no
    infringement of Article 3 in the event of a return  to  Nigeria.  There
    was no persuasive evidence before the FtTJ that the evidence  met  that
    threshold and her findings in respect thereof are unassailable.

29.   Similarly, the FtTJ was entitled to conclude that there were  no  very
    significant obstacles to integration for the reasons that she gave  and
    there is no specific challenge to these findings either. The  FtTJ  did
    not end the assessment of Article 8 having determined the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.  She  properly  considered  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances to allow the appeal outside of the Immigration
    Rules.  The  Appellant's  claim  rested  on  private  life.  The   FtTJ
    considered all material matters, including the  medical  evidence.  She
    had already made findings about the  evidence  of  the  witnesses,  the
    medical  evidence  and  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  properly
    factored  these  into  the  assessment  of  proportionality.   She  was
    entitled to conclude, particularly having proper regard to section 117B
    of the 2002 Act  that  the  decision  was  proportionate.   The  FtTJ's
    assessment of Article 8 is lawful and sustainable.

30.   Overall, I consider  that  the  FtTJ's  decision  was  ultimately  one
    rationally open to her for the reasons given. While there has  been  an
    attempt  to  cherry  pick  certain  conclusions  of  the  FtTJ,  in  my
    judgement, I consider that the FtTJ's conclusions  are  sustainable  on
    the evidence that was before her.

31.   In the circumstances I find that the FtTJ did not  materially  err  in
    law and I formally dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not materially err in law. The decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal shall stand. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral      Date: 27 January 2018


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral      Date: 27 January 2018

