

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19373/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Promulgated on               |
|17 July 2014                                  |On 19 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     WC
                             (Anonymity granted)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Forrest, instructed by R H & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He came to the United Kingdom
    in 2010 with entry clearance as a spouse valid  until  21  March  2012.
    Within the currency of that leave, on 1 February 2012, he submitted  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse.   On  24  April
    2012, after a trial, he was convicted of  sexual  assault  on  a  young
    child contrary to s 20 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009.   On
    14 May 2013 the Secretary of State refused his application for leave to
    remain and decided to remove him by way of directions given under s  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where  Judge  Clough
    dismissed his  appeal.   He  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. The Secretary of State's refusal of  the  appellant's  application  was
    clearly motivated by his conviction.  The application  was  refused  by
    reference to paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules on the ground  that
    the appellant fell for refusal under the general  grounds  of  refusal.
    That is, as is common ground before us, an implied  reference  to  para
    322(5), which prescribes that such an application "should  normally  be
    refused" on the grounds of:

          "The undesirability of permitting the person concerned  to  remain
          in the United Kingdom in the light of his  character,  conduct  or
          associations or the fact that he represents a threat  to  national
          security."

 4. The appellant's family life was separately considered  under  paragraph
    A277B and Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules,  and  the  ground  for
    refusal was that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  in
    relation to "suitability".

 5. S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM gives,  as  a  reason  for  refusing  such  an
    application, that:

          "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to  the
          public good because their conduct (including convictions which  do
          not  fall  within  paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3   to   1.5),   character
          associations or other reasons make it undesirable to allow them to
          remain in the UK."

 6. There was further consideration of the appellant's case under paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  It is clear that  the  appellant  has
    not been in the United Kingdom for a sufficiently long time to  qualify
    under that paragraph, but in any event there is a similar inhibition on
    granting leave to a person who falls for refusal under the paragraph of
    Appendix FM that we have set out above.

 7. Following the appellant's conviction, he was sentenced on 10 July 2012.
     The sentence was  a  Community  Payback  Order  lasting  three  years,
    including supervision for that period, a requirement to  undertake  250
    hours  of  unpaid  work,  and  a  conduct  requirement  preventing  the
    appellant to have any contact with children under the  age  of  sixteen
    years without the prior permission of his supervising officer.   As  an
    automatic result of that sentence, the appellant is required to  be  on
    the Sex Offenders Register for three years.  On 11 September  2013  the
    order was varied by the Sheriff Court enabling the  appellant  to  have
    contact with his stepson provided that this was supervised by his wife.
     The order remains in force in relation to any other children under the
    age of  sixteen.   The  reasons  given  by  the  Sheriff  included  his
    consideration that "a return to some degree of normal family life would
    be desirable to  assist  in  reducing  the  prospects  of  any  further
    offending  by  the  applicant".    Although  recent   assessments   had
    concluded that the appellant's stepson was not at significant risk from
    the appellant,  "that  conclusion  must  be  seen  in  context...  [the
    appellant] has been convicted of a sexual offence against a very  young
    child  and  there  will  always  remain  a  degree  of  risk  in   such
    circumstances".  It is clear from the Sheriff's decision  that  he  was
    strongly motivated by the fact that the appellant's wife "is  aware  of
    the potential risks to [the child's] welfare and ... has his  interests
    before her at all times".

 8. What is set out above is, however, all that is before the  Tribunal  in
    relation to the appellant's offence.  He admits that he  was  convicted
    (although it appears that he and his wife both  say  that  he  was  not
    guilty of any offence); he has not, however, given any details  at  all
    of the  conduct  amounting  to  the  offence.   Before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and before us, his position, presented by his  representative,
    is that it is for the Secretary of State to prove the  details  of  any
    conviction upon which she relies for the purposes of  the  exclusionary
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Immigration Judge said this:

          "14. The Appellant has been convicted of a sexual offence  against
              a child.  I do not have the details  of  the  offence.    The
              details of the offence were not before me despite  my  asking
              the Appellant's representative  for  them.   The  Appellant's
              representation  did  not  enlighten  me  when  asked,  as  he
              considered it was for the Respondent to produce any necessary
              details.  [She then set out the details  of  the  conviction,
              sentence  and  the  variation  of  the  original  order,  and
              continued] .... Any semblance of normal family life  for  the
              Appellant with his wife and her youngest two  children  still
              at home has only started to regularise since September  2013.
              It was accepted that the Appellant was not considered a  risk
              to his wife's youngest child.


          15.   The Appellant came to the UK on 14 January 2010.  Any normal
              family life he has had with her and  her  family  dates  from
              January 2010 - 10 July 2012....  Even this is not certain  as
              I was not told of the terms of  the  Appellant's  bail  while
              waiting for his trial date nor do I know the date the offence
              was committed or  what  behaviour  the  charges  against  the
              Appellant entailed."

10. After noting the terms of the refusal decision, the judge said this:

          "17.  On  the  facts  established  before  me,  I  find  that  the
              Appellant's behaviour and conduct concerning  his  conviction
              is of such seriousness as to justify the decision  to  deport
              him."

11. The judge went on to deal with family  life  outside  the  rules.   She
    wrote as follows:

          "20.  The Appellant married his wife in Pakistan on 30  July  2007
              but did not come to the UK as her husband  until  14  January
              2010.  He entered with leave to remain as a spouse  until  21
              March 2012.  On 24 April 2012 he was convicted  of  a  sexual
              offence against a child on summary complaint at  Ayr  Sheriff
              Court.  This disrupted the life he led with his wife and  her
              children by her late husband.  I do not know when any  family
              life  in  the  UK  was  disrupted  because  the   Appellant's
              representative refused to give me details of the offence, the
              date it was committed or details of any  time  the  Appellant
              spent on bail or in custody.  I can only assume the Appellant
              was barred from living with his family from the date  of  his
              arrest.  The Appellant's wife's eldest child, a son, left the
              family home in July 2012.  Of the two daughters over 18,  one
              now lives in London, but the other remains in the family home
              and is a student.  Her brother, born on 5  May  2000,  is  at
              school.  It was in September  2013  that  the  Appellant  was
              allowed to stay overnight in the family home.  This child  is
              unaware of the details of the  Appellant's  offence  and  the
              Appellant is only allowed to return to the house if his  wife
              supervises the visit.  The Appellant remains restricted  from
              having unsupervised contact with children under the age of 16
              years without the consent of his supervising officer.


          21.    I consider it  a  difficult  decision  as  to  whether  the
              Appellant's position at present constitutes  a  family  life.
              As noted above the details provided for me to make a decision
              as to the Appellant's conviction and the time leading  up  to
              it are scant.  I  can  only  assume  they  were  deliberately
              withheld.  Because of this I find I am  unable  to  find  the
              Appellant has established a family life in the UK.


          22.    If I am wrong about this I consider removing the  Appellant
              would undoubtedly disrupt what family life he has  here,  but
              doing so would be in accordance  with  the  law  and  in  the
              furtherance of protecting the rights of others and  upholding
              the UK's Immigration laws, not least the Immigration Rules.


          23. However, I must consider whether removing the Appellant  would
              be proportionate in all the circumstances here.  His wife has
              relatives in the Appellant's home village and has visited  on
              several  occasions  with  members  of  her  family.   She  is
              familiar with the area, speaks  the  local  language  and  by
              virtue of her relatives and past  visits,  will  be  familiar
              with local customs.  Moreover, according  to  the  Appellant,
              her late husband built a house there.  It would  be  open  to
              the Appellant and his wife to maintain their family  life  in
              Pakistan.  Her three older children are  over  18  and  could
              remain in the UK to continue their  lives  and  pursue  their
              careers.   They  have  close  relatives  here.    Maintaining
              contact with the Appellant's wife's children would not  be  a
              problem with Skype, e-mails and  other  inventions,  such  as
              texting, and, of course, by visits to Pakistan.  However, the
              youngest child of the family is now in  his  second  year  of
              senior school and is doing well there according to his school
              reports.   The  Sheriff,  when  modifying   the   Appellant's
              restrictions  on  visiting  his  family   in   Pollockshields
              specifically took into account when doing so  the  fact  that
              normal family life is clearly in the child's best  interests.
              I, too, have to consider the child's best interests and  find
              that  it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to   remove   the
              Appellant,  having  regard  to  the   personal   and   recent
              circumstances of his wife's  youngest  child,  the  fact  the
              Appellant was convicted of an  offence  of  a  sexual  nature
              against a child and because at best the Appellant lived  with
              his wife and her children from the date of his entry  to  the
              UK on 14 January 2010 until the date  of  his  conviction  in
              April 2012.  It is highly likely the Appellant was not living
              with the family until his conviction because of the nature of
              the offence.  He stated in his application form for leave  to
              remain as a spouse  dated  20  January  2012  that  he  faced
              assault charges that were to call  (in  court)  on  22  March
              2012.  His offence must have been committed therefore  before
              January 2012.  From the date of his  conviction  he  was  not
              allowed to stay overnight in the family home until  after  18
              September 2013.  I cannot find on this  information  that  it
              would be in the youngest son's interests that  the  Appellant
              remains in the household because any family life  experienced
              by the child was short lived and from September  2013  highly
              artificial as his mother has to be present when the Appellant
              is in  the  house.   Should  the  Appellant's  wife  wish  to
              maintain her family life with the Appellant it is open to her
              to wait until her young son is an adult and  she  could  then
              live with him in Pakistan or maintain her  relationship  with
              him by visits there in the interim.   As  this  determination
              involves a minor child I make an anonymity direction."

12. She accordingly dismissed the appellant's appeal.

13. Before us, the grounds of appeal are  first,  that  there  was  no  (or
    insufficient) evidence supporting the conclusion that  the  appellant's
    conduct justified the decision; the second principal ground is that the
    article 8 decision was erroneous in law because, given the error in the
    application of the Immigration Rules; the judge  was  not  entitled  to
    reach  the  view  that   the   appellant's   removal   would   not   be
    disproportionate.   In  order  to  establish  what  is  therefore   the
    principal ground, the appellant seeks to rely upon the decision of  the
    Upper  Tribunal  in  Farquharson  v  SSHD  [2013]  00146  (IAC).   That
    decision, relying also upon  Bah  v  SSHD  [2012]  UKUT  196  (IAC)  is
    authority for the proposition  that  where  the  facts  underlying  any
    conviction are disputed, it is for the Secretary of State to  establish
    them at a Tribunal hearing if she depends on  the  facts  in  order  to
    justify an immigration decision.  That, however, is  not  the  position
    here.  The fact of the appellant's conviction  is  not  disputed.   The
    Tribunal was not invited to entertain any  dispute  about  whether  the
    appellant was guilty, and indeed could not properly do so.  Even if  it
    could have done so, there was simply no  evidential  basis  upon  which
    such a conclusion could have been reached.  The  only  material  before
    the Tribunal was the appellant's  conviction,  his  sentence,  and  the
    somewhat guarded remarks by the Sheriff who made the variation order.

14. So far as the application of the  rules  to  the  appellant's  case  is
    concerned, two questions arise, or may arise.  (We  have  put  it  like
    that because it  is  very  far  from  clear  that  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's case on  this  point  was  put  with  any  clarity  to  the
    Immigration  Judge,  or  that  the  appellant's  professionally-drafted
    grounds of appeal properly raised these  issues  at  all.)   The  first
    question is whether the Secretary of State was entitled  to  reach  the
    discretionary decision she did on the material before her.  If she  was
    not so entitled, the decision might one which  was  "otherwise  not  in
    accordance with the law" (see s 84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act).  The  second
    question is whether, on an appeal, the Tribunal is  persuaded  that  "a
    discretion confirmed by immigration rules" should have  been  exercised
    differently (see s 84(1)(f) and s 86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act).  Those two
    questions appear to be to an extent combined in the  appellant's  first
    ground of appeal to this Tribunal.

15. So far as the first question is concerned, we have no  doubt  that  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to reach the decision she  did  on  the
    material before her.  The position was that at the time  the  appellant
    made his application he had been charged with a sexual offence  against
    a young child, and by the time  the  decision  was  made  he  had  been
    convicted.  Although, as Mr Forrest urged upon  us,  s  20  includes  a
    range of offences, it seems to  us  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    entitled to decide that a recent conviction of any offence  under  that
    section is sufficient to fall within the language of  paragraph  322(5)
    and paragraph S-LTR.1.6.  We therefore reject the submission  that,  in
    the absence  of  details  of  the  offence,  the  material  before  the
    Secretary of State was insufficient in law to enable her to  reach  the
    discretionary decision, within the  ambit  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    which she did reach.

16. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal,  it  was  for  the
    appellant  to  persuade  the  judge  that  the  Secretary  of   State's
    discretion should have been exercised differently.  At this point,  the
    circumstances of the offence would have to be relied  upon  principally
    by the appellant.  It is the appellant's appeal,  and  it  is  for  the
    appellant to make his case that (despite the conviction) he  is  not  a
    person whose departure from the United Kingdom would  be  conducive  to
    the public good.  It is difficult to see how he could do  that  without
    himself going into the details of the conviction.  In any event, in the
    present case the appellant chose not to do  that.   The  only  material
    before the Tribunal gave no reason at all to suppose that the appellant
    was not a continuing danger to children in general (in relation to whom
    the original order continued); and there was therefore simply no  basis
    upon which the judge could have concluded that the discretion ought  to
    have been exercised differently.   For  those  reasons  we  regard  the
    decision under the Immigration Rules as wholly unassailable.

17. The appellant is then a person who seeks to establish that, despite his
    failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, he should be
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  his  family
    life.  That claim outside the Immigration Rules, is essentially  a  new
    claim, made for the  first  time  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    The
    appellant seeks to make it on the basis that he does not  disclose  the
    circumstances of his offence: in other words,  he  seeks  to  establish
    that his circumstances entitle him to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    without being prepared to give a full account of those circumstances.

18. There is no proper basis upon which it could conceivably be said that a
    person is entitled to  assert  a  right  of  this  sort  without  being
    prepared to give, by credible evidence, the full  account  of  all  the
    circumstances which need to be taken  into  account  in  assessing  the
    issue of proportionality.   If an appellant is not prepared to do that,
    it appears  to  us  that  he  is  bound  to  fail  in  his  claim.   In
    circumstances in which the judge  is  aware  that  she  does  not  know
    important facts relating to the appellant's history and his relation to
    the community, it would simply be irrational for her to determine  that
    it is disproportionate to remove him.  That conclusion relates  equally
    to what may be regarded as the pure claim under article 8, and to  that
    based on the consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  any  children
    affected by the decision.  Neither the presence of family life nor even
    the best interests of children can of themselves prevent  a  claimant's
    removal: the question always is whether all the facts, properly weighed
    together, show that his removal would be disproportionate.  The absence
    of important facts makes that balancing  assessment  impossible,  which
    means that the person relying upon it cannot succeed.

19. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal against the refusal of  leave  to
    remain is dismissed.

20. That leaves the removal decision, made under s 47 of the 2006 Act.   It
    is clear that that decision was  unlawful  for  the  reasons  given  in
    Ahmadi v SSHD [2012] UKUT 147 (IAC) and  Adamally  and  Jaferi  v  SSHD
    [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC).   As  Mrs  O'Brien  acknowledged,  the  appeal
    against  that  decision  should  have  been  allowed.   We  accordingly
    substitute a decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    removal decision; but, so far as the decision  refusing  him  leave  to
    remain is concerned, we detect in the First-tier Tribunal's decision no
    error of law justifying its being  set  aside,  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision  refusing  the  appellant  further  leave  to  remain
    therefore stands.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 15 September 2014


