


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/19812/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st August  2013                          |On 27th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

                                    R L P
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. In this determination I will refer to the parties as they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, [RLP] as the appellant and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on [ ] 1967 and he  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 4th September 2012 to deport
    the appellant following a decision to refuse him asylum.  The appellant
    claims the decision is a breach of his rights under  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK as a visitor in 1997 and remained  with
    a student visa.  In 2000 he claimed asylum and later that year  married
    a British citizen.  In 2001 he was convicted of  grievous  bodily  harm
    for which he was given a 4 year sentence of imprisonment. In  2002  his
    daughter was born. He was released from custody in  August  2003.   His
    asylum appeal was refused in September 2003 and  he  then  applied  for
    leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse.    The   appellant   lodged   further
    representations with regards an asylum claim  (on  the  basis  of  gang
    violence and the ensuing death of family members) and  his  appeal  was
    finally refused in September 2012.

 4. The appellant claimed, inter alia, that he wished to remain in  the  UK
    to have contact with his daughter.  He had divorced his wife and mother
    of the child in 2011.

 5. On  30th  May  2013  FTT  Judge  Cheales  and  Mr  G  F  Sandall  in  a
    determination allowed the appeal to the limited  extent  that  a  short
    period of discretionary leave should be made at the discretion  of  the
    respondent.  It was considered that a fresh deportation could  be  made
    when the full facts were before the court.

Application for Permission to appeal

 6. The respondent filed grounds for permission to appeal on the basis that
    the  FTT  panel  had  made  no  or  alternatively  inadequate  findings
    regarding the merits of the appellant's  appeal  in  the  face  of  the
    ongoing family proceedings and failed to  follow  the  guidance  in  RS
    (India) [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) before allowing the appeal.

Grant of Permission to appeal

 7. Permission to Appeal was granted by FTT Judge Warren Grant  who  stated
    that it was arguable that the Tribunal had failed to make any  findings
    on the merits of the appellant's appeal without giving any reasons  for
    failing to make any findings both in general and in the  light  of  the
    guidance set out in RS (India)

The Hearing

 8. Mr Smart submitted that at the hearing which took place on 9th May 2013
    before the First Tier Tribunal it was evident  that  the  full  hearing
    before the Family Proceedings Court was due to take place on  24th  May
    2013.  A decision was therefore imminent. The court was  informed  that
    his daughter did not wish to see him although it was accepted that  the
    CAFCASS report was not before the court. This should have  reduced  the
    weight placed on the issue of  the  family  proceedings.  The  Tribunal
    should have followed the guidance in RS.

 9. Mr Howard asserted that the panel had correctly applied the  principles
    in RS (India) and MS (Ivory Cost) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  133.   The
    panel would not have been able  to  pre  determine  the  outcome.   The
    appellant now had indirect contact with his daughter.  The  panel  were
    aware  of  the  salient  facts  and  considered  the  prospect  of   an
    adjournment but rejected this on the basis that  proceedings  could  be
    lengthy.

Findings

10. Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    confirms that  'Although  there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

11. However, although  the  Tribunal  recorded  an  agreement  between  the
    parties that  a decision in the best interests of the child  could  not
    be made before the decision on contact had  been  made  by  the  family
    court [8] and made a reference  to  the  guidance  in  RS  and  MS,  no
    findings were made at all in respect of the merits of  the  case.   The
    conclusions of the Tribunal consisted of one and half lines [9].

12. The Tribunal therefore did not  follow  the  guidance  set  out  in  RS
    because having failed to  make  findings  it  could  not  have  decided
    whether, in line with RS, the outcome of the proceedings were likely to
    be  material.   Nor  was  there  any  consideration  of   whether   the
    proceedings were instituted to delay or frustrate  the  removal  rather
    than promote the child's welfare.   The Tribunal should have considered
    the extent of the previous interest in the child,  the  timing  of  the
    contact proceedings and  the  commitment  with  which  they  have  been
    progressed, when a decision was likely to be reached and what materials
    were already available or could be made available to identify  pointers
    to where the child's welfare lay.

13. Having gone through the above exercise then, the panel should  consider
    whether the claimant had at least an Article 8 right to remain and then
    if so, the appeal might be allowed to a limited extent.  The First Tier
    Tribunal failed to follow this process.  That was an error of law.

14. Alternatively the Tribunal should consider if it was  more  appropriate
    to grant a short period of adjournment.  Bearing in mind the  date  for
    the  substantive  determination   of   the   family   proceedings   was
    approximately 2 weeks after the hearing before the  IAC  hearing,  this
    was a matter which should have been addressed but was not.  This was an
    error of law.

15. The panel did not follow the guidance in RS, made no assessment of  the
    evidence and no  findings  in  respect  of  the  merits  as  indicated.
    Therefore there was an error in law which  could  affect  the  outcome.
    As such the determination cannot stand and should be remitted  back  to
    the First Tier Tribunal for a full and comprehensive evaluation of  the
    evidence and a full hearing.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 21st August 2013

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Rimington




Directions

The matter should be remitted back to the First Tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

The appellant's  solicitors  are  to  use  their  best  endeavours  to  make
available to the First Tier Tribunal a copy of the CAFCASS report.

All further evidence to be served at  least  14  days  prior  to  the  fresh
hearing before the FTT

