
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 15th April and 7th May 2015      |On:  12th May 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     EH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jones, Counsel instructed by London Visas
Services Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Israel date of birth 14th April  1963.
       He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       (Judge Geraint Jones QC) to dismiss his appeal against a decision  to
       refuse to vary his leave to remain and to remove him from the  United
       Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act
       2006.

       Background

    2. On the 18th December 2013  the  Appellant  made  an  application  for
       indefinite leave to remain as the dependent family member of a Points
       Based Migrant. The application was refused on the 7th April 2014. The
       Appellant duly lodged his appeal, on the grounds  that  the  decision
       was not in  accordance  with  the  immigration  rules,  that  it  was
       contrary to his human  rights  and  that  the  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law.

    3. The matter was listed for the 4th December 2014. On  the  29th  April
       2014 the Appellant's then representatives requested an early  listing
       for a CMR. The Appellant's father, who lives in Israel, had  suffered
       a stroke and the Appellant wished to visit him.  He therefore  wished
       the appeal to be listed as soon as possible or  alternatively  for  a
       ruling that  a  short  absence  from  the  UK  would  not,  in  these
       circumstances, result in his appeal being treated as abandoned.   The
       First-tier Tribunal expedited listing and the matter was set down for
       the 26th August 2014. It was subsequently agreed that the Appellant's
       representatives would serve bundles by the 19th August 2014.

    4. On that date the Appellant's representatives wrote  to  the  Tribunal
       requesting that the matter be adjourned:

          "It will be apparent from our previous  correspondence  that  this
          firm was instructed  in  good  time  and  that  we  were  actively
          representing our client's interests and carrying out instructions.
          However, from mid-June we heard nothing  further  from  him  until
          today. We were awaiting his further instructions and to be put  in
          funds; both these occurred just this morning.

          We asked our client for an  explanation  for  the  delay,  and  he
          explained that  the  last  two  months  were  extremely  difficult
          because he had been refused permission to  visit  his  parents  in
          Israel, and he was worried for their safety. In addition, his wife
          (a very important witness in this appeal) had to  start  treatment
          for cancer abroad, and left the country. She will not be returning
          until the beginning of September 2014"

       The letter goes on to point out that it was  the  Appellant  who  had
       sought to have the matter expedited and that  in  no  way  wished  to
       delay matters unnecessarily. Having regard to the "complex nature" of
       the case, the need to take witness statements and in  particular  the
       Appellant's wish to call his wife, the representatives requested that
       the matter be adjourned. The letter further opined  that  the  matter
       was too complex to be dealt with in the two hours that  Hatton  Cross
       had set aside for the hearing and  that  the  preferred  Counsel,  Mr
       Laurie Fransman QC, was not available as he would be in Vienna.

    5. The application to adjourn was refused by Designated Judge Manuell in
       the following terms:  "1. It is up to the Appellant to  instruct  his
       solicitors properly if he wishes to retain them.   2.  Other  Counsel
       can be briefed".

    6. On the 26th August 2014 the matter came before Judge Geraint Jones QC
       sitting at Richmond Magistrates Court.  The Appellant was represented
       by Mr Sayeed of Counsel. Mr Sayeed reiterated the matters set out  in
       the letter of the 19th August 2014.  He relied on a skeleton argument
       dated the 25th August 2014 and set out further arguments as follows:

          a) The Appellant is separated from his wife but continues to play
             an active and important role in the life  of  their  children,
             the youngest of whom was 12 years  old  at  the  date  of  the
             appeal;

          b) He continues to support his family financially and because  of
             his role in caring for their children his  wife  supports  his
             appeal notwithstanding their separation;

          c) His wife is now seriously ill with cancer and this brings into
             sharp  focus  the  significance  of  the  care  the  Appellant
             provides for his children, both of whom are settled in the UK;

          d) There is a  "complex  history"  in  this  matter  because  the
             Appellant has been the subject of extradition requests by  the
             Russian government. An Interpol Red Notice has been issued  in
             his name. He has defeated two such attempts, one in the UK and
             one in Spain, on the grounds that the charges are  politically
             motivated.  The Red  Notice  means  that  travel  abroad  (for
             instance to go and apply for entry clearance to return to  the
             UK) would likely be problematic.  The Appellant is, in effect,
             "confined" to the UK;

       Having set out those factors Mr Sayeed submitted that  the  case  was
       not a straightforward PBS dependency case. It was actually an Article
       8 appeal which would take longer than two hours because the Appellant
       wished to call evidence inter alia from his wife  (about  the  family
       life  and  her  health),  Spanish  lawyers  (about  the   extradition
       proceedings) and Israeli  lawyers  (about  the  potential  danger  of
       arrest, detention  and  extradition  from  Israel  to  Russia).   The
       revised time estimate was one day.

    7. Judge Geraint Jones QC refused the adjournment request, and following
       instructions, Mr Sayeed withdrew. The appeal was  considered  on  the
       scant evidence before the Tribunal and dismissed.  The reasons  given
       for refusing the adjournment were:

          i) anyone could "force an adjournment" by not turning up;

         ii) the appeal could be justly determined  on  the  basis  of  the
             evidence that the parties had seen fit to adduce;

        iii) "no reason whatsoever" was advanced as to  why  the  Appellant
             had not attended court;

         iv) the fact that the Appellant's wife was out of the country  did
             not prevent her from providing  a  witness  statement.   Judge
             Geraint Jones QC could see no reason to assume  that  she  was
             out of the country for medical reasons;

          v) it would be grossly unjust to allow an appellant to manipulate
             the procedure of the Tribunal by failing, with no explanation,
             to provide instructions to his solicitors;

         vi) other appellants are waiting for their appeals  to  be  listed
             and heard.

    8. In respect of the substantive appeal Judge Geraint Jones QC  was  not
       satisfied that there was sufficient evidence before him to  discharge
       the burden of proof and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

       Error of Law

    9. I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  the
       decision not to adjourn.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal was quite correct to express  indignation  at
       the  way  that  this  Appellant,  and  indeed  his  then  solicitors,
       approached this matter. The determination makes the very  good  point
       that many (thousands of)  other  appellants  are  waiting  for  their
       appeals to be listed and that adjournment requests such as these take
       up valuable time and resources.   It was  not  however  the  entirely
       accurate to find that "no reasons" had been  advanced  for  the  fact
       that the Appellant was not ready to proceed  with  his  case  on  the
       appointed day. The reason given was that his wife, a key witness, was
       suffering from cancer and had to travel abroad for  treatment:  I  am
       unsure why the First-tier Tribunal felt that the reason given for her
       absence was  unclear,  since  it  was  plainly  spelled  out  in  the
       solicitor's letter of the 19th August 2014,  and  was  reiterated  by
       Counsel.   The  Appellant  had  further  been  said  to   have   been
       distracted, if I can put it like that, by the Gaza conflict  and  his
       father's illness.  The Tribunal  might  have  considered  neither  of
       these matters to be good reasons why and adjournment  was  justified,
       indeed close analysis might have shown that to be the case, but  they
       were reasons that merited consideration and this was not done.    Nor
       did the determination give any weight to the fact that the  Appellant
       had previously sought to have his hearing brought forward: hardly the
       actions  of  a  vexatious  litigant  or  someone  seeking  to   delay
       proceedings.

   11. Futhermore Mr Sayeed's submissions on the day made it clear that  the
       Appellant was  then  intending  to  advance  "complex"  argument  and
       evidence about the peculiar  circumstances  in  which  the  Appellant
       finds himself, being the subject of the Interpol  Red  Notice.   This
       issue was significant, since it went to the heart of the  Appellant's
       Article 8 family life with his young daughter. His case was  that  if
       he is removed, his  lawful  return  to  the  UK  would  face  serious
       obstacles  in  that  he  may  well  be  detained  in  Israel  pending
       resolution of Russia's  extradition  request.    That  separation  of
       father and daughter  would  come  at  a  time  of  great  stress  and
       uncertainty for her, because of her mother's illness.  Unpalatable as
       an adjournment in these circumstances might be,  this  was  a  matter
       that deserved careful  consideration,  in  light  of  the  Tribunal's
       obligations under s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
       2009.

   12. For those reasons I find that the decision to refuse to adjourn,  and
       to determine the appeal in the absence of evidence, was  flawed.  The
       decision is set aside.

       The Re-Making

   13. At the close of the 'error of law' hearing there was some  discussion
       between the parties as to the most  appropriate  disposal.  Mr  Jones
       indicated that although ordinarily he would have  requested  remittal
       to the First-tier Tribunal in these circumstances, in this case there
       were particular reasons why it would be preferable to  go  ahead  and
       remake the decision  in  the  appeal  without  the  need  to  further
       adjourn. He pointed out that notwithstanding the submissions made  by
       and on behalf of the previous representatives about the complexity of
       this case, as matters stood today the issue was in fact narrow.

   14. The application had been  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
       dependent spouse of a Points Based System Migrant.  The  reasons  for
       refusal raised two issues under the Rules: the Appellant  had  failed
       to establish that he had passed his "life in the  UK'  test  and  the
       Respondent could not be satisfied that the  Appellant's  relationship
       with his wife was  subsisting.  The  first  matter  could  be  easily
       resolved with reference to the documentary  evidence:  the  Appellant
       had passed his Life in the UK test, and evidence of the same had been
       sent with his application. As to the  Appellant's  relationship  with
       his wife Mr Jones proposed to call both  of  them  as  witnesses.  He
       asked that their evidence be taken immediately following the error of
       law hearing. The Appellant's wife Ms S had very  recently  -  in  the
       preceding 48 hours -  been informed that the cancer that she  thought
       had been successfully treated had in  fact  returned,  and  that  she
       would imminently have to leave the UK in order to go to the  USA  for
       further therapy.   It could not be said with certainty when she would
       be able to return to appear in any further  hearing.    This  was  at
       3pm. Ms Holmes for the Respondent had not had any opportunity to read
       the bundle that she had received that morning  but  in  view  of  the
       pressing nature of the request she very fairly agreed to prepare  the
       case. She was given 30 minutes to read the witness statements.  I  am
       sure that the Appellant and his family are very grateful to  her  for
       agreeing to take on a full remaking so late in the day; for my part I
       am very grateful to both representatives for their clear, concise and
       helpful presentation.

   15. On the afternoon of the 15th April 2015 I heard  live  evidence  from
       the Appellant and his wife, S. That evidence is summarised below. The
       matter was then adjourned part-heard for lack of  time,  resuming  on
       the 7th May in order to hear oral submissions.

       The Matters in Issue

   16. The Respondent's reasons for refusal are set out in  a  letter  dated
       15th April 2014.  It is noted that the Appellant arrived  in  the  UK
       with leave to  enter  as  a  visitor  on  the  30th  March  2008.  He
       thereafter successfully applied to  vary  his  leave,  being  granted
       Leave to Remain as the Dependent of a Points Based Migrant until  the
       14th November 2011, leave that was further extended  until  the  17th
       November 2013. On the 16th November 2013 he made an  application  for
       further leave to remain in the same capacity, thereafter varied to an
       application for Indefinite Leave to Remain as the partner of a Points
       Based Migrant.

   17. The relevant paragraph of the Rules is paragraph 319E:

          To qualify for indefinite leave to remain as the Partner of a
          Relevant Points Based System Migrant, an applicant must meet the
          requirements listed below. If the applicant meets these
          requirements, indefinite leave to remain will be granted. If the
          applicant does not meet these requirements, the application will
          be refused.

          Requirements:

             (a) The applicant must not fall for refusal under the general
             grounds for refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.

             (b) The applicant must be the spouse or civil partner,
             unmarried or same-sex partner of a person who:

                 (i) has indefinite leave to remain as a Relevant Points
                 Based System Migrant; or

                 (ii) is, at the same time being granted indefinite leave to
                 remain as a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, or

                 (iii) has become a British Citizen where prior to that they
                 held indefinite leave to remain as a Relevant Points Based
                 System Migrant.

             (c) The applicant must have, or have last been granted, leave
             as the partner of the Relevant Points Based System Migrant
             who:

                 (i) has indefinite leave to remain as a Relevant Points
                 Based System Migrant; or

                 (ii) is, at the same time being granted indefinite leave to
                 remain as a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, or

                 (iii) has become a British Citizen where prior to that they
                 held indefinite leave to remain as a Relevant Points Based
                 System Migrant.

             (d) The applicant and the Relevant Points Based System Migrant
             must have been living together in the UK in a marriage or
             civil partnership, or in a relationship similar to marriage or
             civil partnership, for at least the period specified in (i) or
             (ii):

                 (i) If the applicant was granted leave as:

                    (a) the Partner of that Relevant Points Based System
                    Migrant, or

                    (b) the spouse or civil partner, unmarried or same-sex
                    partner of that person at a time when that person had
                    leave under another category of these Rules
                    under the Rules in place before 9 July 2012, and since
                    then has had continuous leave as the Partner of that
                    Relevant Points based System Migrant, the specified
                    period is 2 years

                 (ii) If (i) does not apply, the specified period is a
                 continuous period of 5 years, during which the applicant
                 must:

                    (a) have been in a relationship with the same Relevant
                    Points Based System Migrant for this entire period,

                    (b) have spent the most recent part of the 5 year period
                    with leave as the Partner of that Relevant Points Based
                    System Migrant, and during that part of the period have
                    met all of the requirements of paragraph 319C(a) to (e),
                    and

                    (c) have spent the remainder of the 5 year period, where
                    applicable, with leave as the spouse or civil partner,
                    unmarried or same-sex partner of that person at a time
                    when that person had leave under another category of
                    these Rules.

             (e) The marriage or civil partnership, or relationship similar
             to marriage or civil partnership, must be subsisting at the
             time the application is made.

             (f) The applicant and the Relevant Points Based System Migrant
             must intend to live permanently with the other as their spouse
             or civil partner, unmarried or same-sex partner.

             (g) The applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the
             English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the
             United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

             (h) DELETED

             (i) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of
             immigration laws except that any period of overstaying for a
             period of 28 days will be disregarded.

   18. Paragraph 4 of the letter contains the central ground of refusal.  It
       appears to omit two key words which I have added  in  parenthesis  to
       make sense of it:

          "Although it is accepted that at the time of your  previous  grant
          of leave you were married to a Tier 1  Migrant,  no  evidence  has
          been provided to show that you are still married, especially since
          it is noted that you have spent a significant period out of the UK
          without your spouse. Therefore it  is  considered  that  you  have
          [not] established that you are the [partner] of a person  who  has
          indefinite leave to remain  as  a  Relevant  Points  Based  System
          Migrant, or has become a British Citizen where prior to that  they
          held indefinite leave to remain as a Relevant Points Based  System
          Migrant.  Consequently  you  do  not  meet  the  requirements   of
          paragraph 319E(b)."

   19. Paragraph 7 further states that the Appellant has failed  to  provide
       any evidence that he has passed his 'Life in the UK test'.

       The Evidence

   20. The Appellant adopted his witness statement dated 14th April 2015. He
       was born in the former Soviet Union to Jewish parents, who have since
       emigrated to Israel. He is now a citizen of Israel. Whilst living  in
       post-Soviet Russia the Appellant "managed to grow a significant level
       of wealth". He traded in commodities such as wheat,  oil,  steel  and
       meat.  Later on he went into banking.

   21. The Appellant and S met in the early 1990s. They  have  been  married
       for 22 years.  He describes her as the love of his life.   When  they
       married each already had a son from a previous  relationship.   After
       their marriage they lived together  with  her  son  in  Moscow.   The
       Appellant has always treated  his  stepson  as  his  own  child,  and
       continues to support him now he is an adult.  They have two  children
       from their marriage, a son born in 1995 and a daughter born in  2002.
       They all lived together in a large house in the  suburbs  of  Moscow.
       They were very happy together.

   22. In 2006 things started to go wrong. The Appellant had invested  in  a
       large real estate development and this had brought him  and  his  co-
       investors into conflict with the government, which  seized  the  land
       and launched prosecutions against the Appellant and others.  By  2007
       it became clear that the Appellant had to leave Russia. He was living
       in hiding to avoid arrest or worse.  In 2008 the family relocated  to
       London.  S was granted leave to enter as an Investor, having invested
       �1,000,000 in UK government bonds. The children were treated  as  her
       dependents. The Appellant initially entered  as  a  visitor  but  was
       subsequently granted leave to remain as a dependent to S.

   23.  When  they  arrived  in  London  they  lived  in  an  apartment   in
       Knightsbridge. The Appellant was also using it as his office and as a
       result it was quite hectic. There were frequently business associates
       coming and going, and the Appellant was "always on the phone"  or  on
       his computer.  The Appellant said that  they  had  never  employed  a
       nanny to look after their children. He was very proud that he and his
       wife had chosen to try and be a "normal" family notwithstanding their
       wealth. They had an "aunty" who would help out, particularly when his
       wife was very ill, and sometimes used a driver,  but  generally  they
       had always tried to do  everything  for  their  children  themselves.
       They lived there with their daughter and their son who were  enrolled
       in private  schools.  The  family  did  their  best  to  re-establish
       themselves in the UK.

   24. In 2010 S was diagnosed with cancer. She received  private  treatment
       in London and in Germany.  At this  time,  when  she  was  undergoing
       chemotherapy, she really wanted somewhere peaceful to try  and  focus
       on her recovery. She looked  for  and  found  another  apartment,  in
       Chelsea. This was a place that she  and  their  children  could  live
       without  being  disturbed  by  the  business  activity  going  on  in
       Knightsbridge.  The Appellant would stay at the flat in Chelsea  with
       them, and if he was to be working late, stay over  in  Knightsbridge.
       Sometimes she needed to be alone and he would bring  the  children  -
       and pets - back to Knightsbridge with him.

   25. Then in 2010 the family received a  further  blow  when  the  Russian
       authorities attempted to extradite the Appellant  from  London.   The
       Appellant had to face these proceedings, which he won in  Westminster
       Magistrates' Court, at the same time as S was  battling  cancer.   It
       was a stressful time for the family but they held together.

   26. In 2012 S was given the "all clear". The Appellant booked her into  a
       private spa in Spain to aid her recovery.  That  year  was  her  45th
       birthday and he decided to fly  to  Spain  in  order  to  organise  a
       surprise birthday party for her in Ibiza.   He  was  arrested  as  he
       landed, the Spanish police informing him that he was to be extradited
       to Moscow.   He  was  held  in  detention  for  some  weeks,  with  S
       shuttling between Spain where she could visit him, and  London  where
       she was trying to organise legal representation.  In November 2012 he
       was granted bail but was not permitted to leave Spain.

   27. The Appellant set up home in Marbella. S and the children remained in
       London. They were all under a lot of stress, having been advised that
       statistically he was likely to lose his battle against extradition in
       the Spanish court. He feared for his life if returned to  Russia.  In
       January 2013 the Appellant and S quarrelled  over  "something  minor"
       and she did not visit  him  for  a  few  months.  The  Appellant  did
       something that he had never done before; he was unfaithful to  S.  He
       expresses deep regret for having an affair  during  this  period.  He
       said that unlike other wealthy Russians he knew he had never  had  an
       extra-marital relationship. The woman fell pregnant and  subsequently
       gave birth to a little girl.

   28. By May 2013 the Appellant and S had  made-up  and  she  attended  the
       lavish 50th birthday party that he threw for himself in Marbella.  He
       describes her coming to this party as one of the  "best  moments"  in
       his life.   Sadly, in June 2013  S  was  told  that  her  cancer  had
       returned.  These were the  worst  moments.  S  was  upset  about  the
       affair, and distressed about her illness. The Appellant had lost  his
       case in the lower courts in Spain.   They were  facing  the  greatest
       challenge of their long marriage. It was  during  this  time  that  S
       instructed Mischon de Reya solicitors to make settlement applications
       for her and the children.

   29. In November 2013 the Spanish Supreme Court held  that  the  Appellant
       should not be extradited.  This was a first in Spain's legal  history
       and it was a great victory. He was released from bail and was able to
       travel back to the UK. The night he arrived he  was  greeted  by  his
       wife and children and they went out together for a celebratory  meal.
       He immediately began studying for  his  'Life  in  the  UK'  test  to
       support his application and passed it.  The application that  is  the
       subject of this appeal was made on his behalf.  The  Appellant  avers
       that his relationship with his wife is subsisting, as it was  at  the
       date of the application.  He loves her very much.  He  believes  that
       she has forgiven him for his affair. She and the children know  about
       the little girl.  He and S have always treated all their children  as
       part of their family and she  will  be  no  different.  He  is  fully
       providing for this  child  and  S  is  aware  of  and  supports  that
       decision.

   30. The remainder of the Appellant's witness statement is taken  up  with
       his complaints  against  his  former  representatives.   I  need  not
       address  these  matters  herein  save  to  note  that  the  Appellant
       vigorously contests the assertions made in the  letter  of  the  19th
       August 2014: he had put his solicitors  in  considerable  funds  well
       before the appeal and had maintained contact with them throughout the
       entire period.  He was not made aware that  either  he  or  his  wife
       should attend court.  She had been on "stand-by" to come back to  the
       UK if needed but was not asked to.  The submission made by counsel on
       the day,  that  the  marriage  had  broken  down,  was  made  without
       instructions.

   31. S  adopted  her  witness  statement  dated  14th  April  2015.    She
       confirmed that she and the Appellant  have  been  married  almost  23
       years. Asked to describe her husband she said:

          "He's a strong man - a man of good character who is a good friend.
          He spends a lot of time caring about his partners, and his
          friends. He is the ideal of courage. The bible says that I should
          not create an idol - but he is my ideal".

       She said that when they lived together in Russia their  marriage  was
       seen amongst their peers as  being  exemplary  -  they  were  like  a
       "brand". People looked  to  them  as  an  inspiration  because  their
       marriage was good and so were their lives. They were well off, secure
       and happy.

   32. When they were forced, in 2008, to  leave  Russia  their  lives  were
       "annihilated".  They  had  to  leave  suddenly,  taking  only  a  few
       possessions and their passports. They had to leave everything  behind
       and rebuild their lives in London.  They could not speak English well
       and the experience "shattered" them: "we were not prepared for such a
       turn of  events...but  the  main  thing  for  us  was  that  we  were
       together".

   33. They set up home in Knightsbridge.  They tried to maintain  a  normal
       life. S describes her husband as a loving and active father.  He  has
       worked hard to provide material things for his children but the  main
       thing that he brings them is love and care.  They faced the  "terror"
       of the attempted extradition and her illness together, and  the  most
       important thing was that they had each other.

   34. When she became ill she found it difficult to relax in  the  flat  in
       Knightsbridge. The area was full of Russians and she felt as  if  she
       "were in Red Square". She  wanted  peace  and  quiet  and  asked  the
       Appellant to find somewhere more tranquil for she and the children to
       live.  This was how they came to have the flat in Chelsea: "we  chose
       this model to save our family".  They would all stay  there  together
       for three to four nights a week, and sometime  she  or  the  children
       would stay over at the "work' flat.

   35. For S, things became immeasurably more  difficult  when  her  husband
       decided to throw her a surprise party in Spain. What she  got  was  a
       lot of surprises, but not the kind he had in mind.  She  was  in  the
       clinic in Madrid when she received the news that he had been arrested
       in Ibiza. It was the middle of the night and  she  went  straight  to
       Valencia where he had been transferred.   He was kept there for a few
       days before being sent to prison in Madrid. She was visiting him each
       day. She said that the terror she experienced in these few weeks  was
       "unbelievable".  She was trying to sort out lawyers in London as well
       as looking after their daughter and seeing their son, who was at that
       time in Portugal.  She was in constant fear that her husband would be
       sent to Russia.

   36. As it was, he defeated the extradition request in Spain. In the  time
       that he was stuck there however, one of the "many" women who  "circle
       men like him" was successful. S said that Russian men with money  are
       a constant target for "women who want support" and  even  some  boys.
       She has come to accept it as part of her life but never thought  that
       one would actually succeed. In her oral evidence  S  made  clear  her
       distaste for the woman involved, but confirmed that the  little  girl
       who was born of the affair will be treated like all the rest  of  her
       husband's children, by her as well as him.   She was very upset  when
       she had found out about it but when he returned to the UK in November
       2013 he promised her that he loved  her  and  no-one  else;  she  now
       accepts this and has forgiven him, although she describes this period
       as being a "tremendous test" for their marriage,  and  for  her.  She
       believes that it was the stress of 2013 that resulted in  the  cancer
       returning.

   37. S states the she is committed to her husband, and he to her.  On  the
       13th April 2015 she was told that they have found another  lump.  Her
       consultant is recommending that she goes to  America  for  pioneering
       treatment. She will be away for the next few months and her  daughter
       and husband will remain in London.  This will be yet another test  of
       their endurance, but it is one she is confident about tackling.

       My Findings

   38. As Mr Jones frankly pointed out, this was not a case that required  a
       full day's hearing, nor  junior  and  lead  Counsel.  There  are  two
       grounds for refusal under paragraph 319E, and if  the  Appellant  can
       show, on a balance of probabilities, that they  are  both  wrong,  he
       succeeds.

   39. The first matter can be dealt with very briefly. Ms Holmes  used  her
       best endeavours to find out whether the Respondent  had  indeed  ever
       received a copy of the Appellant's 'Life in the UK test'. She managed
       to get it on the day of the resumed hearing, and she accepts that  he
       had passed that test at the relevant time.

   40. The second matter was  whether  this  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       marriage. Having heard the live evidence, and  having  conducted  her
       own sensitive but efficient cross examination, Ms Holmes conceded  at
       submission stage that the evidence was wholly credible, and she could
       advance no reason why I should reject it. I entirely agree.

   41. This is a marriage that has lasted for well  over  two  decades.  The
       past nine years have been extremely testing. This  couple  has  faced
       investigation and potential prosecution by the  Russian  authorities,
       accepted by both Westminster Magistrates' Court and the Supreme Court
       of Spain to be politically motivated[2].  They  have  lost  all  that
       they had in Russia - their home, friendships, security and influence.
       Having  re-established  themselves  in   the   "little   Moscow"   of
       Knightsbridge they were then faced with the cumulative blows  of  the
       extradition request to the UK government, the Interpol Red Notice and
       the diagnosis of cancer. Just when they thought that they  had  dealt
       with these challenges, they had to go through the entire thing again,
       this time in Spain.  The  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter
       dryly notes that the Appellant has spent long periods absent from the
       UK without his spouse. Presumably that is a reference to the time  he
       spent in a Spanish jail and thereafter on bail awaiting resolution of
       his extradition proceedings. It is clear from the evidence that there
       were periods during this stressful period that they were  not  living
       under the same roof. I accept that S was  extremely  upset  when  her
       husband told her he had had an affair but I am equally satisfied that
       she is telling the truth when she says that this is now behind  them.
       All long marriages go through difficult  periods:  that  is  part  of
       married life.  She told me that they are looking to buy  a  house  in
       the UK. They are committed to each other. Her evidence was compelling
       and wholly credible.  I  am  accordingly  satisfied  that  they  were
       together as a couple at the date of the application,  and  that  they
       remain a couple today.

   42. I find on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant  meets  all
       of the relevant requirements of paragraph 319E.

       Decisions and Directions

   43. The determination of the appeal by First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error of law and it is set aside.

   44. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration
       Rules.

   45. This case involves a minor, and information about  the  health  of  a
       witness which should remain private. For those  reasons  I  make  the
       following direction for anonymity:

       "Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
       Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall
       directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.
       This direction applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                7th May 2015

-----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Brunnen on the 11th
October 2014 but granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge
Goldstein on the 11th February 2015
[2] See paragraph 16 of the decision of Senior District Judge Workman dated
15th June 2010

