
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19101/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 August 2016                             |On 21 October 2016            |
|Prepared 24 August 2016                       |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 miss Consuelo Del Rostrio Calderin Manchego
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dayal of MDL Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Colombia, date of birth  3  December  1976,
    appealed against the Respondent's  decision  dated  16  April  2015  to
    refuse leave to remain as a domestic worker in a private  household  by
    reference to paragraph 159H and paragraph 159G(ii)  and  (iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the Rules)  on  16  April  2015.
    Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge C  A  S  O'Garro  (the
    judge) who on 5 February 2016 allowed the appeal under the Rules.

3.   Permission to appeal was sought on 10  February  2016  and  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 15 July  2016.   The  Secretary  of
    State's first challenge  was  that  there  was  a  failure  to  provide
    adequate reasons to establish that there were insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing outside of the United Kingdom.  A  subsidiary
    part of that ground was that the judge had failed to adequately  reason
    the basis of those insurmountable obstacles and in doing so had  failed
    to make reference  to  the  background  material  which  supported  the
    judge's view of the risk of kidnapping in Colombia.

4.   The second challenge was that the judge had failed to  make  a  finding
    that the Appellant's partner was a 'partner' as  defined  either  under
    the Rules or at all.  It was  agreed  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether the relationship was akin to marriage.  It would seem,
    in all likelihood, that the person settling the grounds of  appeal  had
    only the judge's decision when drafting the grounds:  Had  that  person
    also had the case file and  the  submissions  made  together  with  the
    evidence of the Appellant and her partner it is quite possible that the
    grounds would have been drafted differently.

5.   For our part we were satisfied that the judge set out in  the  decision
    [D] the position as claimed by the evidence of  the  Claimant  and  the
    Claimant's partner (see D14, 18,  19).   The  judge  further  correctly
    addressed  the  relevant  parts  of  Appendix  FM  and  in   particular
    paragraphs  EX.1  and  EX.2  as  to  the  factors   relevant   to   the
    consideration of whether insurmountable obstacles exist to prevent  the
    relocation of the Claimant's partner to Colombia.

6.   It is accepted that  the  judge  explained  his  reasoning  in  D29  in
    relation to the case of Agyarko  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440  and  evidently
    understood the threshold of insurmountable obstacles.  At D30 the judge
    said:

         "I  now  turn  to  this  Appellant  and  her  partner's  particular
         circumstances.  I have taken  into  account  that  the  Appellant's
         partner is Iraqi.  He has never been to Colombia and  he  does  not
         speak the language.  He has no  understanding  of  the  culture  or
         mores of Colombia.  There is also the security situation in Colombo
         [sic] [Colombia] as noted from the objective evidence  which  talks
         about kidnapping being a real treat  [sic]  [threat]  as  terrorist
         groups and other criminal organisations continue to kidnap and hold
         civilians, including foreigners for ransom."

    The judge continued, D31:

         "I find the fact that the Appellant's husband will have  difficulty
         finding employment due to language difficulty and understanding the
         culture  as well as the mental fear he would  have  in  them  going
         about their daily lives due to the  fear  of  kidnapping  or  being
         harmed by criminals,  makes  relocating  to  Colombia  filled  with
         practical difficulties."

    The judge continued, D32:

         "Taking  account  of  what  the  courts  said  about   interpreting
         'insurmountable obstacles' in a sensible and practical rather  than
         a  literal  way,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  insurmountable
         obstacles to the Appellant and her partner relocating to Colombia".

7.   Whilst we might not have written the decision in the same way,  we  are
    assessing whether or not  what  was  explained  contained  adequate  or
    sufficient reasons.  It is clear what the considerations were that  the
    judge found demonstrated insurmountable obstacles.  The  judge  reached
    that view by  reference  to  background  material,  whose  origins  and
    sources are unchallenged, and identified the threats to foreigners from
    life in Colombia.   The  sources  are  a  United  Kingdom  and  a  U.S.
    Department of State document. The basis of the  judge's  conclusion  is
    understandable.  If it is generous decision then that is a  matter  for
    the judge and we can only interfere if there is an error of law.


8.   It is also correct to say that the background evidence  does  refer  to
    the risk of kidnapping to foreigners and  visitors  to  Colombia.   The
    judge at paragraph D30 makes reference to  background  evidence,  which
    can only be the two reports referred to.  In the circumstances  failing
    to actually quote parts of those documents does not disclose  an  error
    of law. It is not said that either of the two documents  cited  to  the
    judge did not disclose the element of risk which the judge found  there
    to be from kidnapping or harm.   In  the  circumstances  that  part  of
    ground 1 of the Secretary of State's appeal has no substance.

9.   In relation to ground 2 we found that the evidence before the judge  by
    way of statements from the Claimant and her partner together  with  the
    oral evidence and cross-examination, of which we have the notes, served
    in advance of the hearing from Mr Dayal, show that issue was not  being
    taken over the nature of their relationship. It was not being  asserted
    that they were not in a relationship akin to marriage.  It  is  notable
    that it was not an issue originally raised by the Secretary  of  State.
    Whilst it is correct that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  consider
    paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the Immigration Ruled but  the  fact
    is that this  issue  was  not  pursued  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative at the hearing before  the  judge.   Ultimately  it  was
    agreed, as  the  note  confirms,  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Claimant and her partner was not in issue nor  was  it  raised  by  the
    Presenting Officer.

10.  In the circumstances we were satisfied that there was no error of  law.
    Mr Dayal raised various references that showed the longstanding  nature
    of the Claimant and partner relationship and its permanence  but  these
    did not take the matter any further.

11.  In these circumstances we are satisfied that the Secretary  of  State's
    grounds have not established any error of law: By and large they appear
    to be a disagreement with the findings made by the judge.  We emphasise
    that we might not have reached the same decision on the evidence as  to
    insurmountable obstacles but simply because we might disagree does  not
    demonstrate an error of law.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge O'garro, dated 5 February 2016. The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity was sought nor is it required.



Signed                                  Date 18 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


