
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19341/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 September 2015                             |On 29 September 2015       |
|                                                 |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               hichem saidani
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Ward, James & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Algeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  10  April
    2014 to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his  private  and  family  life.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Carroll allowed the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the appellant entered the UK as a
    visitor in November 2008. Following expiry of his visa in February 2009
    he remained in the UK as an overstayer. On 21 June 2012 he submitted an
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his private and  family
    life. His case is that he began  living  with  a  British  national  in
    September 2011 and they married in  June  2012.  This  application  was
    refused on 5 November 2012 with no right of appeal. On 21 March 2014 he
    was served with a  One  Stop  Notice  and  a  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds. The appellant and his wife have a child who was born in the UK
    on 23 July 2014.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on 10 April 2014 on  the
    basis that the appellant could not meet  the  eligibility  requirements
    set out in E-LTRP.1.1 of Appendix FM because he had no valid  leave  to
    remain at the time of his application and he  remained  in  the  UK  in
    breach of the immigration laws.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge took into account that the appellant  and
    his wife have had a son who is a British citizen  and  found  that  the
    appellant satisfied the requirements of EX1 of Appendix FM in  that  he
    has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen child.

 6. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision  on  the  grounds
    that the Judge misdirected herself in relation to the provisions of  Ex
    1 in that she failed to engage with the second limb of the  test  which
    asks whether it would be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    UK.

Error of Law

 7. Section Ex of Appendix FM provides as follows;

           EX.1. This paragraph applies if
           (a) (i) the applicant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
           relationship with a child who-
                 (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age  of
                 18 years when the applicant was first granted leave on  the
                 basis that this paragraph applied;
                 (bb) is in the UK;
                 (cc)  is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the   UK
                 continuously for at least the 7 years immediately preceding
                 the date of application ; and
           (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           UK; or

           (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

           EX.2. For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner.

 8. In considering Ex 1 at paragraph 8 of her determination the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to consider Ex 1 (a) (ii).  This  is  clearly  an
    error of law. Mr Ward submitted that it is not a material error because
    the Secretary of State's policy in relation to this matter  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the policy would indicate  that  this
    appellant's British child should not be required to leave  the  UK.  He
    submitted that any Judge having proper regard to the policy would  have
    reached the same decision as this Judge. However I do not  accept  that
    it is in any way obvious that the Judge had in mind the second part  of
    Ex  1  in  reaching  her  decision.  The  Judge  has  not   given   any
    consideration as to whether it would be reasonable  for  the  child  to
    leave the UK or for the appellant to return to Algeria with or  without
    his wife and child for a temporary or  permanent  period.  I  therefore
    find that the Judge made a material  error  of  law.  As  there  is  no
    challenge to the findings of fact they are preserved.

Remaking the decision

 9. Mr Ward submitted no further evidence. The representatives agreed  that
    there was no issue in terms of the suitability or other requirements of
    Appendix FM. The sole issue is the application  of  Ex  1  and  whether
    consideration  of  this  case  outside   the   Immigration   Rules   is
    appropriate.

10. Mr Clarke submitted that the evidence before the Judge was  that  there
    was no problem in the appellant  returning  to  Algeria  and  that  the
    policy guidance covers temporary separation as there is  no  compulsion
    on the child to leave the UK whilst the  appellant  applies  for  entry
    clearance to return. He  accepted  that  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 may require consideration of  this
    appeal outside the Immigration Rules. He relied on the decision  in  EV
    Philippines & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and submitted  that  it
    is necessary to look at the situation on the ground. The child will  be
    temporarily separated from  the  appellant  and  there  is  nothing  to
    suggest  that  the  application  for  entry  clearance  will   not   be
    successful. He submitted that the appellant conceded in  oral  evidence
    that there is no reason he cannot return to  make  an  application.  He
    submitted that section 1177B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 must  be  considered  if  looking  at  the  case  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and  the  appellant's  poor  immigration  history  is
    clearly relevant. He relied on the case of R  (on  the  application  of
    Chen) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department)  (Appendix  FM
    - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT
    00189 (IAC) and submitted that the case  indicates  that  an  appellant
    would need to show that temporary removal would cause  a  'significant'
    interference with family life.

11. Mr Ward submitted that at paragraph 8 of the  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge does not make a finding that the appellant can  go  back
    to Algeria, she simply noted his response to a question.  He  submitted
    that the appellant and his wife gave a number of reasons as to why they
    do not want to return to Algeria in  their  witness  statements.  These
    include the appellant's wife's employment responsibilities and the fact
    that the appellant cares for the child when his wife  works  and  their
    relationships with other family members.  He  relied  on  the  IDIs  on
    Family migration which state that a British child should not be made to
    leave the EU save in cases involving criminality. He submitted that the
    appeal can be allowed within the Immigration Rules as  Ex  1  has  been
    met. He said that the Secretary of State has not given any  undertaking
    in relation to entry clearance and it could not be assumed  that  entry
    clearance would be granted or that it  would  be  granted  quickly.  He
    submitted that the appellant  has  no  criminal  record,  there  is  no
    evidence of fraud, the appellant made a proper  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules. He submitted that the appeal can  be  allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules or under Article 8 as it is not one of  the  rare
    cases where entry clearance is required.

12. Both representatives accepted that the respondent's guidance is  silent
    on the issue of short term separation or removal where a British  child
    is involved.

13. The evidence before me as to the appellant's circumstances in the UK is
    contained in the appellant's  witness  statement,  his  wife's  witness
    statement and medical evidence in relation to  the  appellant's  wife's
    mother. In his statement the appellant says that his wife  works  as  a
    care assistant. He says that his wife is close to her mother, she is an
    only child, and she sees or speaks to her mother every day and helps to
    look after her. In her statement the appellant's  wife  says  that  she
    grew up as an only child with her mother and maternal grandparents. She
    says  that  her  mother  suffers  from  Chronic  Obstructive  Pulmonary
    Disease, severe asthma  and  depression  and  that  she  has  been  her
    mother's carer in the past and still cares for her. She says  that  she
    was born in England and has never been abroad. She  says  that  she  is
    close to her mother and could not leave her by herself in the  UK.  She
    also said that she attends her local Church of  England  Church  weekly
    and she believes that she would be unable to practice her  religion  in
    Algeria.

14. The starting point in my assessment of this  case  is  the  Immigration
    Rules. The relevant provision  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal  is
    Section  R-LTRP.1.1(d)  of  Appendix  FM  which   provides   that   the
    requirements to be met for leave to remain as a partner  are  that  the
    applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  Section  S-LTR  and   the
    applicant meets the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-LTRP.1.2-1.12  and
    ELTRP.2.1.-2.2 and paragraph EX.1 applies. No issue was taken before me
    in relation to the eligibility or suitability requirements of  Appendix
    FM. I note that the appellant does not fall foul of E-LTRP.2.1 as he is
    not in the UK as a visitor or with leave to remain for a period of less
    than 6 months.

15. The only issue under the Immigration Rules is therefore  whether  Ex  1
    applies. As set out above Ex 1 applies where there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a British citizen child in the UK
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

16. Mr Clarke did not submit that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's child to leave  the  UK;  instead  he  submitted  that  the
    appellant's child would not have to leave the UK because the  appellant
    could leave the UK for a temporary period to apply for entry  clearance
    to return to the UK. Whilst he did not concede that the appellant would
    be granted entry clearance he said that there was  nothing  to  suggest
    that the appellant's application  for  entry  clearance  would  not  be
    successful.  The  Immigration  Rules  do  not  specifically  address  a
    temporary separation, nor do the IDIs produced by  Mr  Ward.  This  was
    considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in the Judicial Review case  of
    Chen and her assessment of this issue was summarised in the  head  note
    as follows;

      "(i) Appendix FM  does  not  include  consideration  of  the  question
      whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to return
      to his home country to make an entry clearance application to  re-join
      family members in the U.K. There may be cases in which  there  are  no
      insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K.
      but where temporary separation to enable  an  individual  to  make  an
      application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases,
      it will be for the individual to place before the Secretary  of  State
      evidence   that   such    temporary    separation    will    interfere
      disproportionately with protected rights. It will  not  be  enough  to
      rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL
      40."

17. Mr Clarke submitted that in the case of Chen the Tribunal set out  a  2
    stage test in the case of  temporary   removal  as  outlined  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill as follows;

      "39.     In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual (the  burden
      being upon him or her) that an application for  entry  clearance  from
      abroad  would  be  granted and that  there  would  be  significant
      interference with family life by temporary removal, the weight  to  be
      accorded to the formal requirement of  obtaining  entry  clearance  is
      reduced. In cases involving children, where  removal  would  interfere
      with the child's enjoyment of family life with one or other of his  or
      her parents whilst entry clearance is obtained, it will be  easier  to
      show that the balance  on  proportionality  falls  in  favour  of  the
      claimant than in cases which do not involve children but where removal
      interferes with family life between parties who knowingly entered into
      the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that  family  life  was   being
      established  whilst  the  immigration  status   of   one   party   was
      "precarious". In other words, in the former case, it would  be  easier
      to show that the individual's circumstances fall within  the  minority
      envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the exceptions referred to
      in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter  case.  However,  it  all
      depends on the facts."

18. However in the case of Chen there were no children  so  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill was not dealing with facts such as the facts  in  this  case
    where there is a British citizen child. Also, it was accepted  in  Chen
    that the appellant could not demonstrate that Ex 1 applied for  her  as
    she could not show that there were 'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  her
    family life continuing outside the UK. That is  a  different  situation
    from the situation in this case where the appellant argues  that  Ex  1
    applies.

19. Moreover, I note Mr Ward's submission that the Secretary of  State  has
    not given any undertaking that entry clearance would be granted in this
    case and that there is no evidence as to how long such  an  application
    would take. It must be the case that if the appellant leaves the UK  to
    make an application for entry clearance and  that  application  is  not
    granted then any separation becomes longer and possibly  permanent  and
    the prospect of the child being forced to leave the UK becomes greater.
    There is no evidence before  me  as  to  the  likely  duration  of  any
    application for entry clearance or any appeal against a refusal.  There
    is therefore uncertainty as to the potential period of  separation  and
    the extent of any potential interference with  family  life.  In  these
    circumstances it is difficult to draw a clear  line  between  temporary
    and permanent separation and the prospects of the child being forced to
    leave the UK (and EU).

20. Also, in this case the decision can be resolved with reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules. It is not in dispute that the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of R-LTRP1.1 (d) (i) and (ii). It is not in  dispute  that
    the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    British citizen child. Mr Clarke did not submit that it  is  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the UK. The child is a British citizen and
    his mother is a British citizen. I note the IDIs which say that where a
    decision to refuse the application would require a parent to return  to
    a country outside the EU 'the case must always be assessed on the basis
    that it would be unreasonable to expect  a  British  Citizen  child  to
    leave the EU with that parent'. I accept that it is not  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK and the EU. As has  been  acknowledged
    above the Immigration Rules do not contemplate a temporary  separation.
    In these circumstances the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. There is therefore no need  to  go  on  to  look  at
    whether the case should be considered outside the Immigration Rules (as
    in  Chen)  and  whether   any   temporary   separation   would   be   a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's family lfie.

Conclusion

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

22. I set it aside and remake it by making the same decision  and  allowing
    the appellant's appeal.


Signed                                       Date: 28 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the same reason as that set out by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  that
is that the appellant's child was born since the respondent's decision.



Signed                                       Date: 28 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

