
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/19161/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                 |Determination Promulgated  |
|On: 12th September 2013               |On: 17th September 2013    |
|                                      |...........................|
|                                      |............               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     Y.S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Pretzell, Counsel instructed by S.Z Solicitors
For  Respondent:       Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The Appellant is a national of India. Until  today  his  appeal  was
      linked to those of his mother and younger brother  who  are  appealing
      against decisions to deport them from the UK.  For the reasons set out
      below this appeal can, for the moment, be dealt with in isolation.


   2.    The Appellant came to this country when he was 12 years old. He was
      given leave to enter as the dependent of his mother, who had leave  to
      enter as a Highly Skilled Migrant. On the 12th March 2009  when  their
      leave was still current, the Appellant's mother made an application to
      vary that leave by extending it, again naming  the  Appellant  as  her
      dependent.  On the 6th September 2010, having received no response  to
      the earlier application, the Appellant submitted to the  Respondent  a
      'FLR(O)' form. We are told that this was  because  he  had  turned  18
      whilst waiting for the Respondent to deal with the  HSMP  application.
      What happened next is not entirely clear but the following  facts  can
      be extracted from the chronology.

   3.   The Appellant's mother was convicted of a criminal offence  and  was
      sentenced to a period of imprisonment. On the 12th  October  2011  the
      Respondent made a decision to  deport  the  Appellant's  mother  as  a
      foreign criminal. The Respondent further made a decision to deport the
      Appellant and his minor brother as  her  family  members.  The  family
      appealed against those respective decisions.

   4.    On the 21st October 2011 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett  found
      the deportation decision in respect of the Appellant  to  be  'not  in
      accordance with the law': the Appellant was over 18 and as such  could
      not be deported as his mother's dependant[1].

   5.   The Appellant was left with no immigration  decision  giving  him  a
      right  of  appeal  and  his  representatives  issued  judicial  review
      proceedings to remedy this. On the 1st May  2012  it  was  ordered  by
      consent that the Respondent should consider the FLR(O) application and
      that should the application be refused "she will  issue  the  Claimant
      with a notice to remove, thereby giving rise to an in-country right of
      appeal"[2]. On the  25th  July  2012  the  Respondent  served  on  the
      Appellant a decision to remove the Appellant from the  United  Kingdom
      pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999.  That
      gave the Appellant a right  of  appeal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which he availed  himself
      of.  Section 10 reads:

         10. Removal of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom.


         (1) A person who is not a British citizen may be removed from the
         United Kingdom, in accordance with directions given by an
         immigration officer, if-


           (a) having only a limited leave to enter or remain, he does not
           observe a condition attached to the leave or remains beyond the
           time limited by the leave;
           (b) he has obtained leave to remain by deception; or
           (c) directions ("the first directions") have been given for the
           removal, under this section, of a person ("the other person") to
           whose family he belongs.


   6.   The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Khan  and  Mr
      Sandall) and was joined to the deportation appeals of the  Appellant's
      mother  and  brother.  It  is  recorded  at  paragraph   43   of   the
      determination that Ms Pleas, appearing for the  Respondent,  expressly
      conceded that the Appellant was "not  an  overstayer".   She  accepted
      that the application on the 6th September 2010 had been an application
      to  vary  existing  leave  and  that  the  Appellant   therefore   had
      statutorily  extended  leave  by  virtue  of  section  3(c)   of   the
      Immigration Act 1971.  The Tribunal allowed the appeal  on  Article  8
      grounds.

   7.   The Respondent sought leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  on
      the 10th June 2013 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce found  errors  of
      law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of  all
      three members of the family and  set  the  decision  aside.  Her  full
      reasons for doing so are appended to this decision.

   8.   The matter was listed before us to be remade. At the outset  of  the
      hearing the panel enquired as to why this decision had been a decision
      to remove pursuant to section 10 if it was agreed that  the  Appellant
      had not overstayed. Mr Wilding was unable to assist. He confirmed that
      as far as he was aware the Appellant had not yet been served  with  an
      immigration decision in response to the application made  on  the  6th
      September 2010. He agreed with Mr Pretzell  that  notwithstanding  the
      misleading terms of the consent order, the Respondent should  in  fact
      have served the Appellant with a refusal to vary his leave,  since  it
      would appear that none of the criteria in section 10(1)(a)  -(c)  were
      applicable to him. Mr Wilding initially  suggested  that  the  problem
      might be solved with reference to section 86(4)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which provides that "a decision that a
      person should be removed from the United  Kingdom  under  a  provision
      shall not be regarded as unlawful if it could have been lawfully  made
      by reference  to  removal  under  another  provision".   That  however
      presented problems of its own since the only other provision that  the
      Respondent could have used to make a decision to remove was section 47
      of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006; that  could  not,
      for the reasons set out in Adamally and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal
      decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC), be  described
      as a "lawful decision".  In light of that Mr Wilding conceded that the
      appeal should be allowed as 'not in accordance  with  the  law'  since
      section 10 does not permit the removal of a  person  with  valid  3(C)
      leave.










      Decision


   9.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an  error  of  law
      such that it is set aside.


  10. The appeal is allowed only on the limited basis that the  decision  is
      "not in accordance with the law".








                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         13th September 2013






















































                      Appendix A: Error of Law Decision


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
                                                               DA/00867/2010
                                                               IA/39957/2010
                                                               IA/19161/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                 |Determination Promulgated  |
|On: 20th May 2013                     |                           |
|                                      |...........................|
|                                      |............               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NS
                                     PS
                                     YS
                                                                 Respondents

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the First and
Second Respondents:    Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Irving and Co
      Solicitors
For the Third
Respondent:      Ms L Akande, Counsel instructed by S.Z Solicitors




                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


   1.   The Respondents are all nationals of India. NS (date  of  birth  4th
      June 1970) is the mother of PS (15th May 2000) and YS  (5th  September
      1992).  In a determination dated  6th  February  2013  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge AW Khan  and  Mr  GF  Sandall)  allowed  their  linked
      appeals against a series of decisions taken by  the  Appellant.  Those
      decisions were respectively a decision to deport NS  pursuant  to  the
      provisions of s32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007[3],  a  decision  to
      deport PS as her minor child[4], and a decision to remove YS from  the
      UK pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999[5].
      The Appellant now has permission to appeal against the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal.




      Background Facts and Matters in Issue


   2.   NS came to the UK as a Highly Skilled Migrant  in  2005.  Her  sons,
      then aged  nearly  5  and  12,  were  given  leave  to  enter  as  her
      dependents. Their father was also in the UK as  a  HSM.  On  the  12th
      March 2009 NS made an application for further leave to remain as a HSM
      with the children as her dependents.


   3.   Those applications were outstanding when on the 3rd  June  2009  she
      was convicted at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  of  the  offence  of  money
      laundering and sentenced to four years imprisonment.   The  background
      to that offence was that NS, her husband and another  woman  were  all
      charged with a very substantial conspiracy  to  defraud,  relating  to
      their  "professionally  organised"[6]  business  of  producing   bogus
      documents for the purpose of  circumventing  UK  immigration  control.
      Over a million pounds passed through their various accounts in  a  two
      year period.  NS  was  acquitted  of  the  conspiracy  charge[7],  but
      convicted of personally laundering approximately �190,000, money which
      she knew to have come from the criminal enterprise. Her sentence meant
      that she faced automatic deportation from the UK pursuant  to  s32(5),
      but the trial judge added for good measure that he considered that her
      continuing presence in the UK was to the public detriment and that she
      should be deported when she had finished her sentence.

   4.    The Appellant therefore signed a deportation order against NS,  and
      sought to deport /remove her children in line with her.

   5.   On appeal the First-tier Tribunal rejected all arguments advanced by
      NS on asylum and human rights grounds. The Tribunal found that had her
      case been viewed in isolation, it would have upheld  the  decision  to
      deport her. Her case however could still  succeed  if  her  sons,  and
      specifically PS, who was still a minor, could show  that  his  removal
      was a disproportionate interference with his Article  8(1)  rights[8].



   6.   The Tribunal  found  itself  "entirely  satisfied"  that  PS's  best
      interests lay in remaining with his mother, and remaining in  the  UK.
      The Tribunal noted that PS had been in the UK since he was nearly five
      and that he had virtually forgotten how to speak Hindi; it had  regard
      to  evidence  including  expert  reports  prepared   by   a   clinical
      psychologist who concluded that his removal to India with  his  mother
      would be to his severe detriment[9].

   7.   Having made that finding the Tribunal went on to say this:


         "57. As far as the Second Appellant is concerned, he has now  spent
         almost eight years of his life in the UK, a time more than half his
         life. The other exceptional circumstances relate to the findings of
         Dr Carswell and Dr Bartlett as set out above.  The  prognosis  from
         all sources regarding the best interests of the  Second  Appellant,
         including reports from  [his]  School,  clearly  indicate  that  he
         should remain in the UK. We find that deportation to India with his
         mother would have such an adverse impact upon his future  wellbeing
         that it would be disproportionate to seek to deport him.  It  is  a
         fact that the Second Appellant's life is  now  in  the  UK  and  to
         uproot a 12 year old boy away from his  school,  his  friends,  his
         social circle, his uncle and aunt  and  his  older  brother,  whose
         findings in this appeal we set out later, would be wholly wrong."

   8.   The  determination  then  sets  out  pertinent  conclusions  of  the
      judgement in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and goes on:


         "59. In closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the
         question posed that the  Tribunal  must  therefore  answer  in  the
         Second  Appellant's  case  was  whether   the   severity   of   the
         consequences of deportation on him were outweighed by the  severity
         of the criminal conduct of the mother.  As  we  have  said  before,
         looking at the First Appellant's case in isolation, her own Article
         3 and Article 8 claim would not succeed in the light of the gravity
         of her offending behaviour. However, having considered  the  effect
         of the Second Appellant's deportation to India along with the First
         Appellant, we find for all the reasons  set  out  above,  that  the
         Second Appellant's Article 8 claim outweighs the  criminal  conduct
         of his mother. In coming to this conclusion we have also taken into
         account what the Tribunal said in MF in that even if a decision  to
         refuse an Article 8 claim under  the  new  rules  is  found  to  be
         correct, judges must still consider  whether  the  decision  is  in
         compliance with a person's human rights  under  Section  6  of  the
         Human Rights  Act  and  in  automatic  deportation  cases,  whether
         removal would breach a person's Convention  rights.  Thus,  in  the
         context of deportation and removal cases, the need for a  two-stage
         approach in most Article 8 cases remains imperative because the new
         Rules do not encapsulate the guidance given  in  Maslov  v  Austria
         (Application number 1638/03) [2008] ECHR  546.  The  Tribunal  also
         said that when considering Article 8 in the context of an Appellant
         who fails under the new Rules, it  will  remain  in  the  case,  as
         before, that "exceptional circumstances" is to be  regarded  as  an
         "incorrect criterion". In Maslov it was said  that,  amongst  other
         things, the criteria in determining proportionality  and  expulsion
         included the best interests  and  wellbeing  of  the  children,  in
         particular the seriousness of the difficulties which  any  children
         of the applicant are likely to encounter in the  country  to  which
         the applicant is  to  be  expelled  and  the  solidity  of  social,
         cultural and family ties with the host country and with the country
         of destination. Clearly, in so  far  as  the  Second  Appellant  is
         concerned, we find that there  would  be  serious  difficulties  in
         India for him and that as a result of the length  of  time  he  has
         been living in the UK, he has established  solid  social,  cultural
         and family ties.


         Conclusion


         60. In respect of the Second Appellant, he succeeds under Article 8
         family and private life on the basis that his best  interests  must
         be to remain in the UK with his mother. It follows  therefore  that
         the First Appellant succeeds under Article 8 in like case".


   9.   The Secretary of State submits that the conclusion at  paragraph  60
      could not automatically follow from the analysis set out in paragraphs
      59 and 57, nor from direct application of the uncontentious ZH factors
      considered in paragraph 58.  Her complaint is that  the  Tribunal  has
      treated PS's best interests as a 'trump card' and that it  has  failed
      to properly conduct the balancing exercise identified by the  HOPO  on
      the day, to weigh the best interests  of  the  child  (and  any  other
      relevant factors) against his  mother's  criminality  (and  any  other
      relevant factor).   That much is revealed, submits the  Appellant,  by
      the  phrase  "would  be  wholly  wrong"  at  paragraph   57   of   the
      determination, which appears to indicate that the Tribunal reached its
      decision on proportionality only having regard to the  best  interests
      of the child.


  10. The Secretary of State does not challenge the finding that  it  is  in
      PS's best interests to be with  his  mother,  but  does  question  the
      approach taken overall, submitting that there was no  analysis  as  to
      whether it would contrary to PS's best interests to go to  India  with
      his mother and brother; nor was there a proper  analysis  of  all  the
      relevant factors set out, for instance at paragraphs 32-53 of MK (Best
      Interests of the Child) India [2011] UKUT 00475.


  11. The Respondents submit that the grounds of appeal  present  a  slanted
      reading of the determination. They point to paragraphs 36, 38  and  56
      where the Tribunal records the view of the Secretary of State, and  47
      and  48  where  the  Tribunal  sets  out  the  detail  of  the   First
      Respondent's offences, summed up at the end of 47:

         "This was, therefore, a  very  substantial  conspiracy  to  defraud
         involving he  submission  of  completely  bogus  documents  and  an
         extremely serious offence".

      Although these paragraphs  are  not  incorporated  into  the  analysis
      section cited by the Appellant, it  is  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
      clearly had them in  mind  when  assessing  proportionality:  see  the
      phrase "for all the reasons we set out above" in paragraph 59.  As  Mr
      Bradshaw puts it in his rule 24 response: "it is  submitted  that  the
      determination must be looked at as a whole. Simply because conclusions
      have been reached in a particular order within  a  determination  does
      not demonstrate that an incorrect approach has been followed"[10].

  12. In the alternative the First and Second Respondents submit that if the
      Tribunal did err in the manner alleged in the grounds of  appeal,  the
      error is not material. There are clear findings  on  where  PS's  best
      interests lie, so the Respondents would in any case succeed  in  their
      appeal, since the "potential implications of removal for  him  are  so
      significant as to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of
      foreign criminals, despite the seriousness of the offence"[11].


  13. Those are  the  matters  in  issue  insofar  as  they  relate  to  the
      deportation appeals of the First and Second Respondents.


  14. In respect of the Third Respondent the Tribunal notes  the  concession
      of the Secretary of State that his appeal should be allowed  if  those
      of his mother and brother are successful. The Tribunal goes on however
      to set out why his appeal should also be allowed in isolation from the
      others.  Factors weighing in his favour include the  "serious  errors"
      made  by  the  UKBA  in  dealing  with  his  case[12]   including   an
      "unacceptable delay" of 22 months[13], the fact that he had come  here
      aged 12 and had established "considerable ties" during that  time[14],
      that he had never overstayed, that he has studied,  passed  exams  and
      hopes to go to university[15]. For those reasons the Tribunal conclude
      that  YS  was  entitled  to  succeed  under  paragraph  353B  of   the
      Immigration Rules, and Article 8, finding "there is  very  little,  if
      any, public interest in enforcing immigration  control  in  this  case
      upon the whole of the evidence"[16].   The Tribunal also  consider  it
      important to note that "but for the criminal conduct of their parents,
      both children would have had a legitimate expectation to remain in the
      UK on the basis that they had originally come here as dependants under
      the HSMP"[17]


  15. The grounds of appeal allege that the Tribunal has failed to conduct a
      proper proportionality balancing exercise  in  respect  of  the  Third
      Respondent. The determination sets out  factors  in  his  favour,  and
      rejects some of those advanced in the refusal letter, but nowhere does
      it properly engage with the fact that this young man had no  leave  to
      remain in the UK. It is pointed out that he can have had no legitimate
      expectation that he would get  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  HSMP
      dependant; even setting the  criminality  of  his  parents  aside  his
      mother had ceased to work as a teaching  assistant,  the  capacity  in
      which she had obtained that visa.  The "unacceptable delay"  mentioned
      in the determination was in fact attributable to  the  fact  that  his
      parents had been arrested, tried  and  convicted  of  serious  crimes.
      Finally the finding that  the  Appellant  succeeded  "under  paragraph
      353B" was nonsensical since that (now deleted) provision conferred  no
      substantive benefit on applicants.

  16. The rule 24 response on behalf of YS submits  that  the  Tribunal  was
      entitled to find that the factors identified did  cumulatively  amount
      to a successful Article 8 claim. The Tribunal clearly  delineated  the
      factors in YS's case separately from his mother and brother, and since
      this was a s.10 removal there was no need in his case to weigh in  the
      balance the prevention of crime and disorder. The  legitimate  Article
      8(2) aims pursued in this removal were the economic well-being of  the
      country and the rights and freedoms of others  and  the  Secretary  of
      State had not sensibly shown why the decision was  necessary  in  that
      context.

  17. Those are the matters in issue in respect of the Third Respondent.




      My Findings

  18. I begin at the beginning, that is the findings on the  best  interests
      of PS.  Mr Wilding accepted that it is in the best interests of PS  to
      remain with his mother[18]. He took issue however with the  Tribunal's
      finding that it was in his best interest to remain with her in the UK.
      The relevant part of the determination is at  paragraphs  49-57.   The
      criticism of the Tribunal's approach is that there was  a  failure  to
      fully examine the criteria suggested in MK (India).    Those  criteria
      are:  the  child's  perspective,  the  family  context,   citizenship,
      culture, religion and tradition, health, language, education and links
      outside the family, that is to say the child's own independent  family
      life. It is submitted that the failure to have full regard to each  of
      these factors left the determination's assessment  of  best  interests
      incomplete, and therefore flawed.


  19. The Tribunal clearly  placed  great  emphasis  on  this  part  of  the
      determination.  Having found no countervailing factors to suggest that
      the child should be separated from his mother  the  Tribunal  properly
      asked of itself,  at  paragraph  49,  "where  they  should  be  living
      together, namely in India or in the UK".   In answering that  question
      the Tribunal clearly did take into account the opinion of PS  himself,
      having summarised the contents of his witness  statement[19],(although
      not, I note, PS having told Dr Carswell that he  would  rather  remain
      with YS in the UK than go to India with his mother[20]). It  can  also
      be said that the Tribunal had regard to his health, in that mention is
      made of the counselling he receives for anxiety[21]; so too  does  the
      Tribunal consider the impact that moving to a different  culture  will
      have on PS, who is socially settled in  the  UK[22].    All  of  these
      factors suggested to the Tribunal that his deportation was contrary to
      his best interests.   There was however no consideration given to  the
      fact that he remains a citizen of India, who shares  in  the  religion
      and traditions of that country. Emphasis was placed on the  fact  that
      he speaks little Hindi, but apparently no consideration given  to  the
      fact that in many schools in India tuition remains in English: see for
      instance paragraph 40 of MK (India).  The fear expressed by his mother
      that he would be teased because he would be from a higher  caste  than
      the other state school pupils appears to have  been  accepted  without
      consideration of whether it  was  likely  to  be  true  (for  instance
      whether it was supported by  country  background  material)  and  more
      importantly without considering why he  could  not  attend  a  private
      school, given the Tribunal's earlier conclusions that NS would be able
      to work and that she had the support of her family.  For  that  reason
      the Tribunal's  findings  on  language  and  education  were  arguably
      incomplete. However the real difficulty with the  analysis  arises  in
      respect of the family context.


  20. Unlike in MK it was not immediately obvious who this  child  would  be
      going to India with. It was a safe assumption that it  would  be  with
      his mother, but  since  the  positions  of  YS  and  his  father  were
      uncertain, there could be no such assumption about them.   In  respect
      of the latter the Tribunal  appears  to  have  omitted  him  from  the
      equation altogether, and it is hard to see  how  it  could  have  done
      anything  else,  given  that  he  was  subject  to  entirely  separate
      deportation proceedings the outcome of which was unknown.  In  respect
      of YS the Tribunal has proceeded on the basis that he would be staying
      here  (see paragraph 51); conversely the Tribunal appears to  proceed,
      in YS's appeal, on the basis that PS and  NS  will  also  be  staying.
      Nowhere is any consideration given to whether it would be contrary  to
      PS's best interests to go and  live  in  India  with  his  mother  and
      brother. Had that analysis been made, it may have led to  a  different
      outcome in all three appeals.  For instance, great reliance is  placed
      in the determination on the reports  prepared  by  Chartered  Clinical
      Psychologist Dr Carswell. Whilst Dr Carswell  does  conclude  that  PS
      "would experience a substantial detriment were he to  be  returned  to
      India with his whole family"[23]  this conclusion  was  based  on  his
      mother's  self-reporting  that  the  family  would  face  destitution,
      limited access  to  education  and  opportunities  and  a  significant
      reduction in their standard of living: she had also  told  the  doctor
      that she would face social stigma and be  ostracized  because  of  her
      conviction and her status as a divorced woman. These were all  matters
      that were expressly rejected by the First-tier Tribunal  at  paragraph
      45 of the determination where it was found that  she  would  have  the
      support of her family, she would be able to work, and that  she  would
      face no stigma.    There was therefore little sustainable  support  in
      Dr Carswell's report for the proposition that there  would  be  severe
      detriment to PS if he was removed to India with his brother as well as
      mother.   The failure to address this question was a failure  to  take
      relevant matters into account and amounts to an error of law.


  21. I now turn to deal with the central ground of appeal in respect of the
      First and  Second  Respondents,  that  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of
      proportionality was incomplete.  Mr Bradshaw is correct  to  say  that
      the Tribunal had regard to the criminal offence committed by NS.  That
      much is apparent from paragraphs 46  and  47  as  well  as  the  view,
      apparently expressed at hearing as well as in the determination,  that
      she stood no prospects of  success  on  her  own.    The  question  is
      whether the Tribunal members properly directed their minds to  whether
      that criminality was outweighed by their findings on  the  welfare  of
      PS. It is clear from the face of the determination that they  had  the
      question in mind, since it is repeated  at  intervals  throughout  the
      determination (see for instance at paragraph 36, 41, 56, 59),  but  it
      is not clear whether they actually engaged with it. Having set out  in
      detail, over 11 paragraphs, why they found  it  to  be  in  PS's  best
      interests to stay in the UK, the Tribunal conclude, at  paragraph  60:
      "he succeeds under Article 8 family and private life on the basis that
      his best interests must be to remain in the UK with his mother".  That
      is an error of law. PS, and NS, cannot succeed in their appeals simply
      because it is in his best interests to be here with  her.  It  may  be
      that those findings on best interest would, following proper analysis,
      yield the same results for the Respondents, but on the  face  of  this
      determination that analysis was not conducted.   As in ZS (Jamaica)  &
      Anr [2012] EWCA Civ 1639 the Tribunal has treated best interests of  a
      minor appellant as being the, not simply a primary consideration,  and
      having done so failed to have regard to  the  countervailing  factors.
      It was in no way inevitable, as submitted by Mr  Bradshaw,   that  the
      findings on best interests would outweigh the competing  interests  of
      the state.  For that reason the determination cannot stand in  respect
      of the First and Second Respondents.


  22. In respect of the Third Respondent it is in my  view  inevitable  that
      the decision in his case must too be set aside, because it is infected
      with the same error as that of his mother and brother. At paragraph 62
      the Tribunal asserts that it has considered his case  separately  from
      theirs (as well as allowing it on a linked basis) but in the very next
      sentence find that his Article  8(1)  family  life  is  based  on  his
      relationship with his little brother. There is no separate finding  on
      whether the Article is engaged on  the  basis  of  his  private  life,
      distinct from  his  family.   I  therefore  need  not  deal  with  the
      remaining reasoning in the determination and the  criticisms  thereof.
      The decision insofar as it relates to the Third Respondent is also set
      aside in its entirety.



      Decision and Directions


  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  such
      that it is set aside in respect of all three Respondents.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              10th June 2013
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Pursuant to section 5(4) of the Immigration Act 1971
[2] Consent Order at page 20 Appellant's bundle
[3] The Deportation Order was signed on the 12th October 2010
[4] Served on the 25th October 2010
[5] An earlier decision to deport YS in line with his mother was found to
be not in accordance with the law since he was over 18 at the date of
decision: determination promulgated by Judge Grimmett of the First-tier
Tribunal on the 15th February 2012 [IA/40211/2010]
[6] Sentencing remarks of trial judge HHJ McGregor-Johnson 3rd June 2009,
3B
[7] Her co-defendants were convicted. Her husband received a sentence of 7
years' imprisonment and the third defendant 8 years' imprisonment.
[8] Paragraph 46 of the determination.
[9] Paragraphs 49-56
[10] Rule 24 Response dated 28th March 2013, paragraph 9
[11] Ibid paragraph 21
[12] Paragraph 63 of the determination
[13] Paragraph 68
[14] Paragraph 66
[15] Ibid
[16] Paragraph 69
[17] Paragraph 71
[18] That being the finding of the First-tier Tribunal set out at paragraph
49 of the determination
[19] Paragraph 54 determination
[20] Paragraph 11.1 report of Dr Carswell dated 31st March 2012
[21] Paragraph 53 determination
[22] Paragraph 52 determination
[23] Paragraph 10.4 report dated 31st March 2012

