
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19413/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     MjO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
The Appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Miss M Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This case was listed today for 10 am and it now well past 11.00  am.  I
    put this matter to the end of my morning list and no one  has  appeared
    in respect of the appeal.  Appleby Shaw Solicitors  are  on  record  as
    acting for the appellant. I have had a member of the court staff go  to
    the waiting area to make enquiries and he has established that there is
    still no one present.

2.   I was satisfied that it was in the interest of justice to proceed  with
    the appeal. I concluded that the appeal should be dismissed and  I  now
    give my brief reasons.

3.   The appeal brought against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pygott promulgated on 24 February 2015 pursuant to  a  grant  of  leave
    given by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 8 July 2015.

4.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. His  appeal  to  the  Judge  was
    from a removal decision made by the Respondent on 17 April  2014.  This
    followed a previous refusal on 13 December 2012 of an application  made
    under human rights grounds.  The  appellant's  immigration  history  is
    fully set out in paragraph 2 of the Judge's decision  and  I  need  not
    repeat it.

5.   The appellant's case was that he had formed a stable relationship  with
    a Nigerian who  had  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  with  whom  he
    previously had two sons, although paternity had only  been  established
    relatively recently. He claimed that they started to live  together  in
    May or June 2012 and had formed a close familial bond. A third child, a
    daughter, was born in November 2014.

6.   The Judge's decision is detailed and lengthy. The Judge concluded  that
    the appellant did not come within  the  category  of  a  parent  within
    Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  this  conclusion  is  not
    challenged.

7.   The Judge also found that the appellant did  not  meet  the  conditions
    under paragraph 276ADE and similarly there is no  appeal  against  this
    finding.

8.   The Judge then went on to consider the appellant's human  rights  claim
    under Article 8  which  was  classified,  correctly,  as  an  issue  of
    proportionality (para 46). The Judge's balanced analysis  in  paragraph
    47 of the appellant's personal circumstances and those of  his  partner
    with the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control is perfectly
    proper and is not the subject of criticism.

9.   The Judge's discussion of the circumstances concerning  the  two  young
    sons and the baby daughter, each of  whom  the  Judge  found  has  dual
    British and  Nigerian  nationality,  is  at  paragraph  48.  The  Judge
    concludes that the best interests of all three children are  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

10.  The Judge found (para 50) that it would not  be  unreasonable  for  the
    appellant to return  to  Nigeria  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance. The Judge further found (para 51)  that  there  was  nothing
    exceptional in the appellant's circumstances in relation to his private
    life and given his immigration history to indicate that his removal  to
    Nigeria would be unreasonable.

11.   This  Judge  had  earlier  (para  49)  distinguished  the  appellant's
    situation from the factual circumstances in Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  40.  In  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, it was noted (i) that it  is  at  least  arguable
    that the judge failed to make clear findings on the length  and  impact
    on the children of the familial separation while  entry  clearance  was
    sought by the appellant  from  overseas;  (ii)  that  it  is  at  least
    arguable that the Judge may have erred in requiring  the  appellant  to
    show an invincible Article 8 case before the Chikwamba principles would
    be engaged; and (iii) that it is at least arguable  that  some  further
    consideration should have been given to the impact of separation on the
    family: R(on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -   temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 189.

12.  I have considered these  particular  matters  together  with  the  more
    expansive Grounds of Appeal settled by counsel.  I  have  reviewed  the
    evidence which was before the  First-Tier  Tribunal  and  the  findings
    which were made by  the  Judge.  I  remind  myself  of  the  principle,
    expressed in the headnote of Chen as follows:

         "There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable  obstacles
         to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but  where  temporary
         separation to enable an individual to make an application for entry
         clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the
         individual to place before the Secretary  of  State  evidence  that
         such temporary separation will  interfere  disproportionately  with
         protected rights. It will not be enough to  rely  solely  upon  the
         case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40."

13.  Having reviewed the  entirety  of  the  case,  but  particularly  those
    matters identified as arguable errors of law when permission to  appeal
    was granted, I reject the assertion in paragraph 5 of the Grounds  that
    'there was a wholesale failure by the  Judge  to  carry  our  a  proper
    assessment under Article 8'. On the  contrary,  both  in  the  specific
    paragraphs which I have identified above and elsewhere in the  detailed
    decision, it is clear  that  the  Judge  has  carried  out  a  delicate
    balancing exercise to inform  both  the  proportionality  analysis  and
    unjustifiable harshness. The  Judge  took  into  account  all  relevant
    features including the  impact  of  separation  on  the  children,  the
    established bonds with their father, and whether or not having to  make
    an  application   for   entry   clearance   form   Nigeria   would   be
    disproportionate.  Little  if  any  material  was  placed  before   the
    Secretary of State or the Judge on this  latter  point  notwithstanding
    the requirement on the appellant to supply such evidence.

14.  Having had the advantage of  giving  the  matter  fuller  consideration
    than is possible at the permission stage, I am of the opinion that  the
    decision does not reveal an error of law. The Judge did take fully into
    account all relevant features and came  to  a  decision  balancing  all
    relevant features in a complex case. The Judge  was  entitled  to  give
    weight to the appellant's immigration history as part  of  the  overall
    Article 8 assessment. On  any  account,  his  immigration  history  was
    appalling as the Judge recorded and I do not need to repeat. Whilst the
    appellant may not agree with the Judge's assessment, it fell within the
    legitimate range of the Judge's discretion and the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    not permitted to interfere with the discretion exercised by the  First-
    Tier Tribunal in the absence of an error of law.

15.  In all the circumstances, this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 11 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 11 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
