
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/19882/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2014                        |On 10 October 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr SIMON JOHN CABOT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Samuel, Counsel
      (instructed by ICS Legal)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on  14  August  2014
           against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-
           Baker  who  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
           Immigration Rules but who had allowed it under Article 8 ECHR in
           a determination promulgated on 17 June 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of the Commonwealth  of  Australia,
           born on 23 April 1976.  He had sought further leave to remain in
           the United Kingdom to exercise rights of  access  to  his  child
           Miss Zahara  Giselle  Cabot.   The  judge  had  found  that  the
           Respondent had been living in the United Kingdom lawfully for in
           excess of 10 years.  The Respondent and his wife  had  separated
           and had agreed access to the child without  formal  proceedings.
           The judge found  that  the  Respondent  could  not  satisfy  the
           Immigration Rules relevant to his application, but  went  on  to
           find that there was family life between father and daughter  and
           that the child's best interest were for her father to remain  in
           the United Kingdom.  The Respondent had also developed a  strong
           private life in the United Kingdom.  The proportionality balance
           was in his favour.  The case was analogous to MS  (Ivory  Coast)
           [2007] EWCA Civ 1, which case had predated the  commencement  of
           section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
            The judge found that the Respondent should be granted  a  short
           period of time to establish formal access rights  to  his  child
           after which he could make a further application to the Secretary
           of State.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           it was arguable that the judge had not reached a proper  finding
           of  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  despite  quoting
           Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT
           00640 (IAC).  It was also arguable that the judge had not  given
           sufficient reasons for her conclusions.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.


      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Bramble for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards of
           appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  Candidly  and  to
           his credit he accepted that it while it  was  possible  to  show
           that there had been at least one  error  of  law,  it  was  more
           difficult to show that it had  been  material  to  the  outcome.
           Nevertheless it was arguable that the judge's application of the
           current authorities in relation  to  Article  8  ECHR  had  been
           inadequate and there had been insufficient findings of  fact  to
           justify her conclusions.


      6.    It was convenient for the tribunal to engage  in  dialogue  with
           the advocates.  Mr Bramble accepted that the Respondent had  now
           applied to the family court for access to his child.  A copy  of
           the FHDRA appointment on 29 October 2014 at the Family Court had
           been produced.  That foreshadowed the further application  which
           Judge Scott-Baker had indicated would be needed.


      7.    Mr Samuel for the Respondent submitted that this was  the  right
           way forward.  Any error of law was not material and the sensible
           course  was  to  allow  the  Respondent  to  make   that   fresh
           application, once his Article 8 ECHR leave had been granted.


      8.    The tribunal indicated that it found no material  error  of  law
           and reserved its determination which now follows.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    Cases involving children and access to children  are  among  the
           most  difficult  which  the  First-tier   Tribunal   encounters.
           Sometimes children are used to bolster weak cases, but that  was
           very obviously far from the case in  the  present  appeal.   The
           state of the  authorities  when  Judge  Scott-Baker  heard  this
           appeal was perhaps  somewhat  confused.   The  authorities  have
           since been  resolved,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  by  MM
           (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985,  which  was  released  after  the
           judge's determination had been promulgated.  In  the  tribunal's
           view the judge's approach, which was ultimately a Razgar  [2004]
           UKHL 27 analysis, reflected the compelling merit of  the  appeal
           and may be thought to have prefigured MM (Lebanon)  [2014]  EWCA
           Civ 985 which disapproves of the  intermediate  requirement  for
           exceptional circumstances before moving to  consider  Article  8
           ECHR.  It is also perhaps significant that section 177B  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in force  from  28
           July  2014,  favours   the   Respondent's   situation   in   the
           proportionality analysis.


      10.   The judge correctly identified that the appeal failed under  the
           Immigration Rules and that there was no specific provision as at
           the  date  of  the  hearing  which  covered   the   Respondent's
           situation.  He needed to take further formal steps (which it was
           accepted he has now done), which will  enable  him  to  make  an
           application within Appendix  FM  which  has  every  prospect  of
           success.  It could not possibly have been  in  the  Respondent's
           child's best interests for her father to  have  been  forced  to
           return to Australia and attempt to pursue access to her  in  the
           formal court sanctioned sense from there, since personal contact
           would have been broken and the father would have been forced  to
           incur great expense, needlessly.


      11.   That situation may reasonably be thought to  be  an  example  of
           exceptional circumstances too obvious  for  the  judge  to  have
           needed to have spelt it out in specific  terms.   The  potential
           disruption to a long  and  lawfully  established  private  life,
           including established  and  well  remunerated  employment,  from
           which financial provision  was  being  made  for  the  separated
           spouse as well as the child, was a further such factor.


      12.   In the present appeal it seems to the tribunal that there is  no
           useful purpose in examining in any detail the clear and  careful
           determination of a very experienced judge, when the Secretary of
           State accepts that any technical error in the judges'  reasoning
           cannot be said with any confidence to be material.  This applies
           with particular force here, where as noted above,  the  law  has
           already moved on.


      13.   The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
           of  law  in  the  determination  and  there  is  no  basis   for
           interfering with the judge's decision.


      14.   By way of a footnote, the tribunal records that  in  consequence
           the Secretary of State is bound to grant the Respondent a period
           of leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR and that the  Respondent
           is in the  light  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
           obliged to make a fresh application under the Immigration  Rules
           (he may have several options available) during the  currency  of
           his Article 8 ECHR leave.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








