
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19668/2013
                                                               IA/19669/2013
                                                               IA/19670/2013
                                                               IA/19671/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 1 April 2013                               |On 7 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                  NOUSHEEN REHAN + husband and two children
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr C H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The first appellant ("the appellant") entered the  UK  as  a  student  in
   2004.  She was later granted leave to remain in the  Tier  1  (Post-Study
   Work) category until 13 January 2012, with her husband  and  children  as
   her dependants.  On 11 January 2012 she sought leave  to  remain  on  the
   basis of her relationship with her husband and two children.   By  letter
   dated 10 May 2013 the Respondent refused the applications under  Appendix
   FM of the Immigration Rules (considering the partner route, private life,
   the family unit, and leave to remain as a child).

2) First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeals  by
   determination promulgated on 20 December 2013.

3) The appellant's first ground of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  as
   follows:

    The judge erred in law in carrying  out  a  proportionality  assessment
    under Article 8 in that she failed to consider a relevant factor, while
    at the same time considering an irrelevant consideration.  At paragraph
    31 of the determination it was submitted that the family had  now  been
    residing in the UK for 9 years and 9 months and would be able to  apply
    for indefinite leave to remain under the 10 years long residence  rule,
    and that this is ... relevant ... in the Article 8 assessment.


    However, the judge  at  paragraphs  32-36  considered  the  appellant's
    continued residence  under  the  Post  Study  Work  visa  category  and
    concluded:


      I consider it disingenuous that the appellant applied for a Post Study
      Work Visa with her family as her dependants, and appealed against  the
      decision to refuse it thereafter, bearing in mind the  purpose  behind
      the Post Study Work visa ... when she had no intention of working  but
      was wholly dependant on her husband, who was working  full  time.   He
      ... has been since 2008 the family's sole financial  provider.   While
      technically I accept Mr Ndubuisi's submission  that  the  family  have
      been in the UK legally, I consider that  they  have  been  here  under
      false pretences ... the appellant is an educated  woman.   I  did  not
      believe she did not know, as well as  her  husband,  that  the  family
      should not be living in the UK on a Post Study Work visa when she  had
      decided to remain at home as full time mother from 2008  and  had  not
      intended to seek employment.


    ... the judge came to a perverse conclusion ... that the family resided
    in the UK under false pretences ... the main appellant had given  birth
    to her second child on 25 February 2008 ... the  application  for  Post
    Study Work was made in 2008.  It  is  very  reasonable  accept  that  a
    nursing mother  would  usually  be  on  maternity  leave  even  if  the
    appellant was at work ... it is  significantly  discriminatory  ...  to
    conclude that the appellant resided ... under false pretences and  that
    there was no intention to seek employment in the UK when the  birth  of
    her new baby, coupled with her first child being only 2 years old,  led
    to the change of heart.  It is  not  only  reasonable  but  lawful  for
    person in the appellant's circumstances to not only enjoy  a  maternity
    leave period but also be entitled to a long term period of absence from
    work to look after their children.  There is nothing legally or morally
    wrong for the main appellant to choose to suspend  her  career  ...  to
    look after her children ...


4) Mr Ndubuisi said that Ground 1 discloses an adverse  credibility  finding
   wrongly reached.  The judge went wrong because she failed  to  note  that
   the Post Study Work category  does  not  impose  a  requirement  to  take
   employment.  Its purpose is to give  international  students  freedom  to
   remain.  It was not really feasible for the appellant to have found work,
   in her circumstances.  He accepted that she has never  worked,  so  there
   was no question of maternity leave.

5)  I  queried  whether  the  "false  pretences"  finding  could  really  be
   categorised as one on credibility.  Mr Ndubuisi  acknowledged  that,  and
   said the matter amounted to reaching a finding not rationally open to the
   judge.  He relied on the UKBA's guidance  on  Tier  1,  which  under  the
   heading "description of category" states:

    The Tier 1 Post Study Work  category  aims  to  retain  the  most  able
    international graduates who have studied  in  the  UK.   It  will  also
    enhance the UK's overall offer to international students.


    Successful applicants will be free to seek employment without having  a
    sponsor for the duration of their Tier 1 Post Study Work leave.


6) Mr Ndubuisi submitted that the fact that the  appellant  had  not  worked
   was entirely irrelevant to her case, and it was not open to the judge  to
   consider it an adverse factor in the proportionality assessment.

7) The second ground of appeal is this:

    The judge misconstrued the purpose of the  Post  Study  Work  visa  and
    whether it affords a route to settlement ... at paragraph  31  ...  the
    judge said:


      It will  be  seen  from  paragraph  33  below  that  this  is  not  my
    understanding of the position, given the  Rules       related  to  Post
    Study Work visas.


    The extract from the respondent's website cited at paragraph 33 states:


      Applicants under Tier 1 Post Study Work category will not be able  to
    apply to extend their leave in the UK.   Time spent in the Tier 1  Post
    Study Work category does not count towards  the  period  an  individual
    needs to     spend in  the  UK  before  being  eligible  to  apply  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  Leave under the Tier 1  Post  Study   Work
    category does not lead to settlement.


    The judge ... was influenced by this extract ... however  ...  this  is
    incorrect to the extent that it applies to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellants.  Time spent in the Tier  1  Post  Study  Work  category  is
    lawful residence in terms of the 10 years  long  residence  Rule  under
    paragraph 276A-B of the Rules.


    ... The extract referred to at paragraph 33 indicated:


      Applicants who have permission to stay under Tier 1 Post  Study  Work
    can look for work without     making her the sponsor.


    ... This extract does not use the word must ... it is reasonable for an
    applicant in the circumstances of the  main  appellant,  who  has  just
    given birth to a child, to not be able to look for work immediately  or
    alternatively to look for work to allow her to juggle her family life.


8) Mr Ndubuisi said that this ground speaks for itself.

9) The third ground of appeal is this:

    The judge further erred in law in failing to take account of  the  fact
    that there are no  countervailing  circumstances  in  respect  of  this
    family that would make it reasonable to uproot a child who has 7 years'
    residence in the UK.  The family has held  legal  residence  throughout
    the period of their stay in the UK.


10) Mr Ndubuisi accepted that there had  been  no  evidence  that  the  best
   interests of the child  would  be  adversely  affected  by  returning  to
   Pakistan with the parents.  He said that the  fact  that  the  child  has
   resided here lawfully for 7 years was decisive by itself.

11) Finally, Mr Ndubuisi submitted  that  for  all  the  above  reasons  the
   decision ought to be reversed.

12) Mrs O'Brien pointed out that no separate application was made on  behalf
   of the (older) child.  The application was by a parent, with husband  and
   children as dependants.   Nor  was  there  any  statement  of  additional
   grounds, relying on the rights of the child.  Although the  determination
   does say at paragraph 14 that Mr Ndubuisi proposed in the  FtT  that  the
   appellant's eldest child had a freestanding right to  remain  in  the  UK
   because of his age under the Rules, the case had not been clearly put  on
   that basis.  In any event, there is no right for every child who has been
   in the UK lawfully for 7 years to remain indefinitely.  This was  a  case
   which ought not even to have merited consideration in terms of Article  8
   outwith the Rules.  There had not been shown any obstacles to family life
   continuing outside the UK, or any  arguably  good  grounds  for  granting
   leave to remain outside the  Rules.   The  question  whether  there  were
   compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules  was
   not even posed.  The judge should not have embarked upon a  free  ranging
   exercise under the Razgar tests and Article  8,  but  in  any  event  the
   outcome reached was correct.  The title of the Post Study  Work  category
   (which is no longer in  the  rules)  was  self-explanatory.   It  was  to
   encourage graduates to find productive work in the UK, not to become full
   time mothers and to enable dependants on such an  application  to  become
   the sole breadwinner.  That judge's observations on  the  appellant  were
   justified.   Although  the  visa  category  was  open-ended  in  that  it
   specified no requirements actually to obtain work, the judge was entitled
   to find the use to which it was put by these appellants to be an abuse of
   the system.

13) Mrs O'Brien accepted in relation to Ground 2  that  the  judge  confused
   the requirements of different routes within the Rules.  However, she said
   that the misdirection was of no importance, because this family  had  not
   reached the 10 years lawful residence point and "near miss" arguments are
   of no relevance to Article 8.  The judge reached the right decision, even
   if not for entirely the right reasons.

14) Mr Ndubuisi in reply submitted that the appellant should be  treated  as
   having had a freestanding right to remain for the 2 years of her visa  in
   the UK, whether she was interested in working or not.  The  judge  should
   not have discounted that period in her assessment, so her approach to the
   proportionality assessment was materially flawed.

15) I reserved my determination.

16) Mr Ndubuisi did not refer to the  next  paragraph  of  the  respondent's
   guidance describing the Tier 1 Post Study Work category:

      This category provides a bridge to highly  skilled  or  skilled  work.
   Individuals with Tier 1 (Post Study  Work)  leave  will  be  expected  to
   switch into another part of the Points  Based  System  as  soon  as  they
   are able to do so.


17) There is of course (as Ground 1 says)  nothing  morally  wrong  about  a
   person choosing to be a full time parent rather than a worker.   That  is
   beside the point.  In my opinion, the FtT judge correctly identified  the
   purpose of the Post Study  Work  route.   The  use  of  the  term  "false
   pretences" is quite strong, but I do not think the appellant  can  fairly
   quarrel with the description of her conduct as disingenuous.

18) Analysis of this case in terms of the Rules by the  respondent  was  all
   that was required.  There were no arguably good grounds to take this case
   outside the Rules.  If it had been necessary to  go  any  further,  there
   were no compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  the
   Rules.  (Nagre, [2013] EWHC (Admin); MS [2013] CSIH 52, paragraphs 26 and
   30; Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.)

19) There is no error of  law  in  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was  not
   unreasonable for the children to accompany their parents to  the  country
   of origin.

20) Mr Ndubuisi did not cite any authority  for  his  proposition  that  the
   older child of the family has a free standing right to remain in the  UK,
   by which all the  appeals  should  have  been  allowed.   The  Presenting
   Officer submitted that there is no such authority, and I am not aware  of
   any.

21) The judge fell into some confusion between leave  which  may  count  for
   different purposes within the  Rules,  but  that  is  immaterial  to  the
   overall outcome.

22) The appellant and her family took advantage of her two  years  leave  to
   remain in the Post Study Work category,  although  she  never  worked  or
   intended to work.  It is difficult to see  why  that  should  be  thought
   incapable of carrying adverse weight in the proportionality balance.

23) The appellants have not shown that the determination of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal errs in any point of law, such as to require it to be set aside.
    The determination shall stand.

                               [pic]
                                7 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
