
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Huntley [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make  any  order  restricting  publication
    about this case.

 2. The respondent, hereinafter "the claimant" had not appeared  before  me
    at about 11:10 am when it was convenient to hear the appeal.  I  had  a
    letter from his former solicitors informing the Tribunal that they were
    not in funds and that they wished to come off  the  record.   They  had
    tried to find alternative representation but had not been  able  to  do
    so. The letter referred expressly to this hearing on 31  October  2016.
    It follows that the claimant clearly knew about the hearing and, in the
    absence of any application or even explanation for his absence I decide
    to continue with the hearing in his absence.

 3. This case came before me as an appeal by the Secretary of State against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal
    against a decision refusing him leave to remain as the  partner  of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights.

 4. The case came before me on 27 June and I  gave  an  extempore  judgment
    finding that there was an error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  I was concerned at that the point that the claimant had told
    me that he was no longer in a relationship with the person who  had  to
    be his  partner  in  order  to  stand  any  chance  of  satisfying  the
    requirements of the Rules.  As I explained in  my  judgement  following
    the hearing on 27 June, the claimant was not entirely well and had some
    problems   with   mental   health   about   which   he   was   entirely
    straightforward. I was particularly anxious  not  to  disadvantage  him
    unfairly by reason of his general condition.

 5.  I  regret  that  my  extempore  judgment  was  not  promulgated  until
    September.  By then we had the benefit of the decision of this Tribunal
    in the case of Sala (EFMs: right of appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC)
    which establishes, at least in the view of the Vice President and Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb sitting together, that there is no right of appeal
    in cases such as this because  the  decision  requires  an  element  of
    discretion by the Respondent which take  the  case  out  of  the  rules
    relating to appeals.

 6. I am not being disrespectful when I say that the decision in Sala might
    be thought surprising because it is clear from the  judgment  that  the
    Tribunal did not reach the conclusion that it expected to reach when it
    first considered the point. Nevertheless it is a decision that I intend
    to follow unless,  perhaps,  I  had  the  benefit  of  very  persuasive
    argument urging me to reach a contrary conclusion.

 7. Although I found an error of law I  did  not  finally  dispose  of  the
    appeal and I find I can therefore retract what I said when  I  gave  my
    reasons. I append hereto my already promulgated decision that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law but I accept Mr Whitwell's submission  that,
    following the decision of the Tribunal in Sala, there was no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal and therefore the decision to do  anything  with
    the appeal has to be set aside and substituted with a ruling that there
    is no right of appeal.

 8. I am aware that the decision in Sala  is  controversial.   I  make  the
    point briefly that if I had had to decide on  the  evidence  before  me
    today the merits of the appeal I would have dismissed it because  there
    is  insufficient  evidence  that  the  claimant  is  in  a   qualifying
    relationship.  It was his own evidence that put the matter  into  doubt
    and he is not here to remedy it.

 9. It follows therefore that my final decision is a decision setting aside
    all that has gone before  because  there  is  no  jurisdiction  in  the
    Tribunal to entertain the appeal, but there is also a finding  that  if
    there was jurisdiction I would have dismissed the appeal

10. For all these reasons I rule there is no jurisdiction to entertain  the
    appeal.





Notice of Decision

11. The decision of  the  Firs-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  because  the
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 14 November 2016               |




                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2016                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Huntley [R]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


               REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the Respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of State refusing
    the claimant leave as the partner of an EEA national exercising  treaty
    rights.

 2) The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  criticised  in  the  grounds,  and
    permission to appeal was given, for exercising discretion  on  findings
    of fact before the  Secretary  of  State  had  had  an  opportunity  to
    consider them.  This is, I know, a mistake that is very easy  to  make.
    However, Mr Bramble pointed out very fairly and properly, albeit to  my
    slight personal embarrassment, that that it not quite what has happened
    here.

 3) Here the Secretary of State has considered the point.  The  problem  is
    the Judge has not.  The Judge has not exercised any discretion but just
    decided that the appeal should be allowed because of  the  findings  of
    fact.  He has not appreciated that there was an extra step.  This might
    seem a little bit pedantic and it is the sort of error that could often
    be corrected simply but there  is  a  complicating  factor  here.   The
    claimant, perfectly candidly and without in any way being "caught out",
    accepts that he does not presently live with the person  identified  as
    his partner. This admission opens up a very real  doubt  about  whether
    that person is in fact a partner within the meaning  of  the  Rules  at
    all.

 4) The claimant has asked for an adjournment.  He  is  a  person  who  has
    suffered from some sort of mental ill-health.  He  is  not  ashamed  of
    that nor should he be.  He was quite content for a note to be read  out
    in the hearing room which shows that he has had treatment and he is now
    on long-term medication and  which,  in  broad  terms,  is  making  him
    better. However he is somebody who, if not strictly "vulnerable", does,
    in my judgment, need particular care. I am anxious to  ensure  that  he
    does feel that is being bamboozled in any way.

 5) Although I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed  because  the
    Judge's work is incomplete I do not propose to complete that work today
    but to give the claimant an opportunity to come before  me  again  with
    further evidence if he has got it, explaining his present circumstances
    to see if he does in fact comply with the Rules.

 6) Mr Bramble suggested  that  the  appeal  should  remain  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal because this is a new development rather  than  a  fundamental
    failure by the Secretary of State  and,  given  the  claimant's  mental
    condition, it is more  than  ordinarily  important  that  the  case  is
    decided by the same judge reasonably quickly.  I see much sense in that
    and I therefore direct the case to be brought before me as soon  as  is
    reasonably practical.   Standard  directions  to  apply  about  serving
    further evidence. They are set out below.

 7) The claimant has told me  that  he  will  be  in  a  position  to  fund
    solicitors and does expect to be represented on the next  occasion  and
    it is partly because of that that I have adjourned the case.  There  is
    more work to be done here and it is in his best interests to co-operate
    with his solicitors and let them help him do their job.

                                 DIRECTIONS

 8) If the claimant wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was
    not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  evidence  (including  any
    witness statement), must be filed with the Upper Tribunal and served on
    the respondent together with the notice required by rule 15(2A) of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, indicating  the  nature
    of that evidence and explaining why it was not submitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal not later than 7 days before the day listed for hearing.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 26 September 2016              |

