
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19395/2014
                                                               IA/19397/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th May 2015                              |On 15th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            (1) mr MUHAMMAD RIAZ
                             (2) mrs SUGHRA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O. R. Williams, promulgated on  19th  August  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Stoke-on-Trent, Bennett House, on 11th August 2014.  In  the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeals of Mr Muhammad Riaz  and
    his wife, Mrs Sughra Bibi.  The Appellant subsequently applied for, and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are both citizens of Pakistan.  Their dates of birth are
    1st January 1943 and 1st January 1946 respectively.  As mentioned, they
    are husband  and  wife.   They  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 16th April  2014  refusing  their  application  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK  as  the
    family members of a British citizen.  Both had entered the  UK  on  7th
    April 2013 on a visitor's visa,  valid  from  6th  March  2013  to  6th
    September 2013, before applying for a  residence  card  as  the  family
    members of their daughter-in-law, a British citizen.

The Refusal Letter

 3. The refusal letter of 16th April 2014, observes that  their  son,  Sury
    Ejaz Ahmed Riaz, had also been issued with a  residence  card  on  10th
    November 2009, as the spouse of a British national under  Regulation  9
    of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   For  this  reason,  the
    Respondents were satisfied that the  Appellants  met  the  criteria  of
    Regulation 9(2)(a) regarding employment of  the  British  national  EEA
    state.

The Appellants' Claim

 4. The Appellants' claim is that they began residing  with  their  British
    citizen family member in Belgium (an EEA member  state)  on  19th  July
    2006.  Their family member then returned to  the  UK  on  14th  October
    2008.  It was when they subsequently visited the British citizen family
    in the UK on 7th April 2013, on a visit  visa,  that  they  made  their
    application to remain here.  The  British  citizen  family  member  had
    remained in Belgium for four  years  before  returning  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2008.

 5. The Appellants argued that they  met  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    9(2), because the British citizen in question was residing  in  an  EEA
    state as a worker or self-employed person or  was  so  residing  before
    returning to the UK (see paragraph 9(2)(a)).

 6. Additionally, the centre of the British citizen's life has  transferred
    to the EEA state where that person resided as a worker or self-employed
    person (see Regulation 9(2)(c)).  The British citizen here in  question
    is Ms Saira Akhtar.  In a short statement, dated  3rd  September  2013,
    she states that,

         "I exercised treaty rights during my stay in Belgium.  I married to
         Mr Ahmed Ejaz Riaz Sury and have four minor children.  I sponsor my
         mother and father-in-law to  apply  for  a  residence  card  as  my
         dependent relatives who are at present in the United  Kingdom.   My
         husband also supports their applications".

 7. The Respondent rejected these claims on the basis that  the  Appellants
    had not provided any evidence to show that they both resided with their
    daughter-in-law whilst they exercised treaty rights as a  worker  or  a
    self-employed person in Belgium.  Second, consideration  was  given  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.  However, consideration was not given
    to Article 8 because no valid application for Article  8  consideration
    had been made.  As far as paragraph 276ADE was concerned the Appellants
    could not succeed under this provision because they had been in the  UK
    for a very short period of time and  have  not  lost  ties  with  their
    country of origin.

The Judge's Findings

 8. In what is a remarkably short determination, the judge  held  that  the
    Appellants did not satisfy Regulation 9 "as they are the parents-in-law
    of the British citizen family member  and  hence  do  not  satisfy  the
    conditions  in  Regulation  9(2)(b)"   (see   paragraph   11   of   the
    determination).  However, the judge then did go on to give  very  clear
    and succinct reasons for this conclusion (at paragraph 12).  Here,  the
    judge pointed out that the Appellants normally live in Pakistan.

 9. First, they had spent only a two week holiday with the British  citizen
    family member in Belgium  on  19th  July  2006,  following  which  they
    returned back home to Pakistan.

10. Second, they next visited the British citizen family member in  the  UK
    on 7th April 2013 on a visit visa.

11. Third, in the meantime, after their return in  2006  to  Pakistan,  the
    British citizen family member continued  to  remain  in  Belgium  until
    2008.  The judge concluded that,

         "Looking at the wider aims of the Citizens Directive, there  is  no
         evidence  that  the  British  national's  exercise  of  freedom  of
         movement is or would be  impeded  by  this  decision  or  that  the
         refusal will lead to the denial of any  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
         substance of the rights conferred on an EU citizen by virtue of his
         status as an EU citizen" (see paragraph 12).

Grounds of Application

12. In the grounds of application, it is said  that  the  judge  fell  into
    error because the Appellants fall within the  definition  of  a  family
    member in Regulation 7(1)(c) which the judge  did  not  consider.   The
    requirement to "have lived in the household" is  not  a  requisite  for
    this type of a family member.  The attached statements to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal are pleaded on the basis of family reunion application  or  a
    wish to settle.

13. On 6th February 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that, although the  skeleton  argument,  and  the
    grounds refer to Regulation 9, Regulation 7(1)(c) ought  to  have  been
    addressed by the judge.  In granting permission, it was also said that,



         "Although the dismissal of the appeal under Regulation 9 may not be
         infected by legal error, the failure to deal with the submission in
         the  alternative  under  Regulation  7(1)(c)  is  arguable  as  the
         Appellants are entitled to have all matters raised to  be  properly
         considered."

    The grant of permission ends with the stern observation that,

         "The Tribunal on the  next  occasion  may  also  have  to  consider
         whether this application and the actions of the parties represent a
         distortion  of  the  purposes  and  objectives  of  the   community
         provision which grant the right in question.  If this is  found  to
         be so the appeal may fail in any event".

14. On 4th March 2015, a Rule 24 response was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  Here it was said that  the  First-tier  Judge  may
    have erred in considering that Regulation 9 was restricted in scope  to
    the spouses of British citizens.  However, the Appellants' claim to  be
    the family members under Regulation 7(1)(c)  is  not  material  as  the
    requirement under the amended Regulation is that  the  British  citizen
    had transferred the centre of her life during her earlier employment in
    Belgium and this requirement is not met.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 29th May 2015,  I  had  the  benefit  of  a
    detailed skeleton argument by Mr Ahmed, as well as two authorities  put
    before me by Ms A Brocklesby-Weller.  Mr Ahmed, appearing on behalf  of
    the Appellants, submitted that the Appellants are entitled to know  why
    they lost.  The determination of the judge was not only very brief  but
    also confused and confusing in that it had wrongly said that Regulation
    9 was restricted to spouses, which  is  not  the  case.   The  Rule  24
    response had actually accepted that the judge may have  erred  in  this
    respect.  That was enough for this Tribunal to make  a  finding  of  an
    error of law.

16. Second, if it be said that Regulation 9 was not in any  event  complied
    with, this also was wrong because from the period 2004 until  2008  the
    British citizen, Ms Saira Akhtar, had actually relocated to Belgium and
    had lived there.  Therefore, there were no outstanding issues, she  had
    lived there for four years and had shifted her centre of gravity there.
     It was as simple as that.

17. In reply, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that there  was  no  error  of
    law, and certainly no material error of law because the  relocation  to
    Belgium was not a "genuine residence in the host member  state"  as  EU
    law required.  She drew my attention to two important  judgments.   The
    first, rather well-known one, is Surinder Singh (case  C-370/90,  dated
    7th July 1992).  The second one is a more recent judgment of O  &  B  v
    Minister Voor Immigratie, dated 12th March 2014.

18. In reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that the Appellant was  entitled  to  know
    what the issues were against them and none had been identified and they
    had complied with Regulation 9.  He asked  that  the  Tribunal  make  a
    finding of an error of law and  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

19. It is plainly an error of law to suggest that "the  Appellants  do  not
    satisfy Regulation 9 as they are  the  parents-in-law  of  the  British
    citizen family member and  hence  do  not  satisfy  the  conditions  in
    Regulation  9(2)(b)"  as  is  suggested  in   paragraph   11   of   the
    determination.  The  provision  is  not  restricted  to  spouses  only.
    However, the important question is whether this is a  "material"  error
    such that the determination should be set aside.   For  the  reasons  I
    give, I am firmly of the view that the determination should not be  set
    aside.

20. On any view, the present claim is a ruse  designed  to  circumvent  and
    abuse both national and EU law and to acquire a benefit which otherwise
    is not due.  It is remarkable the extent to which the  Appellants  have
    gone to achieve their ends in this case.  If this is the finding of the
    judge, as it plainly is at paragraph 12, then the Appellants know  full
    well why they have lost the appeal, and this Tribunal  can  only  agree
    with that finding.  Second, if this is the finding of the judge  below,
    then it drives a coach and horses through any claim  based  on  EU  law
    made by the Appellants, because EU law is being used  as  a  device  by
    these Appellants to acquire a benefit to which they are not due.

21. Specifically, lest there be any doubt, this application fails  for  the
    following two reasons.  First, it cannot  succeed  under  Regulation  9
    because the "centre of British citizen's life" has to  be  "transferred
    to the EEA state", and thereafter she is required to have "resided as a
    worker  or  self-employed  person"  in  the  state  of  Belgium,   (see
    Regulation 9(2)(c)).  The letter of 3rd September from  DV  Solicitors,
    making the application for a residence card on behalf of the Appellants
    is highly illuminating in this respect.  It draws attention to the fact
    that Mrs Saira Akhtar has married Mr Ahmed Ejaz Riaz Sury and that  the
    couple are enjoying a strong and stable marriage and have now got  four
    minor children.  There is no credible  evidence  of  Mrs  Saira  Akhtar
    having worked or being employed as a self-employed person  in  Belgium.
    The requirement of "the centre of British citizen's life"  having  been
    transferred, does not end there.  Regulation  9(2)  and  (3)  sets  out
    "factors relevant to whether the centre of British citizen's  life  has
    transferred to another EEA state", and this is not an exhaustive  list,
    but includes "the degree of integration of P in the EEA state", as well
    as "the period of residence in the EEA  state  as  a  worker  or  self-
    employed  person".   There  is  no  evidence  that  either   of   these
    requirements  work  in  favour  of  Ms  Saira  Akhtar.   Reliance  upon
    Regulation 9 is therefore misconceived.

22. Second, as far as Regulation 7(1)(c) is concerned there is no  evidence
    that this was actually argued by  Counsel  in  front  of  Judge  O.  R.
    Williams.  Even so, as the Rule 24 response makes  it  only  too  clear
    reliance on this provision too makes it necessary  for  the  centre  of
    life of Mrs Saira Akhtar to have been transferred to Belgium.  The same
    considerations apply as above.  Moreover, as  the  case  of  O  &  B  v
    Minister  Voor  Immigratie  makes  clear,  there  has  to  be  "genuine
    residence in the host member state of the union citizen" (see paragraph
    56).

23. Finally, Judge O. R. Williams was  entirely  correct  in  stating  that
    "there is no evidence ... ... that the refusal will lead to the  denial
    of any genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred on an
    EU citizen ... ..." (paragraph 12).  And the grant  of  permission,  is
    equally correct in stating (at paragraph 6) that this Tribunal may have
    to consider whether "the actions of the parties represented  distortion
    of the purposes and objectives of the (EU) provision".

24. This is because the case of O & B makes it clear that the crucial issue
    in this respect is for Mrs Saira Akhtar, "to remove the  same  type  of
    obstacle on leaving the member state of origin ... ... by  guaranteeing
    that that citizen would be able, in his  member  state  of  origin,  to
    continue the family life which he created or strengthened in  the  host
    member state" (see paragraph 49).

25. In the instant case, Ms Saira Akhtar did not "create"  or  "strengthen"
    her family life in the host member state because after a short visit of
    two weeks in 2006 by the Appellants, following which they  returned  to
    Pakistan, Ms Saira Akhtar continued to remain in  Belgium  for  another
    two years until 2008, after which she returned back to the UK.

26. The entire exercise, therefore, is  nothing  short  of  a  ploy  and  a
    deliberate attempt to  violate  in  a  cynical  fashion  the  essential
    provisions of EU law.  Accordingly, although the judge appears to  have
    erred in one respect in relation to Regulation 9, that error  does  not
    infect the determination as a whole, and this decision is not to be set
    aside.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not to be set  aside.   This
    is because the Upper Tribunal may (but need not) set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (see Section 12(2)(a)).  No other outcome is
    possible but the dismissal of the  appeal  of  the  two  Appellants  as
    decided by the judge below.

28. This appeal is dismissed.

29. No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    12th June 2015

