
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 7 November 2014                         |On 4 December 2014             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         DR SHAFQUAT MOHAMMED RAFIQ

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Gherson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on  12  December  1972.
    On 9 May 2013 the Secretary of State made  a  decision  to  refuse  him
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove him from the United
    Kingdom.  The respondent appealed on the basis that  returning  him  to
    Bangladesh would render the UK government to be in breach of Article  8
    of the ECHR.  In a determination  promulgated  on  15  July  2014,  the
    respondent's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge K W Brown.
    (The respondent will henceforth be referred to as the claimant).

2.   On 9 September 2014 the Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to
    appeal the judge's decision on grounds that argued that the judge erred
    in excusing the claimant's use of a false vignette to obtain  work  and
    finding his action to be "out of character" and also  failing  to  take
    into account the public interest in discouraging such  practices.   The
    grounds also asserted that the judge erred in failing to consider  that
    the time when the claimant had been in  a  relationship  was  when  his
    immigration  status  was  precarious  and  also  in  finding  that  the
    claimant's desire to continue working in the UK was a  factor  weighing
    against removal.

3.   On 1 October 2014 the claimant was granted permission to appeal on  the
    basis that  the  judge  failed  to  determine  the  argument  that  the
    Secretary of State was under a duty to consider paragraph 395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules under which discretion has to be  exercised  by  her.
    The grounds further submitted that there had been  no  application  for
    leave to remain and that the provisions of Appendix FM should  be  read
    so as to require an applicant  to  demonstrate  living  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for two years prior to "the appeal".

4.   The claimant first entered the UK  on  8  June  1999.  He  subsequently
    passed examinations that enabled him to work n the  UK.   He  was  last
    granted leave to remain and work as a postgraduate doctor until 9 March
    2007.  He failed to apply for his leave to be extended  at  that  time.
    In January 2008 when he became aware that he had  failed  to  apply  in
    time, the claimant claimed that he panicked.  Through a  friend  and  a
    third party the claimant falsified his  passport  to  include  a  false
    vignette.  His employers were satisfied  of  the  authenticity  of  the
    documents and the claimant continued to work, albeit illegally,  within
    the UK without valid leave.

5.   On 14 June 2011 the claimant was stopped by police in  Scotland  whilst
    driving. It was discovered that he had remained  illegally  within  the
    UK.  He was subsequently charged and convicted of immigration offences.
     A decision was made that the claimant should be removed from the UK on
    15 June 2011.  The appeal against that decision came before Immigration
    Judge Russell on 4 August 2011.

6.   Immigration Judge Russell decided that claimant did have an  in-country
    right of appeal against the decision that he  is  a  person  liable  to
    removal under Section 10 of the 1999 Act by virtue  of  having  made  a
    human rights claim.  He decided in light of the agreement  between  the
    parties at the hearing that the appeal should be allowed as  not  being
    in accordance with the law to the  limited  extent  that  it  would  be
    referred back to the Secretary of  State  to  consider  the  claimant's
    matter in relation to paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules.

7.   In response to Immigration Judge Russell's decision  the  Secretary  of
    State issued a notice of Immigration  Decision  dated  9  May  2013  to
    remove the claimant under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
    1999 and to refuse his human rights claim.   The notice of  Immigration
    Decision was accompanied by a refusal letter  also  dated  9  May  2013
    setting out the reasons for the Secretary of State's decision.

8.   In considering  the  appeal  the  judge  took  into  account  that  the
    claimant might have expected to have been  granted indefinite leave  to
    remain had he not committed an offence relating to  the  provisions  of
    false documentation.  The  claimant  was  taken  before  the  Stranraer
    Sherriff Court and was fined �400 for being in  the  UK  without  valid
    immigration status.  The judge noted that the  offence  for  which  the
    claimant had been convicted did not lead to a deportation  order  being
    made.  The judge also  noted  that  the  General  Medical  Council,  in
    proceedings concluded in late August 2013, suspended the claimant  from
    the Medical Register  for  twelve  months.   The  suspension  would  be
    reviewed before the end of the suspension but his Counsel who  appeared
    for him before the GMC seemed optimistic that provided  the  claimant's
    immigration issues were rectified, and that he kept his legal knowledge
    up-to-date and showed insight in relation to his  offence,  there  were
    good prospects that he would  be  reinstated  to  the  General  Medical
    Register. At the date of the hearing before me on 7  November  2014,  I
    was  shown documentation which indicated that  the  claimant  had  been
    reinstated to the Medical Register.

9.   The judge heard oral evidence from  the  claimant  about  his  personal
    circumstances.  He was divorced from his wife, Ossilatul Karim.  It was
    an arranged marriage which did not last very long. A decision was  made
    that they should divorce which is uncommon in Bangladesh.  The claimant
    felt he had brought shame on his family as  expressed  to  him  by  his
    father.  A rift developed between him and another member of the  family
    in Bangladesh as a result for the divorce.  He claimed that  after  his
    return to work in the UK he  became  depressed  and  anxious  over  the
    following months.  He spoke to his GP about his  mental  condition  and
    was referred to a mental health professions but he did not  attend  the
    appointment because he felt a sense of embarrassment.

10.  The judge heard evidence  from  the  claimant's  partner,  Miss  Louise
    Tiernan.  She is a Senior Nurse in Epsom and  St  Helier  Hospital  A&E
    Department.  They had met in 2007 and  started  dating  in  2009.   She
    explained that the  claimant  had  not  been  introduced  to   her  two
    daughters because of his lack of immigration status.

11.  The judge heard oral evidence from Beverly Daines, a friend  of  Louise
    Tiernan, who said she had known about their  relationship  since  2009.
    The judge also heard oral evidence of  Asam  Chowdhury.   He  said  the
    claimant had helped him in the past as a friend since 2001  and  during
    hardship the claimant had provided him with  financial  support.   When
    the claimant needed help, he also offered him  a  place  to  live  from
    November 2011 until November 2013.  He was supportive of the appeal and
    hoped that his immigration status would be resolved soon.

12.  In his findings the judge said he was impressed by  both  the  claimant
    and Miss Tiernan  who seemed to have been open and honest  about  their
    relationship and the circumstances leading up to the appeal.  He  found
    that the relationship is genuine  and  although  living  some  distance
    apart, he concluded that they wished to see as much as possible of each
    other  without  causing  difficulties  amongst  other  family  members,
    particularly Miss Tiernan's daughters.

13.  In considering the claimant's behaviour, the judge said  that  the  use
    of  false  documentation  was  a  foolhardy  mistake  in  an  otherwise
    unblemished career and background.  The judge said it seemed to him  to
    have been out for character.  He accepted that the claimant had clearly
    forgotten the importance of keeping his leave to remain up-to-date.  He
    accepted also that the claimant panicked and that at the  time  he  was
    under  stress  because  of  his  previously  failed  marriage  and   of
    developing his medical career  within  the  UK.    He  noted  that  the
    conviction and sentence imposed on him did not lead to the making of  a
    deportation order and was not one that  would  breach  the  suitability
    requirements set out in the reviewed Immigration Rules (S-LTR).

14.  The judge then considered the relationship  between  the  claimant  and
    Miss Tiernan.  He found at paragraph 44  that  even  though  there  was
    doubt about whether the relationship  between  the  claimant  and  Miss
    Tiernan comes within the published Immigration Rules,  he found that at
    the date of the hearing they were committed to each other and that they
    intended in the future to live in a relationship  "akin  to  marriage".
    The judge therefore found that they have demonstrated that they have  a
    family life together at the present time.  He found their evidence  was
    mutually supportive and supported by others.  He took into account that
    they do not cohabit on a day-to-day basis at the present time but there
    is a clear desire by  both parties to spend as much time together under
    the same roof that they can.  The couple's desires have been frustrated
    because  of  the  claimant's  involvement   with   using   false   visa
    documentation and Miss Tiernan's understandable  reluctance  to  inform
    her daughters and her parents of the relationship until his immigration
    status is regularised.

15.  The judge also found that claimant has established a  private  life  in
    the UK based upon his professional life as a doctor  until  June  2011.
    Additionally he has formed many friendships  through  his  professional
    work and private relationships though social development.  Miss Tiernan
     has also been  involved in many of the claimant's  social  activities.
    His private life in the UK has developed over a relatively long  period
    since 1999.

16.  Taking the evidence together the judge found that the  claimant  has  a
    family and private life within the UK that may attract  the  protection
    of Article 8.  He found that  the  removal  of  the  claimant  back  to
    Bangladesh would have consequences of such gravity  for  him  as  would
    potentially engage Article 8.  His relationship with Miss Tiernan would
    most likely be severed and his  professional  life  that  includes  his
    ongoing ability to practice medicine in the UK would be shattered.   He
    accepted that any interference with the claimant's private  and  family
    life would be in accordance with the law and the  UK's  stated  aim  of
    maintaining immigration control.

17.  The judge then considered whether removal  would  be  proportionate  in
    all the circumstances.  He considered the ongoing and deep relationship
    between the claimant and Miss Tiernan.  Their intention to  live  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage has been frustrated for the  reasons  set
    out in their  respective  evidence.   If  he  were  to  be  removed  to
    Bangladesh that relationship would be  ended.   Miss  Tiernan  has  two
    daughters in the UK to whom  she  is  committed  and  she  has  so  far
    protected  them  from  the  difficulties  surrounding  the   claimant's
    precarious immigration history.  Miss  Tiernan  also  has  two  elderly
    parents in the UK. Her life in the UK which  includes  her  work  as  a
    senior nurse within the NHS could not continue if she were required  to
    relocate to Bangladesh.  It would be too much to expect her to relocate
    to Bangladesh with the claimant.

18.  The judge considered that there are consequences for the  claimant  and
    to some extent the Secretary of State in relation to  his  professional
    life.  The judge said  that  the  claimant  may  be  able  to  practice
    medicine straightaway if he is removed to Bangladesh  but  he  has  put
    considerable time and effort in going through the various stages  as  a
    junior doctor in the UK with  the  overall  expectation  that  he  will
    remain in the UK.  His foolish and criminal actions  have  caused  that
    career to come to an end (perhaps temporarily) by the supervisory  role
    of the GMC.  By all accounts the claimant is  a  good  doctor.  The  UK
    government has to some extent invested  in  the  claimant's  continuing
    professional development within the  NHS.   That  development  and  the
    claimant's potential to once again be an asset  as  a  skilled  medical
    practitioner within the UK wiill be lost if he is removed.

19.  The judge then considered that there is another strand of  argument  in
    this appeal in the claimant's favour but does not go  directly  to  the
    issue of proportionality and that is  the  fact  that  the  Immigration
    Rules changed between the letter of 23 January 2013 which responded  to
    the 2011 Tribunal decision and the refusal letter  dated  9  May  2013.
    The judge considered paragraph 395C and found  that  whilst  not  going
    directly to the issue of proportionality, the claimant's  circumstances
    allowed him to  look  favourably  upon  his  provision  of  substantial
    evidence of his private and in particular family life which appears  to
    have been largely ignored by the respondent and in the later letter.

20.  Taking into account decisions in Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  and
    Gulshan, the judge concluded that the claimant's case is an exceptional
    one. He considered that there are compelling circumstances that are not
    sufficiently recognised under the revised Immigration Rules.  He  found
    in the claimant's favour that his removal back to Bangladesh would be a
    disproportionate response and therefore unlawful interference with  his
    private and family life that he has developed in the UK.


21.  Mr Toal  submitted  that  there  would  be  no  need  to  look  at  the
    claimant's cross-appeal for the moment. However, if the Upper  Tribunal
    finds that the judge made an error of law  then  he  would  ask  me  to
    consider the two grounds which constituted the claimant's cross-appeal.



22.  Mr Avery submitted that this was not a  deportation  case  because  the
    sentence was not sufficient although the criminal matter was an attempt
    to undermine immigration control.

23.  Mr Avery's main argument was that  there  was  a  fundamental  lack  of
    engagement with the public interest by  the  judge.  The  claimant  had
    committed a criminal offence and the  judge  sought  to  minimise  that
    offence by describing it as foolhardy.  Secondly, the  judge's  finding
    that the claimant had an interest in maintaining family life in the  UK
    does not outweigh  the  public  interest  and  proportionality  of  his
    removal.  There were significant aggravating factors  which  the  judge
    failed  to  consider.   The  judge's  finding  that  the  claimant  had
    established family life in the UK is contradicted by his  finding  that
    the claimant and his partner are in a relationship  akin  to  marriage.
    The judge failed to factor into the equation that the family  life  was
    established at a  time  when  the  claimant's  immigration  status  was
    precarious.

24.  Mr Toal took me through the grounds lodged on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State.  The first ground identified three  aggravating  features  of
    the claimant's conduct which the judge rehearsed at paragraph 8 of  the
    determination.   The  first  was  that  the  use  of  false   documents
    encourages the supply of documents and enables criminals to profit from
    the abuse of the UK's system of immigration control.   The  second  was
    that the claimant involved others, the friend and the  third  party  in
    his offending.   The  third  was  that  the  claimant  used  the  false
    documents to obtain employment in a highly  responsible  and  sensitive
    environment.

25.  Mr Toal submitted that the third aggravating  feature  was  misleading.
    He argued that the claimant did not use  false  documents  to  "obtain"
    employment.  He was already was in employment  and  needed  to  produce
    evidence of his status in order to be retained in that employment.

26.  As regards the argument that the claimant  involved  others,  a  friend
    and a third party in his offending, Mr Toal argued that that submission
    did not reflect the evidence before the Tribunal.   It was  the  friend
    and the third party  that  engaged  the  claimant  to  be  involved  in
    criminal  offending.   Mr  Toal  submitted  that  whilst  the  claimant
    continued to suffer mental illness and a state of panic, he  turned  to
    friends and unwisely followed  their  suggested  form  of  conduct.  He
    submitted that the appellant was relying on the judge's own findings at
    paragraph 8 to identify what the appellant considered to be aggravating
    features.

27.  I accept Mr Toal's submission that the appellant's  argument  that  the
    claimant used false documents  to  "obtain"  employment  was  factually
    misleading.  Nevertheless the fact is that the claimant  used  a  false
    vignette to maintain his employment knowing very well  that  the  false
    vignette was not a true reflection of his  immigration  status  at  the
    time.

28.  I was not persuaded by Mr. Toal's argument that the  claimant  did  not
    involve his friend and a third party in his offending, rather they that
    involved him in the criminal offending.  The fact is that the  claimant
    was the one with the problem.  He went to his friend and a third  party
    with the problem and they told him how they were going  to  resolve  it
    and he went along with their scheme.  As far as I am concerned, he  was
    just as culpable as they were.

29.  I do not agree with Mr Avery that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    aggravating  circumstances  and  sought  to  minimise  the   claimant's
    behaviour.   The  judge  at  paragraph  8  identified  the  aggravating
    features of the offence committed by the claimant.  At paragraph 38  he
    found that his use of the false document was foolhardy in an  otherwise
    unblemished career and background.  It appeared to the judge that  this
    had been out of character.  He accepted the claimant's explanation that
    he had clearly forgotten the importance of keeping his leave to  remain
    up-to-date.  The judge also accepted the claimant's   explanation  that
    he panicked and that at the time he was under stress of his  previously
    failed marriage and of developing his medical  career  within  the  UK.
    The judge also noted that the conviction and sentence  imposed  on  the
    claimant did not lead to the making of a deportation order.

30.  Looking at the judge's findings, I did not know  what  else  the  judge
    was supposed to have said in order to show that  he  had  given  proper
    consideration to the nature of the offence.

31.  I accept Mr  Toal's  submission  that  whilst  Mr  Avery  placed  great
    emphasis on the nature and gravity of the offending  behaviour  of  the
    claimant, the Secretary of State's letter  of  9  May  2013  adopted  a
    rather lenient approach.  In that letter the Secretary of State said on
    two occasions that Dr Rafiq's conviction was not such as to  disqualify
    him from consideration under the  suitability  requirements.   However,
    the couple could not  fulfil  the  requirements  of  E-LTRP1.7  on  the
    strength of the evidence provided by the claimant.  As Dr Rafiq had not
    been resident in the UK for twenty years he is unable  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii).  On this evidence  I  find  that
    the Secretary of State did not appear to take the  hard  line  approach
    being taken by Mr. Avery.

32.  Mr Avery submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    establishment of the relationship  whilst  the  claimant's  immigration
    status was precarious.  Mr Toal relied on the decision in Jones  [2013]
    UKSC 19 where Lord Hope said that it is well established, as an  aspect
    of Tribunal  law  and  practice,  that  judicial  restraint  should  be
    exercised when the reasons that a Tribunal gives for its  decision  are
    being examined. The Appellate Court should not assume too readily  that
    the Tribunal misdirected itself just because  not  every  step  in  its
    reasoning is fully set out in it.  Mr. Toal also  relied  on  Piglowska
    [1999] UKHL where Lord Hoffman said that the Appellate Court must  bear
    in mind the advantage which the first instance judge had in seeing  the
    parties and the other witnesses.  This is well understood on  questions
    of credibility and findings of primary fact.  But it goes further  than
    that.  It also applies to the judge's evaluation of those facts.

33.  In this case the judge considered the claimant's  immigration  history,
    his failure to apply for an extension of leave to remain and considered
    that the claimant and his partner had met after his leave had  expired.
    The judge was impressed with the evidence given by the claimant and his
    partner.  He found them to be open and honest.  He  also  accepted  the
    evidence that the partner was protecting her two daughters.  The  judge
    took into account the decision in Nagre which deals with a relationship
    was established at a time when the applicant's immigration  status  was
    precarious. The judge also relied on I agree on Gulshan.  He  concluded
    that the appellant's case is an exceptional case.  I find no  error  of
    law in this decision.

34.  I also find that the Secretary of State's letters of  23  January  2013
    and 9 May  2012  indicated  that  had  the  claimant  and  his  partner
    submitted better evidence of their relationship she may have come to  a
    different conclusion.  The judge heard evidence from the  claimant  and
    his partner, found that they have  established  a  family  and  private
    life.  That finding was not challenged by the  respondent.   The  judge
    accepted that their relationship was akin  to  marriage.   He  accepted
    that they were in a committed and genuine relationship.  I do not  find
    that these findings are contradictory.  It was because of  his  finding
    that they are in a relationship akin to marriage that the judge decided
    that they have established a family life.

35.  I find that in light of UE (Nigeria) and Others  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  957
    the judge was entitled to take the claimant's wish to practice  in  the
    UK and his employment as a doctor in the UK as  relevant  factors.   At
    paragraph 35 of UE the Court of Appeal concluded that it is open to the
    court to find that the loss of such public benefit is capable of  being
    a relevant consideration when assessing the  public  interest  side  of
    proportionality under Article 8 as a matter  of  principle.  The  court
    also held at paragraph 24 that as a matter of  principle  there  is  no
    reason why the fact that the community in this country or  part  of  it
    would lose something of value were an applicant to be removed should be
    seen as irrelevant to  an  assessment  of  the  extent  of  the  public
    interest in removal.

36.  I find on this authority that the judge did not err in law  in  finding
    that the UK to some extent has invested in  the  claimant's  continuing
    professional development within the NHS and that  his  development  and
    potential to once again be an asset as a skilled medical doctor  within
    the UK which will be lost if he is removed.

37.  The judge's decision allowing the claimant's appeal under Article 8  of
    the ECHR shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


