
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA195602015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 June 2016                                |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               mr basharat ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  on  common  law  unfairness
    grounds against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  to
    grant him further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I  do  not  consider  the  appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to this case is that the appellant applied for leave  to
    remain on 28 March 2014 relying on a CAS assigned by Stanfords  College
    UK Limited.  On 27 April  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application because the Tier 4 Sponsor Register  had  been  checked  on
    that date and Stanfords College UK Limited was not listed  as  of  that
    date.  He had thus failed to provide a valid  CAS  in  support  of  his
    application.

 3. On page 2 of the refusal letter it stated that on 6  February  2015  he
    was informed that Stanfords College UK Limited was no longer listed  as
    a Tier 4 sponsor, and he was allowed 60 days to obtain  a  new  sponsor
    and CAS.  He did not provide a new CAS within the 60 day period.

 4. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant said
    he had contacted the Home  Office  informing  them  of  his  change  of
    address.  Evidence of this would be provided upon  notice  of  hearing.
    He did not receive any response to the notification of  his  change  of
    address.  A subsequent curtailment  letter  was  sent  to  his  college
    address, and not to him at his new address.  The Home Office was  aware
    the college had closed down  and  therefore  the  appellant  could  not
    possibly receive his curtailment  letter  at  the  college.   The  Home
    Office should have sent the correspondence to the new address which  he
    had provided to the Home Office.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision, of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  Bowler  sitting  at  Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 10 November 2015.  The appellant was  represented
    by  Mr  Chohan  of  Immigration  Chambers,  and  the   respondent   was
    represented by a Home Office Presenting Officer.

 6. The judge's subsequent decision contains a record of the proceedings in
    summary form.  The judge recorded that the evidence before her included
    the appellant's bundle which contained  the  documents  listed  in  the
    index.

 7. The appellant gave oral evidence, and adopted as his  evidence-in-chief
    a witness statement to be found at pages 1  to  3  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.

 8. In paragraph 8 of the statement, he said that  he  contacted  the  Home
    Office to inform them of his change of address.   At  page  14  of  the
    bundle there was a letter from the appellant to the Home Office dated 8
    September 2014.  In this letter he wrote to inform the Home Office that
    the licence of his college had been revoked and therefore he would like
    to change his address as the correspondence address they had  on  their
    system was his college's address.  The appellant then went on  to  give
    details of his home address which was in Durham Road, London  E16.   He
    asked to be issued with a 60 day letter to enable him  to  enrol  at  a
    different college and make a fresh Tier 4 application.

 9. At page 15 of the bundle there was a copy of a certificate  of  posting
    stamped by a post office in West  Drayton,  Middlesex  on  8  September
    2014.  It was a certificate to confirm that one item had been posted to
    the Home Office P O Box 3468 Sheffield.  This was  the  postal  address
    given at the top of the copy letter at page 14 of the bundle.

10.  The  appellant  was  cross-examined  on  his  witness  statement.   He
    confirmed he was attending college every week until the point  that  he
    received a letter from the Home Office on 28 August 2014.   After  that
    he was looking on line and discovered that the  college  had  lost  its
    licence.  He had heard a lot about  60  day  letters  as  a  result  of
    speaking to others.  He had sent a letter  to  the  Home  Office  on  8
    September once he  found  out  that  his  college's  licence  had  been
    revoked, informing the Home Office of his new contact address.

11. The judge gave his reasons for dismissing  the  appeal  on  common  law
    unfairness grounds in paragraph 16 to 19.  The obligation  was  on  the
    appellant to inform the Home Office of a valid address.  He said in his
    witness statement that he had  contacted  the  Home  Office  about  his
    address after contacting them on 30 August  2014  about  the  interview
    letter.  When asked at the hearing if he had called the Home Office, he
    said that he wrote to them:

         "However, there is no copy of that letter."

12. The judge went on to find in paragraph 18 that the  appellant  did  not
    write to the Home Office to  inform  them  of  his  change  in  contact
    address.  She found that he had had plenty  of  opportunity  to  do  so
    given that his college's licence was revoked in June 2014.  There was a
    form which could be completed to inform the Home Office of a change  of
    address or it could be done on line.  The appellant did neither.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13. On 6 May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge gave  her  reasons  for
    granting the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

         "It is apparent on the face of the decision in the bundle that  the
         judge appears to overlook the documentary evidence  supporting  the
         representative's  submissions  and  the  oral   evidence   of   the
         appellant.  It is arguable that the judge  reached  his  conclusion
         without regard to the evidence and if he had  taken  that  evidence
         into account he may have come to a different conclusion"

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

14. Mr Melvin of  Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled  a  Rule  24  response
    opposing the appeal on the ground  that,  after  checking  Home  Office
    systems, no  change  of  address  letter  or  correspondence  could  be
    located.  The appellant's address was not changed in  the  Home  Office
    records until 12 May 2015.

15. However, at the hearing before me Mr Whitwell accepted that  the  judge
    made a clear error in stating that no change of address letter had been
    produced in evidence, when in fact it clearly had been.

16. There is a copy of the letter of 8 September 2014  in  the  appellant's
    bundle which the appellant relied on as showing that  he  had  notified
    the Home Office that future correspondence should be addressed  to  him
    at his home address, and not to the college address.

17. Mr Whitwell said he did not dispute that the judge's error was material
    in that the outcome of the appeal might  have  been  different  if  the
    judge had taken into account the documentary evidence at pages  14  and
    15 of the appellant's bundle. As I informed the parties at the hearing,
    I agree with Mr Whitwell's concession and I find that an error  of  law
    is made out and that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should  be
    set aside.

The Remaking of the Decision

18. Both Mr Whitwell and Mr Mannan were content that I  should  remake  the
    decision on the evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
    Whitwell accepted that if the evidence relied on was taken at its  face
    value, the appeal should succeed on common law unfairness grounds,  and
    the appellant should be issued with  a  60  day  letter.   However,  he
    identified two reasons for not taking the evidence at its  face  value.
    The first was that the appellant had not produced the original  of  the
    post office receipt at page 15 of the bundle.  Secondly, the letter  of
    8 September 2014 was in a different typeface from the letter which  the
    appellant had sent on 30 August 2014  in  response  to  a  Home  Office
    letter of 8 August 2014.

19. I consider that both concerns raised  by  Mr  Whitwell  are  legitimate
    ones.  In addition, in the grounds of  appeal  the  appellant  did  not
    specify that he had informed the Home Office in writing by letter dated
    8 September 2014 of his change of address.  As he was able to produce a
    copy of the letter for the purposes of the appeal hearing, he must have
    had a copy of the same letter in his possession  when  formulating  the
    grounds of appeal. So it was bizarre not to refer to it.

20. However,  the  appellant  does  not  have  to  prove  his  case  beyond
    reasonable doubt, but only on the balance of probabilities.   Moreover,
    the appellant was cross-examined  at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and so there was an opportunity at that stage to explore  any
    outstanding concerns about the reliability of the documentary  evidence
    at pages 14 and 15 of the appellant's bundle.

21. In conclusion, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the
    appellant notified the Home Office of his  change  of  address  by  the
    letter of 8 September 2014 which was posted to the Home Office on  that
    date, and thus the sole ground for resisting his appeal has gone.   The
    appellant discharged the duty to keep the Home Office informed  of  his
    correct address, and the Home Office thus sent the 60 day letter to the
    wrong address.

22. By not providing the appellant with a 60 day letter in accordance  with
    her published policy,  the  Secretary  of  State  acted  unlawfully  in
    refusing the application for leave to remain on the false premise  that
    she had provided the appellant with a 60 day letter, when in  fact  she
    had not.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
contained an error of law, and accordingly the decision  is  set  aside  and
the following decision is substituted: this appeal is allowed on the  ground
the decision appealed against was not in accordance  with  the  law  as  the
respondent failed to provide the appellant with a 60 day  letter  so  as  to
enable the appellant to vary his application before a decision was  made  on
his original application.

I make no anonymity direction.






Signed                              Date 14 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
