

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19659/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 19th December 2014                        |On 11th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Victoria Ayele Kanlow Commodore
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:            Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms Darko, BWF Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Ghana date of birth 4th June  1974.  On
    the 12th August 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge North) allowed  her
    appeal against a decision to refuse to issue her  with  residence  card
    confirming her right to reside in the UK as the family member of an EEA
    national. The Secretary of State now has permission to  appeal  against
    that decision.


 2. The Respondent's case was that she was married to a Dutch national,  Mr
    Alexandra Takyi. They had been married by proxy according  to  Ghanaian
    customary law. In the alternative it was her case that as she was in  a
    durable  relationship  with  Mr  Takyi,  her  application  fell  to  be
    considered under Regulation 8.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept that the marriage was  valid,  or
    that there was sufficient evidence to find  that  this  was  a  durable
    relationship.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal made findings of fact that this  is  a  genuine
    relationship.  Having regard to the expert evidence before it  as  well
    as the findings of the Upper Tribunal in  NA  (Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce - Evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was satisfied that their proxy customary marriage was considered lawful
    in Ghana and the appeal was allowed on that basis.

 5. The grounds of appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider whether the proxy customary marriage  was  recognised  by  the
    Dutch authorities. In accordance with the Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Kareem (proxy marriage  -  EU  law)   [2014]  UKUT  24  applicants  are
    required to show that their marriages are considered valid in  the  EEA
    country that they are claiming their free movement rights from.



    Error of Law

 6. For the Respondent Mr Darko accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal  has
    failed to address the Kareem point, and no findings have been  made  as
    to whether the Dutch authorities would  recognise  this  marriage.  The
    decision must to that extent be set aside, although the parties are  in
    agreement that the findings of fact, that this marriage  is  recognised
    in Ghana and that it is a genuine durable relationship, must stand.




    The Re-Made Decision

 7. Mr Darko  relies  on  evidence  that  was  all  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. He has produced the extracts from the Dutch Civil  Code  that
    were before  the  Tribunal  in  Kareem.   Although  these  prima  facie
    indicate that such marriages  are  recognised,  the  Tribunal  did  not
    consider these bare materials sufficient to  make  a  positive  finding
    that Ghanaian proxy marriages are recognised by Dutch  Law:  there  was
    for instance no direct evidence from the Dutch authorities or an expert
    about how these provisions were applied.  In this case Mr Darko  has  a
    letter from the  Dutch  embassy  in  London.  The  writer,  M  Zegwaari
    confirms as follows:


         "the recognition of marriages contracted outside the Netherlands is
         governed by articles 10:31 to 10:34 of the  Dutch  Civil  Code.  An
         English summary of the relevant parts is given in paragraphs 27 and
         28 of the Upper Tribunals' decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU
         law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)".


    R Zegwaari  adds  that  the  embassy  will  only  make  a  more  formal
    declaration in respect of a specific  marriage  in  the  context  of  a
    passport application.


 8. I am satisfied on a balance of  probabilities  that  this  marriage  is
    recognised by the Dutch authorities. That it is so is set down  in  the
    Dutch Civil Code and  that  this  is  applied  as  it  reads  has  been
    confirmed by R Zegwaari of the Dutch embassy.


 9. In the  alternative  I  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    challenged the findings that this  was  a  genuine  relationship.  This
    couple have been together in excess of two years. As such Ms  Commodore
    also qualifies as an extended family member under Regulation 8. If  the
    Secretary of State does not accept the evidence from the Dutch  embassy
    she will no doubt wish to  exercise  her  discretion  under  Regulation
    17(4)(b) and consider whether to grant her a residence permit  on  that
    basis.


      Decisions


10. I make no direction as to anonymity.


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.


12. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:


    "the  appeal  is  allowed  with  reference  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006"






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              7th March 2015
