
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19541/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st April 2016                             |On 27th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Corben, Counsel, instructed by Samuel Ross
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1982.  On 1 November
    2013 she made an application to vary her leave to remain on  the  basis
    of having  completed  10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   That
    application was refused in a decision dated 3 April 2014.   A  decision
    was also made to remove her under Section 10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson  ("the  FtJ")  on  24  August  2015
    whereby the appeal was allowed, on a limited basis, such  as  to  allow
    the respondent to consider the  new  basis  upon  which  the  appellant
    sought to be entitled to remain in the UK.

 4. Although the appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  10
    years' continuous lawful residence, it was concluded by the  respondent
    that her lawful leave  ended  on  30  November  2011,  when  her  leave
    expired.  An appeal against the decision to refuse leave to remain  had
    been dismissed on 2 May 2012 and her onward appeal was dismissed by the
    Upper Tribunal on 23 August 2012,  with  the  result  that  her  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 12 September 2012.  Her continuous  leave  was
    deemed to have ended on 12 September 2012 at that point.   That  appeal
    was  also  dismissed  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The FtJ in the appeal which is before me recorded that the  grounds  of
    appeal against the respondent's decision were to the  effect  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules and otherwise
    not in accordance with the law,  that  a  discretion  under  the  Rules
    should have been exercised  differently,  and  that  the  decision  was
    unlawful as being incompatible with the appellant's  rights  under  the
    ECHR.  Reference was made in  the  grounds  to  medical  facilities  in
    Nigeria in relation to a health condition  (unspecified  in  the  FtJ's
    decision).  The FtJ also referred  to  the  grounds  stating  that  the
    appellant is an extended family member of an EEA national, in that  the
    appellant's brother was married to  an  EEA  national  with  indefinite
    leave to remain ("ILR").

 6. At [11] in the  FtJ's  decision  it  is  stated  that  the  appellant's
    representative invited the FtJ to take into account "fresh information"
    regarding the appellant's adopted child, said to be a British  citizen.
    It was argued that the appellant was able to succeed under Appendix FM,
    or alternatively under Regulation 15A(4A) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 7. In her findings the FtJ found that the appellant did not have 10 years'
    continuous lawful residence because the "clock stopped" on 30  November
    2011 and her continuous  lawful  residence  was  therefore  only  eight
    years, not 10.

 8. She recorded at [17] that by the time the appeal came  before  her  the
    focus of the appeal had "shifted completely".  There was little  or  no
    reliance on the appellant's  health  issues  and  no  reliance  on  her
    position as an extended family member of  an  EEA  national.   The  FtJ
    stated that she was asked instead to consider that  the  appellant  had
    "become" the mother of a 10 year old boy, JO.  She  made  a  number  of
    findings about that late change in position.

 9. She stated that she had not been given a satisfactory explanation as to
    why the appellant  or  her  representative  neglected  to  provide  any
    information about the existence of the child she regards as her son, at
    any point prior to the hearing.   Although  the  appellant's  statement
    refers to her becoming the adoptive mother of JO on  7  November  2005,
    the appellant had not at any time previously mentioned  her  status  as
    the mother of a child who is  a  British  citizen.   Although  she  had
    provided evidence of a private adoption agreement, it was not clear  as
    to why this was not provided until after the  refusal  of  the  present
    application.  The FtJ noted that the agreement was undated and she said
    that she could  see  very  little  other  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant had assumed a role of a responsible adult and mother of  this
    child since 2005.

10. At [20] she questioned why the parents of the child would wish  her  to
    take on the role of the adoptive parent in 2005, when she  was  in  the
    United Kingdom in a temporary capacity as a student and  her  intention
    was to return to Nigeria.

11. The contention that the appellant and JO had lived at the same  address
    since 2005 was at odds with  some  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant, of which examples were given by the FtJ.

12. At [22] she stated that the real difficulty with  the  evidence  was  a
    lack of information showing that the appellant had indeed provided  the
    role of adoptive mother to a 10 year old British  citizen  since  2005.
    No evidence was provided with the original application submitted to the
    respondent.  Although there was a letter from a  deputy  head  teacher,
    there was no indication as to whether the appellant had recently become
    the carer of that child,  who  was  registered  at  the  school  on  29
    September 2014.  There was no evidence from his earlier school  or  any
    other  educational  institution  which  showed  the   length   of   her
    involvement.  The FtJ also noted that there  was  no  information,  for
    example, to show that she  was  registered  with  a  GP  as  the  adult
    responsible for the child's care.  There was no evidence  to  show  who
    was receiving child benefit payable for the  child's  care.   A  recent
    letter from the Church did not state how long the child had been viewed
    as the appellant's adopted child.

13. With reference to evidence given by the appellant at the  hearing,  the
    FtJ stated that she found it implausible that the appellant  would  not
    know of the whereabouts of  JO's  siblings  or  their  current  school.
    Although there was reliance on a Child Arrangements Order in the Family
    Court, the FtJ expressed herself not satisfied that the  appellant  had
    been straightforward regarding the real reasons  or  motivation  behind
    the  production  of  a  private  adoption  agreement   or   the   Child
    Arrangements Order made in the Family Court.  She stated that  she  was
    not provided with any of the reports  submitted  to  the  Family  Court
    which led to the order.  She found that the appellant had not  given  a
    plausible explanation regarding the whereabouts of the siblings of  JO,
    or their care, and  she  stated  that  she  questioned  what  the  real
    arrangements and motivations were for seeking a court order.  She noted
    that the appellant and JO's mother are cousins.  She noted that CAFCASS
    reports were not disclosed to her, the FtJ.

14. At [26] she stated that her initial conclusion, taking all the evidence
    in the round, is that this  is  not  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental
    responsibility.   She  stated  that  she   had   been   provided   with
    insufficient evidence to show the living arrangements of this child  in
    the past and she did not know  what  information  was  put  before  the
    Family Court.  Crucially, she stated that in  the  absence  of  further
    evidence the motivation for the provision  of  the  Child  Arrangements
    Order was simply to enable the appellant to  make  an  application  for
    further leave to remain as the parent of a British citizen  child,  who
    has lived in the UK for a period in excess of ten years.

15. At [27] she said that the information she had been given, together with
    additional  information  regarding  the  history  of  the   appellant's
    relationship with JO, should have  been  submitted  to  the  respondent
    prior to the late stage it was disclosed.  She said that  although  she
    had expressed real concerns about whether this is a genuine transfer of
    parental responsibility it was still a matter  which  should  be  fully
    considered by the respondent. Accordingly, she found that there  was  a
    still a decision to be made regarding the best interests of the  child,
    stating that she was concerned that she had little information  on  the
    wishes and desires of the  child,  arrangements  for  him  to  see  his
    parents and the level of contact he has with his siblings.

16. She stated that her findings conflict with the decision of  the  Family
    Court but this conflict arises from a lack of information regarding the
    background circumstances and a concern that the appellant has not  been
    straightforward.

17. Ultimately therefore, she  concluded  that  the  respondent  should  be
    afforded a full opportunity to consider the completely different  facts
    with supporting documents.  As to disposal, she stated that she allowed
    the appeal "to the extent that the  Appellant's  current  circumstances
    and those of her adopted child be considered by  the  Respondent",  and
    that  the  appellant  should  provide  all   reports   and   supporting
    correspondence to the respondent within 21 days of her decision.

18. The respondent's grounds before me, albeit briefly, contend that  there
    was nothing unlawful in the respondent's decision of 3 April 2014.   In
    the light of the lack of reliable evidence, it is  contended  that  the
    FtJ could only have dismissed  the  appeal  and  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to make further representations to the Secretary of State.

19. Mr Staunton relied on the grounds, submitting that the FtJ should  have
    made the decision herself rather than deciding  that  the  respondent's
    decision was unlawful.

20. Mr Corben made reference to a 's.120' notice, which  it  was  submitted
    allowed the appellant to raise the issue of the adopted  child  at  any
    time up to the hearing before the FtT.

21. Although it was contended that the grounds of appeal to the FtT  raised
    this issue, I am not satisfied from the information put before me  that
    that is the case.  The original grounds of appeal to the FtT appear  to
    have been faxed with the notice of  appeal  on  23  April  2014.   They
    contain no reference to any argument in relation to the appellant being
    a parent of an adopted child.  It is true to say that  the  appellant's
    bundle at pages 7 - 10 contains a document headed "Grounds of  Appeal",
    raising this argument, but I am not satisfied that that is  in  fact  a
    copy of the original grounds.  As I say, the notice of appeal is  dated
    23 April 2014, which is the date of the  faxed  grounds  which  do  not
    include any reference to an adoptive child.

22. Nevertheless, for present purposes I am prepared to accept  that  there
    is no time limit on the provision of information pursuant  to  a  s.120
    notice, for the reasons advanced on behalf of the appellant before  me.
    In that case, the matter was therefore properly before the FtT  in  any
    event.

23. Mr Corben submitted that whilst the FtJ had doubts about the quality of
    the evidence, she was aware of the Family Court order and was conscious
    that the information before her was not the same  as  that  before  the
    Family Court.  The Secretary of State had not considered  s.55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, or the best interests of
    the child.  The FtJ had the option, it was submitted, of  finding  that
    there was no genuine relationship and could have dismissed  the  appeal
    on that basis.  Equally, she was entitled to conclude that although not
    unlawful at the date of the decision,  the  respondent's  decision  was
    nevertheless not in accordance with the law.

    My assessment

24. The relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules which appears  to  have
    been the basis of the appeal before the FtJ is  that  at  Appendix  FM,
    Section R-LTRPT, that is the requirements for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    parent.  Those requirements include those under E-LTRPT.2.3  which  has
    as one of its features that  the  applicant  must  have  sole  parental
    responsibility for the child as one of the options, or that  the  child
    normally lives with the applicant and not with their other  parent  who
    is a British citizen or settled  in  the  UK.   Under  E-LTRPT.2.4,  an
    applicant must provide evidence that they  have  either  sole  parental
    responsibility for the child, or that the  child  normally  lives  with
    them, again as one of the options for meeting the requirements  of  the
    Rules.  The applicant must also provide evidence that they are  taking,
    and intend  to  continue  to  take,  an  active  role  in  the  child's
    upbringing.

25. Although the FtJ did not refer to those specific  requirements  of  the
    Rules, and before me there was only limited reference to the Rules,  it
    seems to me that those are the relevant requirements.  In any event, it
    is plain from the FtJ's reasons, which I have recited, that she was not
    satisfied with the evidence that she had been  provided  with  such  as
    would demonstrate that the appellant met the requirements of the  Rules
    for leave to remain as a parent.  Many and varied reasons are given  by
    the FtJ for her views in  that  regard.   She  evidently  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that she is the adoptive parent of JO,  at  least  in
    reality.  At [26] she stated that her initial conclusion having  regard
    to all the evidence was that this was not a not a genuine  transfer  of
    parental responsibility.  She concluded that  the  motivation  for  the
    provision of the Child Arrangements Order  was  simply  to  enable  the
    appellant to make an application for further leave  to  remain  as  the
    parent of a British citizen child.

26. In those circumstances, it is apparent that the FtJ was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant had sole responsibility for  the  child,  or  indeed
    that she is taking and intends to continue to take an  active  role  in
    the child's upbringing.  On that basis the appellant was  not  able  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules.

27. This was not  a  case  therefore,  where  information  was  before  the
    respondent at the time of the decision in relation to a child which the
    respondent failed to have regard to, and to make a decision in  respect
    of.  Even if that were the case, it is clear from the  decision  in  AJ
    (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1191  that  in  circumstances  where  the  respondent  has  not   given
    consideration to the best interests of a  child,  the  Tribunal  should
    nevertheless go on to deal with the matter itself in any event,  rather
    than concluding that the decision is not in accordance with the law.

28. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in
    effectively remitting the matter to the respondent for consideration of
    the evidence which she herself did not find  to  be  satisfactory.   In
    fact,  the  FtJ  did  not  express  herself  as  concluding  that   the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law, although  she
    did allow the appeal to a limited extent and from which that conclusion
    could be interpreted.

29. In any event, for the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the FtJ
    erred in law in allowing the appeal in the light of  her  findings.  In
    the circumstances, I set aside the decision of the FtT

30. Mr Corben intimated that there was a further bundle  of  evidence  that
    was not before the  FtJ,  but  indicated  that  its  contents  are  not
    materially different  from  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtJ.
    Although he said that "theoretically" the further evidence could affect
    the FtJ's findings, if a material error of  law  was  found  there  was
    likely to be limited scope for an outcome other than  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed.

31. Having set aside the decision of the FtJ, I cannot see  that  there  is
    any basis upon which to have a further hearing to make further findings
    of fact. There is no complaint by either side in relation to the  FtJ's
    findings, and those findings are not infected by the error of law.

32. That being the case, having set aside the FtJ's decision, I re-make the
    decision in line with the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  FtJ,  and
    accordingly dismiss the appeal.

    Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  I  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity. This is in order to protect the  identity  of  the  child
referred to in these proceedings.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant, the child, or any  member  of
their families.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 27/05/16
