
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/19312/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13 May 2015                                |On 15 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                           The Hon Mr Justice Edis
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          emmanuella funmi ogazuma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance or representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  against
    the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  who,  by  a
    determination promulgated on 15 December 2014, allowed  the  appeal  of
    this claimant against the removal decision made under Section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The issue at  the  heart
    of the appeal was whether or  not  the  claimant  had  established  ten
    years' continuous residence in the United Kingdom such  as  to  qualify
    for leave to remain under the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Secretary  of
    State submitted that that period of continuous residence had  not  been
    accumulated  because  an  application  lodged  at  some  stage  in  her
    immigration history during  her  period  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom had been rejected as invalid.  The judge heard submissions  and
    evidence about that issue and made a clear finding of fact at paragraph
    5 of his determination that he did not accept that the  application  in
    2007 categorised by the Secretary of State as invalid was that at  all.



2.   Today the claimant does not appear and is not represented  and  it  has
    been established that that is because notice of  the  hearing  had  not
    been received by her or by her legal representative.  However, in  view
    of what we say next, no purpose would be  achieved  in  adjourning  the
    hearing to enable them to attend.

3.    Mr  Duffy,  who  appears  for  the   Secretary   of   State,   accepts
    realistically that if the finding at paragraph 5 of  the  determination
    whereby the judge did not accept that the  2007  application  could  be
    regarded as invalid stands undisturbed, there is no basis upon which he
    can challenge the outcome of this determination unless  he  is  granted
    leave to amend his grounds.  Again realistically and entirely  properly
    he makes no such application and on that basis the determination is one
    that does not disclose material legal error we dismiss  the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal and direct that the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing Ms  Ogazuma's  appeal,  is
to stand.



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

Date 14 May 2015

