
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/19185/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 August 2014                                |On 05th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ms anitha velda jeffers
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Blundell, Counsel instructed by Makka
Solicitors Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") appeals to the Upper Tribunal from  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  A.J.  Parker  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 24 April 2014) allowing the claimant's  appeal  against
    the decision by the SSHD on 9 May 2013 to refuse to issue  her  with  a
    derivative residence card on the basis that she  was  a  third  country
    national upon whom her British citizen  daughter  (born  in  2006)  was
    dependent in the UK.

 2. The application was made on 13 December 2011. By the time of  decision,
    the appellant was pregnant with a second  child  by  the  same  British
    citizen father.

 3. The application was refused under Regulation 15A on the ground that the
    father, Mr Hall, was an exempt person who was able to  care  for  their
    daughter, and she had not  shown  that  her  removal  would  force  her
    daughter to leave the EEA.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the hearing Judge Parker received oral evidence from  the  appellant
    and Mr Hall.  In  his  subsequent  determination,  he  found  that  the
    appellant did not live with Mr Hall, but had moved out of his  parental
    home in December 2012 due to the  cramped  conditions  there.  Mr  Hall
    continued to live with his parents, and  he  had  four  other  children
    (including two  minors  aged  12  and  14)  who  lived  elsewhere.  The
    appellant had recently given birth to their second  child,  Alayna.  It
    was clear to the judge that Mr Hall  was  not  the  children's  primary
    carer, and if she left the UK, he would be unable and unwilling to look
    after them. He worked irregular hours as an electrician, and strove  to
    maintain  his  relationship  with  his  four  children  by  a  previous
    relationship. It was  not  possible  that  he  could  discontinue  this
    employment, become dependent on the state, and become the primary carer
    of his children by the appellant:

         The youngest child is still being breast fed and is four months old
         so there is no realistic prospect that this is a possibility.

 5. The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15A, and so had established a derivative right of residence.
    He went on to conduct a best interests assessment, and found  that  the
    appellant's removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  the
    family life of her and her partner and the two young children.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The SSHD applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    arguing that the judge had failed to have proper regard  to  Regulation
    15A(4A)(c) which required that the relevant British citizen  should  be
    unable to reside in the UK or in another  EEA  state.   The  judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding inability on  the  part  of
    the sponsor to care for the children as opposed to mere  unwillingness.



 7. The SSHD also appealed on the ground that the judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to apply Gulshan when considering the Article 8 claim.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 8. On 5 June 2014 Judge  White  refused  the  SSHD  permission  to  appeal
    against the finding under Article 8, but granted the SSHD permission to
    appeal on the question whether the judge had made an error  of  law  in
    concluding that "the child" would be unable to  reside  in  the  UK  or
    another EEA state as a consequence of the appellant's removal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Bramble  referred  me  to  MA  and  SM
    (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013]  UKUT  00380  (IAC),  in
    which the UT dismissed the appeal of one of the claimants (SM)  on  the
    ground that inability to reside was not made out, but allowed the  same
    claimant's appeal under Article 8. He agreed that the UT's approach was
    not helpful to the error of law challenge in respect of Judge  Parker's
    Article 8 finding, and he confirmed  that  he  was  not  pursuing  this
    challenge.

10. With regard to Regulation 15A(4A),  Mr  Blundell  referred  me  to  his
    skeleton argument before the FTT and  to  Hines  v  London  Borough  of
    Lambeth [2014] Civ 660 where Vos LJ at paragraph  [21]  held  that  the
    judge below had rightly taken into account the welfare of the child and
    had rightly directed  himself  that  the  circumstances  of  compulsion
    varied from case to case. The Court of Appeal found no error of law in,
    and  indeed  approved,  the  reasoning  of  the  judge  below  on   the
    application of Regulation  15A(4A)  to  the  facts  of  the  case.  His
    reasoning is set out at [10]:

         I am satisfied...that the Appellant is  entitled  to  accommodation
         only if Brandon would be effectively compelled to leave the  United
         Kingdom if she left. However,  what  amounts  to  circumstances  of
         compulsion may differ from case to case. The welfare and individual
         physical and emotional needs and circumstances of the child have to
         be considered. Those circumstances may  include  the  impact  which
         separation from the primary carer would  have  on  the  child.  The
         younger and more dependent the child, the more likely  it  is  that
         the child would also have to leave.

Discussion

11. While it is open to argument whether the inability test  was  met  with
    regard to the oldest child, it is beyond argument that it  was  met  in
    the case of the youngest child. Alayna was only four  months  old,  and
    she was still being breast fed. So removal of the appellant would  mean
    that Alayna would have to go with her,  and  she  would  be  unable  to
    reside with her father in the UK or another EEA state.

12. In SM's appeal, the children had been born in 2004 and 2007.  Thus  the
    mere fact that the sponsor could not be as economically  active  as  he
    would wish, because of his  care  responsibilities  to  them,  was  not
    sufficient to support the conclusion that  they  would  be  denied  the
    genuine enjoyment of their EU rights if the refusal of entry  clearance
    to the mother and to FM (born in 2007, and residing  in  Thailand  with
    his mother) was maintained.

13. The situation of the youngest child here is completely  different  from
    that of SM's children, and this explains the  different  outcome.   The
    judge has applied the correct law, and has given adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant qualified for a derivative residence card at
    the date of the hearing before him.







Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands. The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.








Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

