
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19336/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2015                              |On 27 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE MALES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        FATMATA ROSELYN DORCAS ALLEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Samuel Ross
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  with  the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker from a determination dated 5  December
    2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Samini which allowed the appeal of Ms
    Fatmata Allen against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    letter dated 18 April 2014 to  remove  her  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal allowed Ms Allen's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules  holding  that  she  satisfied  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and also allowed  her  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Ms Allen is a national of  Sierra
    Leone. She was born on 7 May 1979. She lived in Sierra  Leone  for  the
    first 22 years of her life at which point she came to this country on a
    student visa. That was in August 2002. The visa was valid until October
    2004. Extensions were granted until 26 February 2007 on which date  she
    applied for leave to remain  as  a  dependent  relative  but  that  was
    refused on 20 July 2007.

 3. On 30 September 2010 she applied for leave to remain on ten  year  long
    residency grounds but that was  refused  on  21  October  2010.  On  21
    September 2013 she applied for leave to remain outside the  Rules.  She
    was served with notice of liability to administrative removal. She  was
    found by the Secretary of State to have remained in the United  Kingdom
    illegally for over six  years.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  her
    application in a letter dated 18 April 2014.

 4. The refusal letter determined that  Ms  Allen  failed  to  satisfy  the
    requirements set out in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules,  those  being
    the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of private  life.  The  Rule  in  force  at  the  date  of  her
    application and at the date of the refusal letter provided as follows:

         "1.  The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application the applicant

             (vi) subject to subparagraph (ii) is aged 18 years  or  above,
                  has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less  than  twenty
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which she would have to go if required to leave
                  the UK."

 5. That was the Rule which the Secretary  of  State  determined  Ms  Allen
    failed to satisfy. The refusal letter said that although Ms  Allen  may
    not  have  lived  continuously  in  Sierra  Leone  since  2002  it  was
    considered that she had resided there for the majority of her life  and
    it was not accepted that she had severed  all  ties  including  social,
    cultural and family ties with Sierra Leone.

 6. The findings of the First-tier Judge were  as  follows.  Ms  Allen  had
    studied in the United Kingdom. She has two uncles living here who  have
    supported her financially. She no longer has any  relatives  living  in
    Sierra Leone. Her father was the only remaining relative living  there,
    apart from a sister whom I will mention in a moment,  and  he  died  in
    2012. Her mother had gone missing during the civil war. She  had  three
    sisters, one living in the United  States,  one  in  Malaysia  and  the
    youngest sister who was 18 years old at the time of  the  determination
    was about to leave Sierra Leone to join her sister in Malaysia.

 7. The First-tier Judge found that the evidence given   by  Ms  Allen  was
    credible, there were no inconsistencies in her  evidence  and  she  was
    consistent and genuine in saying that she had no  relatives  in  Sierra
    Leone apart from her 18 year old  sister  who  was  due  to  travel  to
    Malaysia that very week. The sister who was about to travel was said to
    be traumatised due to her father's health (at all events, that is  what
    the decision says, although we suspect that  this  is  a  typographical
    error for "death").

 8. The determination then continued :

         "I accept the appellant's oral evidence that she has no ties in her
         country of origin. I accept the appellant's oral evidence which has
         not been challenged before me to the effect that the appellant  has
         no social or cultural ties to  Sierra  Leone.  I  accept  that  the
         appellant satisfied the burden of proof to the required standard of
         balance of probability that she does  not  have  any  ties  to  her
         country of origin. The appellant has satisfied the requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) that she has no  ties  to  her  country  of
         origin."

 9. The judge then went on to consider the alternative case based on family
    and private life in the United Kingdom for the purpose of Article 8.

10. The sole ground of  appeal  which  has  been  argued  before  us  today
    concerning the question whether the appellant satisfied  the  Rules  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal applied the wrong Rule. The Rule which was
    in force at the date  of  the  application  and  the  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State was as we have already set out.  There  was  a  Rule
    change, however, which took effect in July 2014 which replaced the test
    of  "no  ties"  with  a  test  of  "very  significant   obstacles"   to
    integration. In the July 2014  version  of  the  Rules  paragraph  (vi)
    reads:

         "Subject to subparagraph (ii) is aged 18 years or above, has  lived
         continuously in the UK for less than twenty years (discounting  any
         period  of  imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

11. Although the explanatory memorandum to  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
    these  Immigration  Rules  states  that  this  wording   represents   a
    clarification  of  the  original  policy  intention,  rather   than   a
    substantive change, it seems to us  that  the  test  of  "no  ties"  is
    different from the test of "very  significant  obstacles".  It  is  not
    difficult to imagine a case where a person might  have  no  ties  to  a
    country or might no longer have ties to a country but  would  in  fact,
    because of their  personality  or  other  characteristics  or  material
    circumstances, face no real obstacles in integrating into  the  country
    in question.

12. The question which arises on this appeal, therefore,  is  what  is  the
    applicable version of the Rules. If the  "very  significant  obstacles"
    test applies it would be clear, as the  Secretary  of  State  contends,
    that this was not the test which the First-tier Judge applied. However,
    we accept Mr  Iqbal's  submission  on  behalf  of  Ms  Allen  that  the
    applicable test is that which applied at the date of  the  application.
    That is what the Rule says in its introductory words. That was also, as
    it happened, the Rule which applied at the date of the decision by  the
    Secretary of State which is the subject of Ms  Allen's  appeal,  albeit
    that a different test had been introduced by the time  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Because of the  difference  in  wording
    and substance,  we  do  not  think  it  can  be  said  that  the  "very
    significant obstacles" wording should inform or be applied to  the  "no
    ties" test which was there in the Rules before the July 2014 change.

13. The position, therefore, is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  applied
    the correct Rule. He made a finding which was a finding of fact that Ms
    Allen had no ties of any kind to Sierra Leone. He accepted her evidence
    about the absence of family ties. He also  accepted  specifically  that
    she had no social or cultural ties to Sierra Leone. It is true that she
    lived there for the first 22 years of her life of which  the  last  few
    years were as an adult but nevertheless we do not think  that  that  is
    such a powerful factor as to demonstrate that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge must have made an error of law in making  the  finding  which  we
    have set out above.

14. It follows that there is no error of law in the  determination  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal so far as the appeal under the Immigration Rules is
    concerned.

15. In those circumstances it is unnecessary to consider the position under
    Article 8. That alternative ground of appeal would only arise if  there
    is no right to remain within the Rules. We  will  simply  say  that  it
    appears, so far as that is concerned, that if we had taken a  different
    view on the position under the Immigration Rules there would have  been
    considerable force in  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal
    against that part of the First-tier Tribunal's determination. Mr  Iqbal
    realistically accepted this but as it is Ms Allen succeeds  within  the
    Rules and the appeal is therefore dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  no  errors  of  law
and stands.

Ms Allen's appeal remains allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 17 March 2015

Mr Justice Males

