
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19571/2013
                                                               IA/19584/2013
                                                               IA/19595/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |On 27th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     MK
                                     AK
                                     DK
                                     HK
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Abbott
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Manuel
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 12th September 2013.

Background

 2. The first Appellant is a 34 year old male  citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    second Appellant is  his  wife  and  the  third  Appellant  and  fourth
    Appellant are his two children.

 3. The first Appellant first entered the UK on 16th  September  2003  with
    student leave valid for  two  years  which  was  subsequently  extended
    until, on 29th December 2007. He applied for further  leave  to  remain
    under the international graduate scheme, and was refused but by then he
    had been offered employment as an accounts  assistant  with  Rizvi  and
    Company.  He returned to Pakistan on 12 February 2008 to apply for work
    for entry clearance as a work permit holder and  whilst  there  married
    his wife on 13th March 2008.  He was granted entry clearance  and  came
    to the UK on 22nd May 2008 and the second Appellant  joined  him  as  a
    work permit dependent on 17th October 2008.  The two children were born
    in the UK.

 4. On 30th April 2013 the Appellants submitted applications for  leave  to
    remain on the basis that they had established  Article  8  private  and
    family life in the UK and were refused on 3rd June 2013.

 5. The first Appellant  started  working  on  a  self  employed  basis  in
    February 2010, less than two years into his work  permit  visa,  having
    left there in March 2010.  The family left  the  UK  on  a  three  week
    holiday and on 2nd April 2010 returned on the work permit visa  in  the
    knowledge that the contract with the employer had been  terminated  and
    there was no longer any basis of stay in the UK since he had  not  been
    given any permission to work on a self-employed basis.

 6. The judge took into account the fact that there had been  deception  of
    immigration officials when the family returned to the UK.  There was no
    reason their private lives could not continue in Pakistan.  They  could
    maintain contact with their friends and  social  contacts  here.   They
    still had family in Pakistan and maintained ties there.  She took  into
    account Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009, cited the relevant case law and concluded that it  would  not  be
    disproportionate for the family to be returned.

 7. She took account of the fact that both children were very young and had
    not formed strong ties outside  the  family.   They  were  not  British
    citizens and would be returning with their parents to  the  country  of
    their nationality where all the extended family members live  including
    both sets of grandparents.  There was no reason  why  the  elder  child
    could not attend school in her own country.

 8. She then wrote:

         "Taking all factors into account I find that  the  Appellants  have
         failed  to  show  that  there  are  insurmountable   obstacles   to
         continuing private life in Pakistan."

 9. She concluded that it  was  reasonable  for  all  four  to  do  so  and
    dismissed the appeal.



The Grounds of Application

10. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in its  assessment  of  the  evidence  on
    credibility and secondly  had  erred  in  requiring  them  to  pass  an
    insurmountable difficulties test.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lewis on 17th October 2013 on
    the second ground only.

Submissions

12. Mr Hussain submitted that the judge had plainly applied the wrong test.
     Secondly, she had put undue emphasis on  the  Appellants'  immigration
    history and had failed to consider their substantial  private  life  in
    the UK which was not recognised in this determination, which was not as
    clear as it could have been and the effect of it was that, because  the
    family could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  they
    could not succeed on Article 8 grounds.

13. Mr Diwnycz submitted that there was no error and the decision ought  to
    stand.

Findings and Conclusions

14. This challenge amounts to a disagreement with the  decision.   Had  the
    judge made this decision  solely  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to continuing private life  in  Pakistan,  the
    challenge would have had more merit.  However, her conclusion was  that
    it was reasonable for them all to continue their  private  lives  there
    which, on the facts of this case, is unassailable. It was open  to  the
    judge to place some emphasis on the fact that the first Appellant chose
    to enter the UK at a point when he had no basis of stay here.

15. This is a family which has been in the UK for a temporary purpose, with
    no expectation of settlement. Most of their extended family  remain  in
    their country of nationality to which they  would  be  returning.   The
    decision that removal would not be  disproportionate  was  plainly  one
    open to the judge and will not  be  interfered  with  by  an  appellate
    Tribunal absent legal error.

Decision

There is no error in  this  determination  and  the  decision  stands.   The
Appellants' appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

