
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/19069/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at: Manchester              |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 4th August 2014                    |On: 8th August 2014      |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          MRS FRANCA NGUNAN ENWEREM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth 27th May 1982. She
    has permission to appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer dated 16th November 2012 to dismiss her appeal against the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to issue her with  a  residence  permit
    confirming her right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national.


 2. This appeal is determined on the papers before me at the request of the
    Appellant.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  made  directions  for  paper
    disposal on the 15th January 2013 and there has been  no  objection  to
    this course of action by the Respondent. I  initially  dealt  with  the
    matter on the papers in May 2013 and directed that the matter be stayed
    pending an Upper Tribunal decision on the  effect  of  proxy  marriage.
    There was then an unfortunate delay in having the matter re-listed  for
    which I apologise.


 3. The matter in issue was whether the Appellant had shown that she was in
    fact married to the EEA national  in  question,  Mr  David  Jorg  Costa
    Afonso, a  national  of  Portugal.    The  Appellant  had  submitted  a
    certificate of marriage issued by Mrs NJ Okuomo  Chioma,  Secretary  of
    the Mbaitoli Local Government "Artea" of Imo State, Nigeria.  This read
    "this marriage is conducted under the native  law  and  custom  of  Imo
    State at Mr Alexander Achigbe's compound at Umuowa, Ubomiri in Mbaitoli
    Local Government area of Imo State".   She  also  provided  a  document
    showing that an earlier customary marriage had been  dissolved  and  an
    affidavit from her father stating that  he  had  been  present  at  the
    ceremony of his daughter's marriage to Mr Costa Afonso.

 4. The Respondent had refused the application on the  grounds  that  proxy
    marriages are not universally recognized  under  UK  law  and  will  be
    accepted only if they are  recognized  as  valid  marriages  under  the
    issuing country's own law.  The refusal letter cited paragraph 24.23 of
    the Nigerian Country of Origin Information  Report  which  states  that
    proxy marriages are no longer considered valid under Nigerian  law.   I
    would only observe that I do not know how the Respondent  deduced  from
    the documents in her bundle that this was a proxy marriage; it  may  be
    that some documents have not been reproduced but there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that this was the case.

 5. When the matter came before Judge Colyer on  the  papers  Judge  Colyer
    referred to the spelling mistake of 'Artea' in the marriage certificate
    and found in strange that it should record  that  'both  parents'  gave
    consent to the marriage. On this  basis  Judge  Colyer  concluded  that
    there as doubt as to the validity of  the  certificate  and  placed  no
    weight upon it.  Judge Colyer adopted the Respondent's  submissions  on
    the validity of proxy marriages in Nigeria. The Judge directed  himself
    to the authorities of CB (Validity of Marriage: Proxy Marriage)  Brazil
    [2008] UKAIT 00080 and Apt v Apt [1947] P 127 which  provide  that  the
    recognition of proxy marriages are not contrary to public  policy,  and
    that such a marriage considered  valid  in  the  country  where  it  is
    contracted will be recognized in the UK per the doctrine  of  lex  loci
    celebrationis.  Judge Colyer then cited the COIR  to  the  effect  that
    Nigerian law no longer recognizes proxy marriages  and  on  that  basis
    dismissed the appeal.  He went on to deal with Article  8  but  in  the
    absence of any substantive  evidence  about  the  Appellant,  Mr  Costa
    Afonso  or  their  life  in  the  UK  considered  that  it   would   be
    proportionate to expect them to go and live in Nigeria.




 6. The grounds of  appeal  submit  that  the  determination  contains  the
    following error of law: the material in the COIR which  indicated  that
    proxy marriages are no longer considered valid in Nigeria only  related
    to civil matrimonial law, not customary marriage, which is governed  by
    native law and custom.

 7. The relevant paragraphs of the 2011 COIR are as follows:




         24.15  EveryCulture.com, in a section on marriage in its undated
         profile of the country accessed 18 March 2011, noted: ?"There are
         three types of marriage in Nigeria today: religious marriage, civil
         marriage, and traditional marriage. A Nigerian couple may decide to
         take part in one or all of these marriages. Religious marriages,
         usually Christian or Muslim, are conducted according to the norms
         of the respective religious teachings and take place in a church or
         a mosque. Christian males are allowed only one wife, while Muslim
         men can take up to four wives. Civil official weddings take place
         in a government registry office. Men are allowed only one wife
         under a civil wedding, regardless of religion. Traditional
         marriages usually are held at the wife's house and are performed
         according to the customs of the ethnic group involved. Most ethnic
         groups traditionally allow more than one wife." [104]

         24.16  The Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) undated
         profile for Nigeria, accessed 18 March 2011, stated: ?"There are
         three forms of marriage in the country: monogamous marriage
         registered under the civil marriage law, customary marriage, and
         Islamic marriage. In southern Nigeria, the minimum legal age for
         marriage is between 18 and 21 years of age, depending on the
         region; in the north it ranges from 12 to 15 years. In some
         regions, customary law allows girls to marry from the age of only
         nine years; such marriages are banned in two states, but remain
         common overall. The incidence of early marriage is high in Nigeria
         ..." [68]

         ...

         24.19  In an email from the British High Commission in Abuja to
         UKBA of 1 December 2008 it was stated that: "... Although proxy
         marriages are not recognised under Nigerian civil law, they are
         allowed under customary law." [2d]

         ...

         24.21  The United States State Department Reciprocity Schedule, in
         an undated section on ?marriage certificates in the country,
         recorded that: "... both parties to the marriage ?technically must
         be physically present at the same location with witnesses to sign
         ?certain marriage documents, proxy marriages have ceased to be
         valid but still occur." ?[3e]






 8. Although the determination  refers  to  paragraph  24.23  there  is  no
    reference to the preceding paragraphs which show  that  proxy  marriage
    conducted under customary law are still valid.  I am satisfied that the
    determination has failed to take material evidence into  account.   The
    evidence in the COIR indicates that such a marriage would be considered
    valid in Nigeria.


 9. The grounds of appeal do not address the comments made by the Judge  in
    respect of the certificate being "strange". The Judge  found  that  the
    spelling mistake in 'area' and the fact that the  parents'  consent  is
    recorded together "put such doubt as to the validity of  the  document"
    so he can place no weight upon it. The Respondent  had  not  challenged
    the veracity of this document. Had she done so it would have  been  for
    the Respondent to produce cogent evidence to show that the document was
    false. I am not satisfied that the document could be rejected  for  the
    reasons given in  the  determination.  There  may  be  perfectly  valid
    cultural reasons why the consent of both parties is recorded, or it may
    simply be the practice of Mrs Okuomo to record that fact.  That  leaves
    the spelling mistake. Had this been an official  document  produced  on
    behalf of the Nigeria state I would agree  that  such  an  error  could
    reveal falsity. However this document purports to be nothing more  than
    a certificate issued by  Mrs  Okuomo.  The  fact  that  it  contains  a
    spelling mistake is therefore  more  understandable.  I  note  that  an
    affidavit from the Appellant's father attesting to his presence at  the
    ceremony has gone unchallenged. In those  circumstances  the  Appellant
    has shown that she is married according to Nigerian customary law to Mr
    Costa Afonso.


10. There is however the matter of  whether  the  Appellant's  marriage  is
    recognized by Portugal. Since Judge Colyer promulgated his decision the
    Upper Tribunal has issued the guidance in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 00024(IAC): the burden is on  the  Appellant  to  show
    that her marriage is also recognized  by  the  Portuguese  authorities.
    In the absence of this  evidence  the  appeal  must  fail  because  the
    Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof.


    Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did contain an error such  that
    it is set aside.


12. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             4th August 2014
