
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd November 2014            |On 21st November 2014           |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                             MRS TASLEEM AKHTAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Patel, Counsel, instructed by Fawad Law
                  Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 14th August  1942.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18th September 2013 on a  valid
    visit visa.  The Appellant has remained in the United Kingdom  and  has
    applied for indefinite leave to remain as a  dependent  relative.   The
    Respondent refused the application on 3rd April 2014 and  on  the  same
    day made a decision to remove the Appellant under  Section  47  of  the
    2006 Act.

 2. By a determination promulgated on 28th July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McAll dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. The grounds for seeking to appeal against that decision  are  based  on
    the failure by the judge to disclose to the Appellant  emails  sent  to
    the Tribunal.  The full circumstances with regard to that are  set  out
    within paragraphs 5 to 7 of the determination.

 4. The Emails had been submitted to the Tribunal.  Those emails appear  to
    have been also in the possession of  the  Respondent.   The  Respondent
    indicated that no reliance was placed on  those  emails.   Judge  McAll
    determined that as there were no witnesses to the  emails  and  as  the
    truth or otherwise of the contents could not be ascertained he was  not
    going to take the emails into account.  However he  determined  not  to
    disclose the emails or the identity of the author to the  Appellant  or
    to the Appellant's representative.

 5. It is the Appellant's case that that failure  to  disclose  the  emails
    results in an allegation that the Appellant cannot be certain that  the
    information contained within such emails did  not  colour  the  judge's
    approach to the evidence. It is submitted  that  the  proceedings  were
    therefore procedurally unfair.

 6. At the hearing I asked the Appellant's representative to  identify  any
    finding of fact within the determination by the  judge  which  was  not
    soundly based upon the evidence that was  available  to  both  parties.
    The Grounds of Appeal do not challenge any of the factual basis for the
    judge's decision or allege that the contradictions and  inconsistencies
    noted by the judge were not clear on the evidence available.

 7. The only challenge is the failure to disclose and identify  the  author
    of the emails and the suggestion that there is  a  suspicion  that  the
    judge may have taken into account such materials.

 8. Courts every day have to deal  with  evidence  and  have  to  determine
    whether or not evidence is admissible or  inadmissible.   Courts  every
    day have to determine what if any evidence  can  be  disclosed  to  the
    parties on public  interest  immunity  applications.   There  are  very
    frequently  applications  for  non-disclosure  of  materials  by  third
    parties such as local authorities in child care proceedings not wishing
    to disclose information to criminal courts or tribunals.

 9. The present proceedings were governed by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  The 2005 Rules, Rule 43  specifically
    empowers the Tribunal to decide what procedure is to be followed in any
    appeal or application.

10. Rule 51 sub-paragraph 7 specifically states subject to Section  108  of
    the 2002 Act the Tribunal must not take account of  any  evidence  that
    has not been made available to all the parties.

11. In dealing with the emails the judge has at paragraph 5 having set  out
    the  facts  stated  that  he  has  not  referred  to  the  emails  when
    considering the evidence and the emails as such form  no  part  of  any
    consideration of the evidence  or  findings.   The  judge  goes  on  in
    paragraph 7 point out that further emails had been sent but  that  they
    also had been totally disregarded by him.

12. Detailed findings of fact have been made by the judge.

13. The judge firstly has dealt with the Appellant's medical condition.  He
    noted that the documentation disclosed now proves  that  the  Appellant
    had been receiving treatment not only for  diabetes  but  for  a  heart
    condition for several years.  When asked about it in  the  hearing  the
    Appellant had indicated that her heart  complaint  had  been  diagnosed
    lately in the United Kingdom.  She claimed that her  medical  condition
    had significantly deteriorated in the United Kingdom.  However  it  was
    clear and evident that she had had the heart problems for at least five
    years in Pakistan and she had been receiving medical treatment for such
    in Pakistan.  There was no evidence or at least no medical evidence  of
    any deterioration in her medical condition.

14. The judge also assessed the fact that  there  was  a  medical  note  to
    indicate that the Appellant was planning to fly abroad  accompanied  by
    family members and that it was suggested  she  was  not  fit.   However
    there was no evidence of her condition having deteriorated.  Indeed the
    letter from the NHS in Stockport on 10th December indicated that whilst
    the Appellant had attended  at  the  hospital  no  medicines  had  been
    dispensed at that stage.  The suggestion therefore  that  it  would  be
    detrimental to the Appellant's health was therefore not  made  out  and
    the judge was entitled to  make  that  finding  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence.

15. The judge was also entitled  to  make  the  finding  that,  whilst  the
    Appellant was seeking to suggest  that  her  problems  were  of  recent
    origin, such was not true as it was obvious that they had existed for a
    long time.  Indeed the Appellant appears to have been  a  diabetic  for
    some twenty years and to have been receiving treatment for her diabetes
    in Pakistan throughout the whole of that period of time.

16. The judge was entitled on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  presented  to
    conclude that there was no evidence that the Appellant's condition  had
    deteriorated and no reason why the Appellant could not continue to rely
    upon the treatment previously available in Pakistan.

17. The judge then has considered the witnesses' evidence and the  accounts
    given.   The judge on a careful analysis of the  accounts  found  again
    that the Appellant and the witnesses were not telling the  truth.   The
    Appellant had come to the United Kingdom and was  fit  enough  to  look
    after herself at that stage.  However the witnesses and  the  Appellant
    sought to claim that she required assistance one of their  number  from
    the first two or three weeks after she arrived in the  United  Kingdom.
    However that as the judge noted was at least six to  ten  weeks  before
    the  Appellant  and  the  witnesses  claimed  that  her  condition  had
    deteriorated.  Again the judge was satisfied that  the  witnesses  were
    unreliable and was accordingly fabricating the evidence to fit the case
    being put on behalf of the Appellant.

18. It was also noted that despite the fact that  the  Appellant  had  been
    only a visitor in September 2013 the evidence, that had been disclosed,
    showed that the Appellant had been registered  with  a  doctor  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2011.  The judge  was  clearly  mindful  that  the
    Appellant would not be entitled to be registered with  a  GP  save  and
    except in emergency situations.  That does not appear to have been  the
    case.  She was registered with the medical practitioners and had  a  UK
    NHS number.  Given that the Appellant was a visitor until 2013  at  the
    earliest she would not have been entitled to an NHS number in 2011.

19. The judge found on the evidence presented that as of the  date  of  the
    hearing that the Appellant was not in such condition as she  could  not
    return to Pakistan because of medical problems and was  satisfied  that
    she could resume her life there.

20. There had been a claim that the Appellant had no family to return to in
    Pakistan.  However again the judge has carefully examined the  evidence
    presented.  The judge found that at least one of the Appellant's  sons,
    a Mr Mozzam Hussain, was in Pakistan at the time that  the  application
    was made.  That information has come from  documentation  submitted  on
    behalf of  the  Appellant.  That  was  directly  contradictory  to  the
    evidence given by the Appellant and other witnesses, who was seeking to
    suggest that there was no warning Pakistan  to  look  after  her.   The
    judge was satisfied that the family knew that one member of the  family
    at least was still in Pakistan.

21. The judge has gone on to make specific findings  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was not reliable with regard to aspects of her case  including
    whether or not she had individuals in Pakistan upon whom she could rely
    for support and assistance.

22. With regard to financial support the judge has again gone on  to  refer
    to the Visa Application Form wherein the Appellant has stated that  she
    receives income from various sources from savings, from properties  and
    other sources rental income, as well as money  from  her  children  and
    friends.  The Appellant had stated in her application that she received
    monies from agricultural land.  The judge was satisfied therefore  that
    the suggestion that the Appellant was  totally  dependent  upon  family
    members in the United Kingdom was not true.

23. The Appellant had stated that her deceased  husband  had  been  a  farm
    labourer and that appears to have been confirmed by at least one of the
    Appellant's witnesses.  However when Mr Hussain came to  give  evidence
    he clearly explained that the father had been a farmer owning lands and
    that those estates had been sold and divided up between  the  children.
    The judge was satisfied that that was the true  picture  and  that  the
    Appellant and one of her  witnesses  was  clearly  seeking  to  give  a
    totally false picture of the Appellant's  circumstances  and  finances.
    The judge was therefore satisfied that the Appellant's credibility with
    regard to the financial circumstances could not be accepted.  The judge
    did not accept that the Appellant was financially  dependent  upon  her
    children in the United Kingdom.

24. The judge has gone on to make specific findings that there  were  other
    family members living in Pakistan including family  members  of  Mozzam
    Hussain and younger siblings of the Appellant.  In those  circumstances
    the judge concluded accordingly that the Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph  277C  or  276ADE  or  EX.1  or  any  of  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.

25. In a very detailed and careful determination the judge has pointed  out
    the inconsistencies and contradictions within the evidence.  The  judge
    has based his decision solely upon the evidence that was presented  and
    has given valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that he did.  The
    judge has clearly stated that he has not taken any account  of  the  e-
    mails and that they form no part of the determination.   There  was  no
    evidence of any materials within the e-mails being used either  by  the
    judge in the determination or by the Respondent  in  questioning.   All
    the materials upon which the  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  had
    been found were from evidence and documents that had been  provided  to
    the Appellant and to the Appellant's representative.

26. As a general point I would note that  frequently  letters,  e-mails  or
    other  information  are  received  in   forced   marriage   situations,
    potentially from females being forced into marriage. To deal with  such
    situations is never easy and it may require a  reference  by  the  Home
    Office to the Forced Marriage Unit. It is clear that the provisions  of
    the rules had been put in place to enable the Tribunal to  control  the
    procedure and determine  what  evidence  should  be  disclosed  to  the
    parties. Provided that  the  judge  has  not  relied  upon  undisclosed
    evidence in coming to a conclusion in a case, the rules permit a  judge
    to determine the procedure to be followed. There may be good reason not
    to disclose the identity of a third party. Provided the judge  has  not
    relied upon the evidence the judge can determine that it is appropriate
    not to disclose the evidence or the identity of the author

27. Taking the contradictions in the evidence and the inconsistencies I  am
    satisfied that no judge could have come to any  other  conclusion  than
    the Appellant and some of her witnesses were seeking to give  a  wholly
    false picture of the Appellant's circumstances.  In the light  of  that
    there was only one conclusion that could be reached in respect of  this
    appeal.

28. I find that there is no material error in law in the way that the judge
    dealt with the appeal.  Accordingly the decision to dismiss this matter
    on all grounds stands.

29. No anonymity direction made.



Signed        Date 20th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

