
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19370/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd August 2017                    |On 14th August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan , Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Chapman, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.   I
    make an anonymity direction  as  this  case  concerns  minor  children.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him, his spouse or  the  children.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The procedural history and background:

 3. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge MA  Khan)  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 29th  April  2016  allowed  his  appeal  both  under
    Appendix FM  and on human rights grounds (Article 8 outside the Rules).



 4. Whilst the Appellant in these proceedings is the  Secretary  of  State,
    for the sake of convenience I intend to refer to the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The Appellant's immigration history and the basis of his claim  is  set
    out within the determination at paragraph 18 of the  FTT  determination
    and in the decision letter issued by the Secretary of State.  It can be
    summarised briefly as follows.

 6. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He claims to have entered the
    United Kingdom avoiding immigration controls in 2002; he has never  had
    any substantive right to remain. In January 2011 he met  his  wife  and
    began cohabitation in the summer of 2011.  They  married  on  17  March
    2012.

 7. On the 12th of June 2012 he made an application for leave to remain  as
    the spouse of a British citizen on form FLR(M) . This was refused in  a
    decision letter of 26 November 2012 on the basis that the Appellant did
    not have limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom and did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 284 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    His case was also considered under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules
    and the Respondent concluded that the requirements of EX1 were not  met
    and that the Appellant was also not entitled to a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain based on his private life pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE.

 8. Judicial review proceedings were  brought  in  February  2013  and  was
    refused on the  papers  in  a  decision  dated  11  October  2013.  The
    application was renewed and the consideration at an oral hearing having
    been  transferred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber). At an oral hearing in April 2014 the case was adjourned and a
    further refusal decision was made on 18 June 2014. When the matter came
    before the Tribunal,  permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  was
    granted. After the grant of permission in judicial  review  proceedings
    the  hearing  was  adjourned  for  the  Respondent  to   consider   the
    Appellant's case once more. The Respondent  reconsidered  the  decision
    and issued a further refusal decision dated 8th of May 2015  which  was
    the decision which was the subject of the appeal before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In that  decision  the  Secretary  of  State  maintained  her
    decision but provided the Appellant with an in-country right of appeal.

 9. The appeal came before the First- Tier Tribunal (Judge MA  Khan)  at  a
    hearing on the 5th April 2016. In a determination  promulgated  on  the
    29th  April  2016  he  allowed   the   Appellant's   appeal.   In   the
    determination, he found that there were insurmountable obstacles family
    life outside of the United Kingdom and  therefore  allowed  the  appeal
    both under the rules (EX(1)(b) and outside of the Rules.

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle)  on  the
    6th October 2016.

11. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal  on  the  2nd
    February 2017 before Upper Tribunal Jordan.

12.  In a determination promulgated on 3rd  February  2017  Upper  Tribunal
    Jordan found an error of law. That decision is annexed to  the  present
    determination.

13. As can be seen  he  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he did not re-make the decision at the hearing as he  recorded
    that there could not be any finality and the remaking of  the  decision
    could await the birth of the  twins.  He  stated  at  paragraph  21  as
    follows;-

         "their birth clearly herald  the  necessity  on  the  part  of  the
         Appellant to reformulate his case on  Article  8  grounds  for  the
         purpose of it being remade  and  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         respond. This  may  require  a  further  decision  to  be  made  in
         consideration will have to be given to  whether  these  proceedings
         are now the right way forward. Second this will permit the  Supreme
         Court to deliver its judgement in Agyarko and others. The Appellant
         made no attempt to establish whether this is a case where he me met
         or meets the requirements for entry clearance as a spouse  and,  in
         accordance with Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40  and  the  numerous  cases
         that followed it, whether it is appropriate for him  to  return  to
         Sri  Lanka  to  regularise  his  stay  bearing  in  mind  his  poor
         immigration history. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  did  not  deal
         with this element."

14. Consequently the remaking of the decision was adjourned on that  basis.
    On 22 June 2017 a transfer  order  was  made  by  the  Deputy  Resident
    Principal Judge so that the appeal could  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal.

15. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 3rd August  2017  for
    the re-making of the decision.

The evidence:

16. For the  purposes  of  the  hearing,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  had
    indicated that the bundle that had been provided for the FTT was  still
    relevant and they provided a copy  of  the  index.  In  addition,  they
    provided a supplementary bundle under cover of a letter dated 28th July
    2017 which contained further evidence relied upon,  including  updating
    material from the Appellant and his wife and from other family members.
    There was also information provided concerning the birth of  the  twins
    and medical evidence.

17. The Respondent had produced a copy bundle of  documentation  which  had
    been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no  further  evidence  was
    produced.

18. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant, his wife, and mother in  law.
    His sister-in law was called but was not  cross-examined  similarly  Mr
    Tufan indicated he did not  take  any  issue  with  the  other  witness
    statements. There is  a  record  of  that  evidence  in  my  record  of
    proceedings and I shall refer to that evidence during  my  analysis  of
    the issues and conclusions reached.

The submissions:

19. I then heard a summary from each of the advocates. Mr  Tufan  made  the
    following submissions. He submitted that the factual circumstances  did
    not demonstrate that there were any "insurmountable obstacles" for  the
    family relocating  to  Sri  Lanka.  In  this  regard  he  directed  the
    Tribunal's attention to the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko
    and the particular factual circumstances in that case. He  stated  that
    the sponsor was a British citizen who had lived  all  his  life  United
    Kingdom and had employment and  whilst  they  were  difficulties,  they
    could not be described as "insurmountable obstacles". As the court  set
    out it is a "high test". The family  could  relocate  and  reside  with
    family who have a home there.

20. As to the birth of the twins, when considering either EX1(a) or section
    117(B) (6) there is no expectation for them to leave the United Kingdom
    and therefore the issue of reasonableness does not arise.

21. In respect of the guidance set out in paragraph 50 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, it was considered in the decision of SF but  on  the  facts  of
    that case there was no other  parents  look  after  the  children.  The
    guidance was an attempt to  implement  the  decision  in  Zambrano  and
    refers to a parent as a "primary carer". In this case there is  another
    parent who could look after the children.

22. In the alternative, it would be proportionate to require the  Appellant
    to seek entry clearance from abroad. In this case the  applicant  would
    have to show that he could succeed in any application. However  he  has
    not demonstrated  compliance  with  the  documentation  required  under
    Appendix FM-SE which relates to payslips and  bank  statements.  Whilst
    the Supreme Court in the decision of MM referred to flexibility  as  to
    evidence, there is insufficient evidence to show  the  application  was
    succeed. In any event, the burden is upon the Appellant to show why  it
    would be disproportionate to seek entry clearance although the case  of
    Chen did make reference to where there are children involved it may  be
    easier to show that it is  disproportionate.  There  are  other  family
    members who could assist the Appellant's wife while she remains in  the
    UK. Thus he submitted the appeal should be  dismissed  both  under  the
    rules and on Article 8 outside of the rules.

23. Ms Chapman had provided a skeleton argument setting out the Appellant's
    case and reference to the legal principles and relevant  case-  law  to
    this appeal. It is not necessary for me to set out the contents of that
    skeleton argument as it a matter of record. She supplemented it by  the
    following oral submissions.

24. As regards the decision of Agyarko, she reminded the Tribunal that  the
    facts of the case did not involve any relevant  children.  Here  it  is
    common ground that there are two young children. The court is  required
    to take into account their  best  interests  as  set  out  in  skeleton
    argument  and  are  relevant  to  the  issue  of  whether   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles. The decision of Agyarko at paragraph 45  made
    reference to the correct interpretation of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    as the "very serious  difficulties  in  continuing  their  family  life
    outside the UK, which could  not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship." In considering that test, the best interests and the
    circumstances of the children are a relevant consideration.

25. The decision in Agyarko also reinforced the decision in Chikwamba  (see
    paragraph 51 and paragraph 3.6 and 3.7 of the  skeleton  argument).  In
    this case the Appellant's wife has a history  of  full-time  employment
    and has set out her annual  salary  within  the  evidence.  Whilst  the
    documents necessary under Appendix FM-SE have not  been  set  out,  her
    circumstances are unusual at the present time as she  is  on  maternity
    leave and thus the bank statements would  not  adequately  reflect  her
    normal salary. In any  event,  documentary  evidence  had  been  placed
    before the Secretary of State at an early stage  in  these  proceedings
    and no issue had been taken as regards the financial requirements  (see
    page 188 onwards).  The  "Chikwamba"  issue  had  been  raised  in  the
    proceedings issued for judicial review. Initially the  application  was
    made under paragraph 284 of the immigration rules and whilst  Appendix-
    FM-SE now applies, at no stage has the Secretary of State  taken  issue
    with this aspect of the case.

26. The case of Chen had been raised by Mr Tufan however as can be seen  on
    the facts of this case, the "Chikwamba point" had  been  raised  at  an
    early stage. As to the decision of SF, it was a fact specific and there
    was only one parent caring for the child. Here it is not the  case  and
    thus the guidance does merit consideration. The wording of the guidance
    makes it plain that it also encompasses a two-parent family and  unless
    a parent falls within the bullet points then the appropriate course  is
    to grant leave to remain. The exclusions relate to  criminality  whilst
    he may be described as having a "poor immigration history"  it  can  be
    distinguished from a person who has deliberately  breached  immigration
    rules on more than one occasion. The guidance set out in the bundle  is
    that presently on the UKBA  website  and  relevant  the  date  of  this
    hearing. The court should be making its assessment on the facts and the
    evidence as they are today.

27. Miss Chapman submitted that the clear answer to this appeal is that the
    Appellant should succeed by reference to the  Immigration  Rules  under
    either EX1(a) and (b) or in the alternative  leave  should  be  granted
    outside the  rules  on  human  rights  grounds.  In  this  respect  the
    requirements of S117B (6) are  the  same  as  those  under  EX1(a)  and
    applying the decision in MA(Pakistan) the public interest under section
    117B (6) does not require the Appellant to leave. Thus she  invited  me
    to allow the appeal.

28. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.




    The appeal under Appendix FM

29. I shall consider the appeal based on the applicant's family life  under
    Appendix FM.

30. The Respondent's decision is that of the 8th May 2015. The Secretary of
    State began by considering the decision under the partner route and  as
    the Appellant and his partner had no children it was  found  that  they
    could not meet the requirements of EX 1 (a). It was  accepted  that  he
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner and that she
    was a British citizen. When considering the issue of whether there were
    "insurmountable  obstacles"  the  Secretary  of  State   consider   the
    seriousness of the difficulties that he and  his  wife  would  face  in
    continuing their family life outside the  UK  and  whether  they  would
    entail something that they  could  not  (or  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to) overcome even with a degree of  hardship.  In  particular,
    the Secretary  of  State  considered  the  medical  evidence  and  that
    relating to  the  issues  of  fertility.  However  there  was  evidence
    available that such medical treatment was available in  Sri  Lanka  and
    that the Appellant and his wife had not shown any reason why they would
    be unable to access such treatment in Sri Lanka. It was noted  that  he
    had met his partner in January 2011 that began cohabiting in the summer
    of 2011 were married on 17 March 2012. He had entered the UK  illegally
    in 2012 and thus  the  relationship  started  and  developed  the  full
    knowledge of his precarious immigration status. It was considered  that
    both he and his wife are fully aware  of  his  immigration  status  and
    would have been aware that he may not be able to continue  to  live  in
    the United Kingdom.

31. Whilst it was acknowledged that his wife had lived in the UK all of her
    life, it did not mean that she was unable to  live  in  Sri  Lanka.  No
    evidence had been provided to demonstrate that the  Appellant  and  his
    wife could not return to Sri Lanka or lawfully live there;  their  wish
    or preference to live in the UK would not amount to  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.

32. As to the issue of employment, the Appellant's spouse would be able  to
    benefit from using skills and qualifications obtained in the UK to gain
    employment. There was no explanation or  supporting  evidence  to  show
    that the spouse would be prevented from obtaining employment outside of
    the UK.

33. Whilst it was claimed that there may be  a  cultural  barrier  for  his
    spouse live in Sri Lanka and that some adjustment may be needed, it was
    not sufficient to amount to an "insurmountable obstacle". The Appellant
    faced a change of culture to live in the UK  was  not  unreasonable  to
    expect his wife to face such a change. No evidence  of  any  particular
    hardship in adjusting to life had been submitted and therefore  it  was
    considered  the  difference  in  culture  would  not   amount   to   an
    "insurmountable obstacle".

34. Lack of knowledge of language spoken in the country to which the couple
    would be required to live would not usually amount to an insurmountable
    obstacle. English is spoken by approximately 10% of the population  and
    is widely used for official and commercial purposes.

35. As to the decision outside of the immigration rules, the  Secretary  of
    State considered that there were no  "exceptional  circumstances"  that
    would mean removal was disproportionate, particularly having regard  to
    the precarious circumstances in which the relationship was  formed  and
    consideration  given  to  the  issues  of  fertility  but  it  was  not
    considered that they were "exceptional" and in the  circumstances,  the
    public interest in firm immigration control was at the forefront in the
    balance of interest in the present case such that the  removal  of  the
    Appellant was not considered to be disproportionate. Thus the Secretary
    of state refused the application.

Findings of fact:

36. My starting point is the determination of the FTT and the findings made
    in 2016. The judge had the opportunity to hear the oral  evidence  from
    the Appellant, his spouse and four other family and friends,  including
    the sponsor's mother, her two sisters and a friend of the  parties.  As
    the judge recorded at paragraph 37 that were also 11  other  statements
    and letters of support all of which were not the subject  of  challenge
    by the presenting officer. Indeed the only witnesses  who  were  cross-
    examined were the Appellant and his spouse. For the  purposes  of  this
    hearing, the evidence was also in the great part  unchallenged  by  the
    presenting officer. There was little cross examination of  any  of  the
    witnesses (either the Appellant,  his  spouse  or  mother-in-law).  The
    other witnesses who were present give oral evidence were  not  required
    to be cross-examined.

37. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  42  that  the
    Appellant's spouse was an "extremely credible witness, her evidence  is
    outstanding and could not be doubted in any way." He also recorded that
    he found the spouse's mother, sister and  two  other  witnesses  to  be
    "credible and consistent". I have also had the opportunity  of  hearing
    oral evidence insofar as it was the subject of challenge and would also
    describe the evidence that I have  heard  to  be  wholly  credible  and
    consistent and that includes the evidence of the Appellant  as  to  his
    life in the United Kingdom since his arrival. I have found the evidence
    of the Appellant and his spouse in particular to be both thoughtful and
    insightful and have not found that either of the parties have sought to
    either overplay their evidence or  to  exaggerate  any  aspect  of  the
    evidence that has been given before me.

38. I shall deal with the circumstances of the Appellant. As the First-tier
    Tribunal judge recorded,  the  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally in or about  2002  and  failed  to  make  an  application  to
    regularise his immigration status. In his evidence (see  paragraph  22]
    he  had  said  he  had  not  made  an  application  to  regularise  his
    immigration status because he was scared he would be  returned  to  his
    country of origin where he would have to re-join the army  to  complete
    his service. He said  that  he  had  thought  about  making  an  asylum
    application, but had spoken  to  solicitors  and  had  never  made  the
    application. He said that he did not wish to return because he did  not
    want to serve in the army. He said that he had not seen his  family  in
    Sri Lanka in 14 years (paragraph 25).

39. The judge found that this aspect of this case  was  not  credible  (see
    paragraph 42). I take this to mean  that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally but had failed to make any application to  regularise
    his immigration status. There does not appear to be any dispute  as  to
    his circumstances prior to his arrival namely that  he  had  undertaken
    some education in Sri Lanka which is the equivalent to O-levels in  the
    United Kingdom and that he had been in the army for one year.  When  he
    had entered the United Kingdom he had not studied here and that he  had
    worked in the United Kingdom the last time being in 2011.  His  brother
    has lived in the UK for about 15 years. His mother continues to live in
    the family home in Sri Lanka  but  it  has  two  bedrooms  and  has  to
    accommodate both his mother, her brother, one of his brothers  and  his
    niece. He described the circumstances as "overcrowded" not only in  his
    statement ( B1) but also his oral evidence  before  this  Tribunal.  He
    made reference to having another brother and sister  who  live  in  Sri
    Lanka but they live with their family  members  and  do  not  have  the
    capacity to accommodate the Appellant, his wife and two children. I  am
    satisfied that there is no realistic prospect  of  the  Appellant,  his
    spouse and 2 children living in that  property  given  the  overcrowded
    nature of that accommodation. In addition  I  find  from  the  evidence
    given before me that he has worked as a chef and has some experience in
    this capacity although he has not worked in Sri Lanka.

40. As to his relationship with his wife, there  is  no  dispute  that  the
    parties met in 2011 and that she has  been  aware  of  his  immigration
    status from approximately July 2011. The parties went on  to  marry  in
    May 2012 and their relationship has continued since that time. There is
    no dispute between the parties and it is accepted by the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant and his wife are in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship. There is also no doubt in my judgement that they  have  a
    strong and supportive relationship. Furthermore, the extended family of
    his spouse have welcomed the Appellant into  their  family  and  it  is
    abundantly plain that he is  both  well  liked  and  has  received  the
    support of all those family members and friends who  know  him.  As  he
    described his first statement (page 2 of AB1) they were very  welcoming
    and made him feel like he was part of their family. They  were  married
    in the church of his spouse's family.  The  evidence  of  his  wife  is
    consistent with this and makes reference to both of them having a  good
    relationship with the extended family members whom they see  a  regular
    basis and with whom they are in frequent contact (page 8 AB 1).

41. The evidence in support of  the  family  members  is  set  out  in  the
    original bundle which includes the evidence of the Appellant's  mother,
    and sisters and friends. None of that evidence has been disputed in any
    way by the Secretary of State  and  I  accept  the  contents  of  those
    statements in their entirety. The general thrust of  that  evidence  is
    that the Appellant is very much part of their family life life  and  is
    well settled within that family.

42. The circumstances before the First-tier Tribunal judge referred to  the
    steps taken by the couple to start a family. I need  not  set  out  the
    evidence in this regard and it is referred to in the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal judge, the witness  statements  and  references
    made to it in the Upper Tribunal's decision in February of  this  year,
    who recorded that the Appellant's spouse was pregnant at  the  time  of
    the hearing. The Appellant's spouse gave birth to twins in April  2017.
    The circumstances of the birth and her pregnancy are  set  out  in  the
    witness statement of the Appellant at pages 20 to 21. It is plain  that
    the circumstances were extremely difficult and I need not set  out  the
    medical evidence in this regard which is not been the  subject  of  any
    challenge.

43. I have no hesitation in accepting the evidence given by  the  Appellant
    and his wife concerning the circumstances of the birth of the children,
    her medical complications and the physical  effects  of  looking  after
    twins. I also find from the evidence that this is not the case  of  the
    Appellant simply helping out but that he has taken on an equal care  of
    the welfare and upbringing of the children which,  but  for  his  help,
    would be extremely difficult and overwhelming. The oral evidence that I
    have  heard  from  the  parties,  which  I  accept,  demonstrates   the
    significance of the physical assistance that he has given in  the  care
    of the twins who were born prematurely.

44. It was suggested in cross examination that the Appellant's mother,  who
    lives a great distance away in a different part of the  country,  could
    care for the children  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant.  From  the
    evidence before me I do  not  find  that  to  be  either  realistic  or
    feasible. The Appellant's mother-in-law is in her 70s  and  whilst  she
    provides some care and assistance for the Appellant's spouses'  sister,
    the circumstances are entirely different. On  the  evidence  before  me
    they are older children who do not have the needs of the twins and this
    is not done on any regular basis. Furthermore she lives in a  different
    part of the country in a village far from the nearest town or  city.  I
    find on the evidence before  me  that  if  the  Appellant  were  to  be
    removed, that whilst her mother would wish to  assist,  any  assistance
    would be minimal and that the Appellant's spouse would  be  caring  for
    the twins including their medical needs, on her own.

45. I accept the evidence given by his spouse as to her concern  about  the
    availability of medical care for the  twins  both  of  whom  were  born
    prematurely.

46. I also do not accept the submission made by Mr Tufan  that  her  sister
    would be able to provide assistance to her. Her circumstances  are  set
    out in the written evidence which demonstrates that she works full-time
    and has a family of her own (see page 26-7 AB2).  Any  assistance  that
    could be given would be minimal and be from afar. Although  I  do  find
    that there would be some support from her even if it could  not  be  in
    the form of any realistic offers of  care.  His  spouses  other  sister
    (page 28) lives closer to them but again has  full-time  employment,  a
    partner and children and I am satisfied that any help  would  be  of  a
    minimal nature.

47. As to the financial circumstances of the parties, they  have  lived  in
    their own home for approximately four years and the Appellant's  spouse
    has an extremely good salary. She has supplemented her salary  also  by
    teaching Pilates (see page 8 AB1). The current  circumstances  are  set
    out in her second witness statement  (page  22)  which  refers  to  her
    maternity leave and she received six months maternity pay at 90% of the
    salary which was a sum far  in  excess  of  the  requested  figure  for
    maintenance necessary under the immigration rules (of �18,600)  and  is
    receiving statutory maternity pay. She described taking up to one  year
    of maternity leave but that she was likely to return to work.

48. Her evidence before me was  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  obtain
    employment of a similar nature in Sri Lanka. She has  no  knowledge  of
    the indigenous languages in that country and  whilst  she  accepted  in
    cross  examination  that  there  is  some  English  spoken  it  is  not
    widespread nor does it permeate every part  of  society.  The  position
    that she currently has, she stated, could not be replicated abroad. Her
    evidence made reference to the number of years that she had  worked  in
    her employment, the hard work that she had undertaken to  get  to  that
    stage and that it was a job that she  had  enjoyed  and  progressed  in
    (page 23 AB2). Her future circumstances were not entirely certain but I
    do not find any inconsistency in her evidence as to whether  she  would
    work in the future. It seemed to  me  that  given  the  nature  of  her
    employment and that she would be able to continue that employment along
    with the assistance of her spouse, that it is more likely than not  she
    will continue in that capacity. Whilst the Appellant told  me  that  he
    wished to obtain work, it would be in the food industry as  he  has  no
    qualifications or experience in and any other field. However the  hours
    that type of work not preclude him from continuing to carry out a child
    caring role which he is presently under taking.

Discussion:

49. Appendix FM, "Family Members", begins with a  general  statement  which
    explains that it sets out the requirements to be met by  those  seeking
    to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  with  a
    person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK
    with  limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
    protection (para GEN.1.1). It is said to reflect how, under Article  8,
    the balance will be struck between the right to respect for private and
    family life and  the  legitimate  aims  listed  in  article  8(2).  The
    Appendix nevertheless contemplates that the Rules will  not  cover  all
    the circumstances in which a person may have a valid claim to enter  or
    remain in the UK as a result of his or her Article 8 rights. Paragraphs
    GEN.1.10 and GEN.1.11 both make  provision  for  situations  "where  an
    applicant does not meet the requirements of this Appendix as a  partner
    or parent but the decision-maker grants entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter or remain outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds".



50.  Section R-LTRP sets out the requirements for limited leave  to  remain
    as a partner. Certain requirements apply in  all  cases:  for  example,
    that the applicant meets  suitability  requirements  relating  to  such
    matters as his or her criminal record. Other requirements depend on the
    applicant's  circumstances.   In   particular,   under   paragraph   R-
    LTRP.1.1(d), the applicant must not be in the UK on temporary admission
    or temporary release, or in breach of immigration laws (disregarding an
    overstay of 28 days or less), unless paragraph EX.1 applies.

51. That paragraph applies if either of two conditions  is  satisfied.  The
    first applies to persons applying for leave to remain as  parents.  The
    second applies to persons, such as the Appellant, who apply  for  leave
    to remain as a partner and reads as follows:

    EX1"(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled in the UK or
    in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK."

52. EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles"
    means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
    applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."


53. The Supreme Court considered insurmountable obstacles and Article 8 in
    the decision of R(Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] UKSC 11. Mrs Agyarko had made her way to the Supreme Court by
    way of a failed appeal in the Court of Appeal against a decision of the
    Upper Tribunal to refuse to grant permission for judicial review.  She
    had argued that in refusing permission the Tribunal had failed to
    recognise that the Secretary of State had imposed too high a threshold
    in respect of paragraph EX.1 of the Rules, and had failed to take
    relevant facts into account. This argument was rejected by both Court
    of Appeal and the Supreme Court, who held that the Secretary of State
    had applied the correct legal framework. For the purpose of this
    appeal, they also held that on the facts presented, neither Mrs Agyarko
    nor her co-Appellant Mrs Ikuga could possibly have established that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to their family life continuing
    abroad.


54. Mrs Agyarko was a long-term overstayer of Ghanaian nationality. She had
    married a British citizen; they had no children. She however, had three
    children of her own (now adults), a sister and a mother living in
    Ghana. Her partner was British and had lived all his life in the UK. He
    was in employment here. The Secretary of State had accepted that there
    would be a degree of hardship for her husband going to live in Ghana (a
    country with which he had no connection) but that this did not meet the
    test in the rule. Mrs Ikuga was a Nigerian, also an overstayer. Her
    British husband was of Nigerian origin. She placed particular reliance
    upon the assertion that she was receiving medical treatment, including
    for infertility, in the UK which would have been disrupted if she were
    to leave. The Secretary of State had cast some doubt on whether she was
    actually living with her husband and found that the claimed medical
    problems were not in fact as serious as the application had indicated.


55. In neither case were there any children involved which is the
    distinguishing feature here from the instant appeal.


56. At paragraph 43 the court considered the European jurisprudence and
    that the "words "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a
    practical and realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to
    obstacles which make it literally impossible for the family to live
    together in the country of origin of the non-national concerned".


57. However the Court went on to state: "Insurmountable obstacles" is,
    however, the expression employed by the Grand Chamber; and the court's
    application of it indicates that it is a stringent test. In Jeunesse,
    for example, there were said to be no insurmountable obstacles to the
    relocation of the family to Suriname, although the children, the eldest
    of whom was at secondary school, were Dutch nationals who had lived
    there all their lives, had never visited Suriname, and would experience
    a degree of hardship if forced to move, and the applicant's partner was
    in full-time employment in the Netherlands: see paras 117 and 119".


58.  Thus the Court found that the requirement of insurmountable obstacles
    is a stringent test to be met and this was not incompatible with
    Article 8.

59. The Court also found that the requirement must be interpreted in a
    sensible and practical way and the definition in EX.2 was approved at
    paragraph [44] as follows:
    "The expression "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by paragraph
    EX.2 as meaning "very significant difficulties which would be faced by
    the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner." That definition
    appears to me to be consistent with the meaning which can be derived
    from the Strasbourg case law. As explained in para 16 above, paragraph
    EX.2 was not introduced until after the dates of the decisions in the
    present cases. Prior to the insertion of that definition, it would
    nevertheless be reasonable to infer, consistently with the Secretary of
    State's statutory duty to act compatibly with Convention rights, that
    the expression was intended to bear the same meaning in the Rules as in
    the Strasbourg case law from which it was derived. I would therefore
    interpret it as bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph
    EX.2."


60. In conclusion the Court held at [ 45 ] "By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b),
    "insurmountable obstacles" are treated as a requirement for the grant
    of leave under the Rules in cases to which that paragraph applies.
    Accordingly, interpreting the expression in the same sense as in the
    Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not normally be granted in
    cases where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route
    was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless the applicant or
    their partner would face very serious difficulties in continuing their
    family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
    would entail very serious hardship".


61. That is the test that I must apply when considering the appeal under
    EX1(b).




62. When looking at the issue of Article 8 outside the Rules at paragraph
    [48] the Court stated:
    " [48]As has been explained, the Rules are not a summary of the
    European court's case law, but a statement of the Secretary of State's
    policy. That policy is qualified by the scope allowed for leave to
    remain to be granted outside the Rules. If the applicant or his or her
    partner would face very significant difficulties in continuing their
    family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
    would entail very serious hardship, then the "insurmountable obstacles"
    test will be met, and leave will be granted under the Rules. If that
    test is not met, but the refusal of the application would result in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences, such that refusal would not be
    proportionate, then leave will be granted outside the Rules on the
    basis that there are "exceptional circumstances". In the absence of
    either "insurmountable obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as
    defined, however, it is not apparent why it should be incompatible with
    article 8 for leave to be refused. The Rules and Instructions are
    therefore compatible with article 8. That is not, of course, to say
    that decisions applying the Rules and Instructions in individual cases
    will necessarily be compatible with article 8: that is a question
    which, if a decision is challenged, must be determined independently by
    the court or Tribunal in the light of the particular circumstances of
    each case".


63. At paragraphs 49-51 the Court stated:
    " 49. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber said,  consistently  with  earlier
    judgments of the court, that an important consideration when  assessing
    the proportionality under article  8  of  the  removal  of  non-settled
    migrants from a contracting state in which they have family members, is
    whether family life was created at a time  when  the  persons  involved
    were aware that the immigration status of one of them was such that the
    persistence of that family life within the host state  would  from  the
    outset be "precarious". Where this is the case, the court said, "it  is
    likely only to be in exceptional circumstances that the removal of  the
    non-national family member will constitute a violation  of  article  8"
    (para 108).

    50. Domestically, officials  who  are  determining  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances as defined in the Instructions,  and  whether
    leave to remain should therefore be  granted  outside  the  Rules,  are
    directed  by  the  Instructions  to  consider  all  relevant   factors,
    including whether the applicant "[formed] their relationship with their
    partner at a time when they had  no  immigration  status  or  this  was
    precarious". They are instructed:

    "Family life which involves the applicant putting down roots in the  UK
    in the full knowledge that their stay here is unlawful  or  precarious,
    should be given less weight, when balanced against the factors weighing
    in favour of removal, than family life  formed  by  a  person  lawfully
    present in the UK."

    That instruction is consistent with the case law of the European court,
    such as its judgment in  Jeunesse.  As  the  instruction  makes  clear,
    "precariousness" is not a preliminary hurdle to  be  overcome.  Rather,
    the fact that family life has been established by an applicant  in  the
    full knowledge that his stay in  the  UK  was  unlawful  or  precarious
    affects the weight to be attached to it in the balancing exercise.

    51.    Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled to
    remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the  significance  of  this
    consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration control  might
    otherwise  be.  For  example,  if  an  applicant  would  otherwise   be
    automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the  weight  of  the
    public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal  will  generally  be   very
    considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in
    the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter,
    at least if an application were made from outside the  UK,  then  there
    might be no public interest  in  his  or  her  removal.  The  point  is
    illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department."

64. The correct approach is set out at  paragraphs [56]-[57] when the Court
    considered the earlier jurisprudence and MF (Nigeria):

    "  56.............Cases  are  not,  therefore,  to  be  approached   by
    searching for a unique or unusual feature, and in its absence rejecting
    the application without further examination. Rather, as the  Master  of
    the Rolls made clear, the test is one of proportionality. The reference
    to exceptional circumstances in the European case law  means  that,  in
    cases involving precarious family life, "something very compelling  ...
    is  required   to   outweigh   the   public   interest",   applying   a
    proportionality test. The  Court  of  Appeal  went  on  to  apply  that
    approach to the interpretation of the Rules concerning the  deportation
    of foreign criminals, where the same phrase appears; and their approach
    was approved by this court, in that context, in Hesham Ali.

    57. That approach is also appropriate  when  a  court  or  Tribunal  is
    considering whether a refusal of leave to  remain  is  compatible  with
    article 8 in the context of precarious family life. Ultimately, it  has
    to decide whether the refusal is proportionate in the  particular  case
    before it, balancing the strength of the public interest in the removal
    of the person in question against the  impact  on  private  and  family
    life. In doing so, it should give appropriate weight to  the  Secretary
    of State's policy, expressed in the Rules and  the  Instructions,  that
    the public interest in immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when
    considering an application for leave to remain brought by a  person  in
    the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws,  only   where   there   are
    "insurmountable obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances"  as  defined.
    It must also consider all factors relevant  to  the  specific  case  in
    question, including, where relevant, the matters discussed in paras 51-
    52 above. The critical issue will  generally  be  whether,  giving  due
    weight to the strength of the public interest in  the  removal  of  the
    person in the case before it,  the  article  8  claim  is  sufficiently
    strong to outweigh it. In general, in cases concerned  with  precarious
    family life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to  outweigh
    the public interest in immigration control."

65. In summary the Court stated at [60]:

    " [60] It remains the position that the ultimate question is how a fair
    balance should be struck between the competing  public  and  individual
    interests involved, applying a  proportionality  test.  The  Rules  and
    Instructions in issue in the present  case  do  not  depart  from  that
    position.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  imposed   a   test   of
    exceptionality, in the sense which Lord Bingham had in mind: that is to
    say, a requirement that the case should  exhibit  some  highly  unusual
    feature, over and above the application of the test of proportionality.
    On the contrary, she has defined the  word  "exceptional",  as  already
    explained, as meaning "circumstances in which refusal would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  the
    refusal of the application would not be proportionate". So  understood,
    the provision in the Instructions that leave can be granted outside the
    Rules where exceptional circumstances apply involves the application of
    the test of proportionality to  the  circumstances  of  the  individual
    case, and cannot be regarded  as  incompatible  with  article  8.  That
    conclusion is fortified by the express statement  in  the  Instructions
    that "exceptional" does not mean "unusual" or  "unique":  see  para  19
    above."

Conclusions reached on EX(1)(b):

66. I have considered this issue in the light of the jurisprudence  that  I
    have set out in the preceding paragraphs. Whilst the test I must  apply
    is a "stringent one" it must be defined sensibly and practically as  to
    whether the continuation of family life outside  the  UK  would  entail
    very  significant  difficulties  of  very  serious  hardship  for   the
    Appellant and/or his British Citizen spouse.

67. I have therefore approached this issue on the basis of the findings  of
    facts that I have  made  earlier  in  this  determination.  Whilst  the
    factors that I shall go on to identify may not  singularly  demonstrate
    there are "insurmountable obstacles" it is important in my judgement to
    consider them all cumulatively and  also  on  the  basis  that  it  now
    includes  the  presence  of   two   children   and   their   particular
    circumstances which are relevant to this issue.

68. As can be seen, the Appellant's spouse is a  British  citizen  who  was
    never lived outside of the United Kingdom. There is  no  doubt  on  the
    evidence before me, both written and the  oral  evidence  that  I  have
    heard, that she has particularly  strong  family  ties  in  the  United
    Kingdom due in part to losing a parent to young age. Moving  to  abroad
    would mean that she would lose those strong family ties as  it  is  not
    likely that her mother and  sisters  would  be  able  to  maintain  any
    physical contact with her by way  of  visits  given  the  circumstances
    (presence of their own children) and the distance of  travel  involved.
    This would not preclude contact by  telephone  or  Skype  but  this  is
    entirely different to  the  support  she  has  received  to  date.  The
    Appellant  is  in  well-paid  employment  and  have  spent  many  years
    establishing herself in her field of  expertise.  She  does  not  speak
    indigenous languages of Sri Lanka and does not  know  anything  of  the
    culture in that country.

69. In general terms I would agree that such matters are  similar  to  ones
    that are difficulties often faced by an individual who, through  choice
    or work or through compulsion, have when settling in a foreign  country
    as stated by the Upper Tribunal Judge at paragraph  6.  However  in  my
    judgement, those factors have to be viewed  in  greater  depth  and  in
    accordance with the evidence relating to the parties and their  factual
    circumstances. There is no dispute that the issue now has to be  viewed
    in the light of  the  presence  of  the  two  children  who  were  born
    prematurely and  the  circumstances  of  their  birth  are  a  material
    consideration  when  considering  whether  there  are   "insurmountable
    obstacles".

70.  In this regard, I find that their presence and their ongoing needs for
    a settled existence and home would not be met by having to live  abroad
    at this time. As set out in the findings of fact, I do not accept  that
    they  will  be  able  to  live  in  the  former  family  home  as   the
    accommodation for two more adults and two children would be  more  than
    overcrowded. Therefore the family do not have any housing available  to
    them. As to the prospects of settling in a new country,  I  have  found
    that the Appellant's spouse and her circumstances  are  such  that  she
    would not be able  to  obtain  employment;  she  has  no  knowledge  of
    indigenous languages and whilst English is spoken it is not  widespread
    nor does it permeate every strata of society. There  is  no  equivalent
    job to that held in the United Kingdom  and  any  employment  prospects
    abroad have to be seen in the context of the care of the children.  The
    Appellant has not been in his country of origin since 2002 and has  not
    maintained any  ties  with  that  country,  either  through  family  or
    otherwise, and has no work history or contacts that he would be able to
    rely upon to obtain employment to ensure that the family are  supported
    and accommodated. This may have been different if the parties were only
    a couple but the  presence  of  the  children  make  the  circumstances
    entirely different.

71. Whilst in normal circumstances,  a  partner  in  the  position  of  the
    Appellant's spouse would  miss  her  family  members,  however,  in  my
    judgement it goes beyond that on the facts of this case. It is  evident
    from the evidence before me which I accept, the birth of  the  children
    has not been without its problems and this has had an impact  upon  her
    well-being. Consequently she would be leaving the support that she  has
    from family. Although I have found that the support that they can  give
    her in practical terms is minimal, there is the prospect of there being
    some support and contact available to which she would not have  in  Sri
    Lanka. The Appellant has had no contact  with  his  family  or  friends
    having left in 2002 and there is no form of network  support  available
    nor is it likely that there would be any state support of the type  the
    Appellant's spouse has in this country given the age of the twins.

72. Therefore taking into account all of those factors that I have outlined
    above and when taken cumulatively, I am satisfied that  the  particular
    circumstances facing this family and the continuation of  their  family
    life outside of the UK, would entail very significant  difficulties  or
    very serious hardship for the Appellant, his  spouse  and  children.  I
    therefore allow the appeal under the immigration rules and EX (1) (b).

73. In those circumstances it is not necessary to  consider  the  issue  of
    whether the Appellant can satisfy EX1(a)  which  was  matter  that  the
    Secretary of State had not considered in the decision letter of the 8th
    May 2015 because as can been seen from the chronology, the  Appellant's
    partner was not pregnant and the children had not been born.

74. When the matter was before the Upper Tribunal  in  February  2017,  the
    judge was aware of the change of circumstances (see paragraph  21).  He
    made it plain that the circumstances  of  the  children's  birth  would
    "herald the necessity on the part of the Appellant to re-formulate  his
    case on Article 8 grounds for the purposes of it being re-made  and  or
    the Secretary of State to respond. This may require a further  decision
    to be made and consideration will have to be  given  to  whether  these
    proceedings are the right way forward."

75. This has not been done. The Appellant's case although re-formulated was
    not put to the Secretary of State in any proper form as  envisaged.  At
    best a  letter  was  sent  on  the  16th   January  2017  (set  out  at
    supplementary bundle AB 60) in which the solicitors confirmed that they
    were relying on the original bundle of documents for the  hearing  then
    listed on the 2nd February 2017, and  confirmation  of  the  pregnancy.
    This was sent to the UT and copy of the letter and enclosures was  sent
    to  the  Secretary  of  State.  I  have  not  been  shown  any  further
    correspondence sent to the Secretary of State since this other  than  a
    copy of the supplementary bundle sent for this hearing in August  dated
    July 2017. Whilst these documents  made  reference  to  the  change  in
    circumstances, and the birth of the children, the  Secretary  of  State
    has not received any re-formulation of the case and has not issued  any
    further decision letter. Thus there has been no consideration of EX1(a)
    nor any explanation as to how the Tribunal should consider  this  issue
    against that background.

76. That does not however preclude any assessment outside of the Rules  and
    in particular, S117B(6).

Assessment outside of the Rules under Article 8:

77. The alternative submission made in the skeleton argument is that if the
    Appellant  could  not   meet   the   Rules,   there   are   "compelling
    circumstances" meriting the grant of leave to this Appellant outside of
    the Rules.

78. The law I should apply has been set out in a number of  decisions.  The
    more recent cases indicate a departure from  the  requirement  to  find
    some additional factor before Article 8 can be considered  outside  the
    rules. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016]  UKSC  60   Lord  Reed  at
    paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality
    and said what has now become the established  method  of  analysis  can
    therefore continue to be followed in this context.


79. That approach was also endorsed in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 (in
    particular paras 66 and 67) and in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 where Lord
    Reed in explaining how a court or Tribunal should consider whether a
    refusal of leave to remain was compatible with Article 8 made clear
    that the critical issue was generally whether, giving due weight to the
    strength of the public interest in removal, the Article 8 claim was
    sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  There is no suggestion of any
    threshold to be overcome before proportionality can be fully
    considered.

80.  It is now clear from Agyarko and Ikuga [2017] UKSC 11 that there is no
    separate test for exceptional or compelling circumstances to be
    satisfied; but that one would expect to find such circumstances, if it
    were to be decided that it was disproportionate to remove somebody who
    could not satisfy the provisions of the Immigration Rules.

81. The question I have to decide is whether, in terms of this Appellant's
    private and family life, it would be disproportionate to the public
    interest to remove him, and I need to consider that in terms of the
    provisions of s. 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

82. I am satisfied that Article 8 (1) is engaged as the Appellant's removal
    will interfere with the family and private life of the Appellant and
    that the decision is in accordance with the law.  His removal will be
    for the legitimate aim of effective immigration control.

83. Consequently the issue relates to that of proportionality and it
    requires a fair balance to be struck between the public interest and
    the rights and interests of the Appellant and others protected by
    Article 8 (1) (see Razgar at [20]) which includes the Appellant's wife
    and children and other family members whose evidence I have heard, read
    and considered.

84. In  R(MM and others) (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 10, the Supreme Court at [43] set out the
    central issue as follows:

         "whether a fair balance has been struck between the personal
         interests of all members of the family in maintaining family life
         and the public interest in controlling immigration."

85. When assessing the proportionality of the removal decision I am obliged
    to consider  the best interests of the children who are affected by the
    decision and those best interests are assessed without reference to the
    parents' circumstances. In making the assessment of the best interests
    of the children I have also taken into account ZH (Tanzania) (FC)
    (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent)
    [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC which
    states that "in all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by
    courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the
    best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

86.  Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary of State
    must make arrangements for ensuring that those functions "are
    discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom". Lady Hale stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not be
    "in accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8(2)". Although
    she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the best
    interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she added "Of
    course, despite the looseness with which these terms are sometimes
    used, "a primary consideration" is not the same as "the primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration."

87. The importance of a child's nationality was the subject of discussion
    in the decision of  ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4   Lady Hale said
    that "Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
    importance in assessing the best interests of any child".  She noted
    with approval Wan v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
    [2001] FCA 568, in which the Federal Court of Australia, pointed out at
    para 30 that, "when considering the possibility of the children
    accompanying their father to China, the Tribunal had not considered any
    of the following matters, which the Court clearly regarded as
    important: "(i) the fact that the children, as citizens of Australia,
    would be deprived of the country of their own and their mother's
    citizenship, 'and of its protection and support, socially, culturally
    and medically, and in many other ways evoked by, but not confined to,
    the broad concept of lifestyle');(ii) the resultant social and
    linguistic disruption of their childhood as well as the loss of their
    homeland;(ii) the loss of educational opportunities available to the
    children in Australia; and(d) their resultant isolation from the normal
    contacts of children with their mother and their mother's family." Lady
    Hale also took the view that the intrinsic importance of citizenship
    should not be played down. "As citizens these children have rights
    which they will not be able to exercise if they move to another
    country. They will lose the advantages of growing up and being educated
    in their own country, their own culture and their own language. They
    will have lost all this when they come back as adults".  Lord Kerr said
    that "The significance of a child's nationality must be considered in
    two aspects. The First of these is in its role as a contributor to the
    debate as to where the child's best interests lie. It seems to me self
    evident that to diminish a child's right to assert his or her
    nationality will not normally be in his or her best interests. That
    consideration must therefore feature in the determination of where the
    best interests lie. It was also accepted by the Respondent, however,
    (and I think rightly so) that if a child is a British citizen, this has
    an independent value, freestanding of the debate in relation to best
    interests, and this must weigh in the balance in any decision that may
    affect where a child will live. As Lady Hale has said, this is not an
    inevitably decisive factor but the benefits that British citizenship
    brings, as so aptly described by Lord Hope and Lady Hale, must not
    readily be discounted". In ZH the SC said that the "best interests of
    the child" meant the well-being of the child.  That involved asking
    whether it was reasonable to expect the child to live in another
    country.  Relevant to that would be the level of the child's
    integration in the UK and the length of absence from the other country;
    where and with whom the child was to live and the arrangements for
    looking after the child in the other country; and the strength of the
    child's relationships with parents or other family members which would
    be severed if the child had to move away.

88. Although nationality was not a "trump card" it was of particular
    importance in assessing the best interests of any child.  The UNCRC
    recognised the right of every child to be registered and acquire a
    nationality and to preserve that identity, including nationality.  In
    the instant case, the children were British not just through the
    "accident" of being born in Britain, but by descent from a British
    parent.  They had an unqualified right of abode, had lived in Britain
    all their lives, had been educated here and had other social links with
    the community.  Furthermore, they had a good relationship with their
    father.  It was not enough to say that a young child might readily
    adapt to life in another country, particularly in the case of children
    who had lived in Britain all their lives and were being expected to
    move to a country which they did not know and would be separated from a
    parent who they also knew well (paras 29 - 31). The intrinsic
    importance of citizenship should not be played down.  As citizens the
    children had rights which they would not be able to exercise if they
    moved to another country.  They would lose the advantages of growing up
    and being educated in their own country, their own culture and their
    own language."

89. With that in mind I must make an assessment of the best interests of
    the children involved. I remind myself that their best interests are
    "a"primary consideration but not "the"primary consideration. The
    starting point is that the children should be brought up by both
    parents (the Appellant and his wife). As British citizens, the children
    should have the benefit that their nationality brings to them. As set
    out in the preceding paragraphs and in accordance with the decisions of
    the Supreme Court (both ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas) nationality is an
    important factor although I recognise is not a "trump card". There is
    no dispute on the evidence before me that the Appellant has a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with the twins and indeed on the
    evidence before me demonstrates that he shares the care of the children
    with his wife to the extent that I am satisfied that without his
    assistance she would find the circumstances as she outlined to me to be
    overwhelming. The medical evidence to which there has been no challenge
    and the circumstances of the birth of the twins demonstrates my
    judgement that the assistance, support and care provided by the
    Appellant is more than there would be in the usual circumstances and
    has been exceptional. Given their young ages, and the circumstances of
    their birth, it cannot be ruled out that they may require further
    medical attention.  On the evidence I am satisfied that it is that the
    best interests of these children to reside with both of their parents.
    The separation of the children from their father at this stage in their
    development would not be in their interests and to the contrary I find
    would be detrimental. It is not necessary for there to be medical
    evidence to reach that conclusion, given the ages of the twins and the
    importance of the bonding and attachment process at this present time.
    I would also find that it is in their best interests for their father
    to remain with them in the United Kingdom. Whilst the Appellant has
    family members in Sri Lanka, I am satisfied that he would not be able
    to live with his mother and the relatives he has described. The
    property would not accommodate the Appellant, his spouse and two
    children. On the present evidence, the Appellant's wife, who has no
    knowledge of the indigenous languages of that country would not  be
    able to obtain employment and as the Appellant himself has been out of
    that country since 2002, and has little by way of qualifications, would
    not be able to obtain employment sufficient to finance and accommodate
    the family. The children are very young only a few months old and have
    had difficult premature births and there is no realistic family or
    other support available for them there.

90. In the assessment under Article 8, the best interests of the child must
    be a primary consideration.  That meant that they must be considered
    first.  They could, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative effect
    of other considerations.

91. In carrying out the  balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard" to the  considerations
    set out in section 117B of the Nationality, immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (section 117A). Section 117A (2) of the  2002  Act  provides  that
    where a Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under
    the Immigration Acts would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 it must, in considering 'the public interest question',
    have regard in all cases to the considerations listed in section117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  Section  117  (3)  provides  that  the  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether an interference with a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2).



92. S117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases:
    (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.

    (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
    because persons who can speak English-

    (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
    because such persons-

    (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)Little weight should be given to-

    (a)a private life, or

    (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
    interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child, and

    (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.



93. I am required to consider whether there are any "sufficiently
    compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public interest because the
    refusal of leave would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"
    (see decision in Agyarko at [48]).

94. The public interest identified in this appeal is the effective
    maintenance of immigration control.

95. Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether it
    would be disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home
    country to make an entry clearance application to re-join family
    members in the U.K.

96.  In R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department) (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) the Tribunal found that
    there "may be cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to
    family life being enjoyed outside the UK but where temporary separation
    to enable an individual to make an application for entry clearance may
    be disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the individual to
    place before the Secretary of State evidence that such temporary
    separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights. It
    will not be enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40".

97. In this case there is such evidence. The Appellant's bundle provides
    evidence concerning the length of the temporary separation between the
    Appellant, his spouse and the children. Whilst it is said that
    settlement visas and such applications are processed between 60 to 90
    days, I have considered this in the light of the witness statement at
    page 71 AB2 which makes reference to the delays in appeals relating to
    entry clearance and that requests for expedited hearings are not often
    successful. The length of time for the temporary separation then is
    approximately 60 to 90 days or in the event of there being a refusal
    the appeal could take up to 18 months. The Respondent has not sought to
    place any contrary evidence to the Tribunal and I am satisfied that
    that evidence to which I have referred is realistic in all the
    circumstances. In the light of my findings of fact that this is an
    important stage in the development of the children both of whom are
    being cared for by their father and mother jointly, that it is not in
    their best interests or their protected rights for the Appellant to be
    absent from their lives even for the temporary period. Even a period of
    90 days (on the best case scenario) would be a significant period at
    this stage of the children's attachment and development. If there was
    to be any further delay, that would be also detrimental to their
    welfare and in my judgement there is evidence that such temporary
    separation would interfere disproportionately with both the rights of
    the children and the rights of the Appellant's spouse. I am therefore
    satisfied that the particular factual circumstances of this case places
    in that category envisaged in the case of Chen as outlined above.

98. Furthermore as set out in Agyarko at paragraph [51]

    " 51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled to
    remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance of this
    consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration control might
    otherwise be. For example, if an applicant would otherwise be
    automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the weight of the
    public interest in his or her removal will generally be very
    considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in
    the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter,
    at least if an application were made from outside the UK, then there
    might be no public interest in his or her removal. The point is
    illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department."

99. On the facts of this case it is submitted on behalf of the Appellant
    that the financial circumstances of the Appellant's wife are such that
    the Appellant will be able to satisfy the requirements.

100. I have made reference to the financial circumstances of the parties
    earlier in this determination. The Appellant's wife has an extremely
    well paid job and her annual salary is three or four times in excess of
    the figure of �18,600 which is necessary to meet the maintenance
    requirements. There is no dispute that the Appellant and his wife have
    appropriate accommodation in United Kingdom; they own and occupy their
    own home. Her present circumstances of that she is subject to statutory
    maternity pay which although less than her usual salary would be likely
    to meet the maintenance requirements. In any event, as submitted by
    Miss Chapman the Respondent has taken no issue with the Appellant's
    ability to meet the requirements of the rules as to maintenance and
    accommodation. When the case originally was considered, paragraph 284
    applied. Even if, as Mr Tufan submitted, the documentary evidence
    required under appendix FM-SE is not available before this Tribunal,
    the evidential flexibility referred to in the decision of MM would
    apply in the light of the acceptance of their financial circumstances.
    I am satisfied also from the evidence before me that the Appellant's
    spouse intends to obtain employment and that if it were necessary there
    is the likelihood of  some third party financial support  available
    from the extended family members. The Appellant's speaks fluent English
    given the length of time that he spent in the United Kingdom and as
    evidenced before this Tribunal and giving oral evidence. I consider
    that there would be no difficulty in the Appellant passing any English
    language test which would be necessary.

101. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the public interest in
    effective immigration control is considerably weakened given the
    ability of the Appellant and his wife support themselves in the United
    Kingdom at the requisite level as required under the rules. As set out
    in the decision of Agyarko at [51] (as cited) notwithstanding his
    residence in the UK as being unlawful, if otherwise certain to be
    granted leave to enter if an application were made, there might be no
    public interest in his removal. It is a factor of some weight which
    weighs in favour of the Appellant's removal being disproportionate when
    carrying out the balancing exercise.

102. Applying the section 117 factors, the public interest in effective
    immigration control is engaged in this appeal (see s. 117B (1).  I am
    satisfied that he can speak English and has an understanding of it so
    that the public interest in s. 117 B(2) is not engaged but the fact
    that he can speak English does not provide a positive right to leave to
    remain and is essentially, a neutral factor (see decision of Ruppiah v
    Secretary of State for the home Department [2016) EWCA Civ 803 at
    paragraphs [59] - [61]). The Appellant, on the present evidence, is
    financially independent for the purposes of section 117B (3) but this
    is a neutral factor also. I also take into account that his family life
    with his partner has developed whilst his presence was unlawful and is
    therefore entitled to "little weight" (s 117B (4) (b).

103. The Secretary of State seeks to justify removal either with the
    Appellant leaving and therefore splitting up the family or to expect
    the Appellant's wife and newborn twins to join him in Sri Lanka.
    Although the Secretary of State couches that option in terms of a
    choice that the Appellants partner would have to make, the fact that
    the immigration decision itself forces such a challenging choice does
    interfere with the family life of all of those affected. Presenting a
    couple with such a choice does not, of itself, absolve the United
    Kingdom of its duty to respect family life. It is accepted that the
    Appellant is a genuine and subsisting relationship with his spouse and
    with the children, all of whom are British citizens and Secretary of
    State would have to establish that the public interest was such to
    outweigh the factors that have been identified in the balance on behalf
    of the Appellant. In this case the public interest identified is that
    of effective immigration control and that the Appellant entered United
    Kingdom unlawfully in 2002 and has remained here since that time with
    no legal right to be in United Kingdom and established a family life in
    the full knowledge of his unlawful status. I therefore acknowledge the
    public interest factors as set out above in section 117 of the 2002 Act
    and in particular that there is a public interest in removing the
    Appellant who has failed to respect legitimate immigration control
    having entered unlawfully and remaining so. It is a strong factor in my
    judgement that must be taken into account in determining his case to
    remain.

104. However  S117B(6) provides that in the case of a person who is not
    liable to deportation, the public interest does not require the
    person's removal where, (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it would not be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

105. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section
    117D:"qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
    who-
    (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a
    continuous period of seven years or more;"

106. There is no dispute that the Appellant is not liable for deportation
    and nor is there any dispute that the Appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with the twins, both of who are
    "qualifying children" by virtue of their British Citizenship. The
    evidence that I have set out above demonstrates that he plays a full
    parental role and indeed shares the care of the children with his
    partner.

107. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that section
    117B(6) had no application here since there is no expectation that  the
    children will leave the UK. He submitted that on a true construction of
    the words the question of reasonableness does not arise for such
    children.  I would not accept that submission. The effect of it would
    be that s117(6)(b) would offer protection to parents whose children
    faced removal with them, but not to parents whose settled children were
    staying here. Given that the focus of the provision is the protection
    of the parental relationship this makes little sense. I am not
    satisfied that anything turns on the words "to expect". The meaning of
    the entire phrase is clear. Would it be reasonable for this child to
    leave the UK?

The guidance:

108. The Home Office IDI of August 2015, headed "Family Life  as  a  Partner
    or Parent  and  Private  Life,  10  year  Routes",  gives  guidance  to
    caseworkers - in cases not involving serious criminality - on  when  it
    would be unreasonable to expect a British child to  leave  the  UK,  in
    terms of EX.1(a) of HC 395.



109. At [9.1] of the document under the heading "Exceptional
    Circumstances", the Respondent notes that the best interests of the
    child remain relevant in determining whether there are exceptional
    circumstances to justify a grant of leave outside the Rules and that
    this entails consideration of section 11 of the guidance.


110.  Section 11 then deals with the best interests of children affected by
    the relevant decision and at [11.2.3] deals with the position of
    British citizen children under the heading "Would it be unreasonable to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the UK?" Having made reference
    to the ECJ judgment in Zambrano, the guidance says this:-

    "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
    primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or primary
    carer.

    In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
    parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
    child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship.
    It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in the
    EU.

    The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:
    Criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398 of
    the Immigration Rules;
    a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
    repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

    In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision maker
    must consider the impact on the child of any separation. If the
    decision maker is minded to refuse, in circumstances where separation
    would be the result, this decision should normally be discussed with a
    senior caseworker and, where appropriate, advice may be sought from the
    Office of the Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare
    of the child, in order to inform the decision.

    Where the applicant has made an application under the family and/or
    private life Immigration Rules, the application must:
    a) be considered under those Immigration Rules First;
    b) where the applicant falls for refusal, the decision maker must go on
    to consider whether there are any exceptional circumstances that would
    warrant a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules; and
    c) where the applicant falls for refusal under the Immigration Rules
    and there are no exceptional circumstances, and where satisfactory
    evidence has been provided that all of the following criteria are met,
    the case must be referred to European Casework for review:
    i) the child is under the age of 18; and
    ii) the child is a British Citizen; and
    iii) the primary carer?. of the child is a non-EEA national in the UK;
    and
    iv) there is no other parent/guardian/carer upon whom the child is
    dependent or who could care for the child if the primary carer left the
    UK to go to a country outside the EU."


111. The guidance does explain that the effect of the parent's removal  must
    not be to force the  British  child  to  leave  the  EU  and  has  been
    interpreted in that way by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (see  SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) [2017] UKUT  120  (IAC)  a  Vice-Presidential
    panel applied this guidance when deciding that it would be unreasonable
    to expect a  British  child  to  leave  the  UK  with  his  mother  and
    siblings). The facts are different to the present case, but in  reality
    the effect of the removal of the Appellant would force the children  to
    leave as the Appellant's wife would be faced with the separation of the
    twins from their father at an important time in the attachment process.
    The earlier error of law decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  appeared  to
    place weight upon the spouses evidence recorded at paragraph 11 of that
    determination and that if her husband had to go back that she  "had  no
    choice, she would go live with him there." In  her  oral  evidence  for
    this Tribunal I asked her about that evidence as recorded and what  she
    meant by it. She told the Tribunal that it was said under the  "extreme
    circumstances of being  forced  to".  She  said  that  since  the  last
    hearing, she had become  the  mother  of  two  children  and  that  her
    circumstances had changed and  that  she  would  not  go,  taking  into
    account the circumstances. I have no reason to disbelieve that evidence
    and this it is plain that her circumstances  have  changed  since  that
    earlier evidence was given.  Therefore  I   place  no  weight  on  that
    earlier evidence given as recorded by the First-tier Tribunal.


112. The guidance also  was considered in  the  decision  of  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705, Elias LJ at [46]]:

         "46. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that
         a child has been here for seven years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


         47. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness  test  where
         the focus is on the child alone, it would not  in  my  view  follow
         that leave must be granted whenever the child's best interests  are
         in favour of remaining. I reject Mr Gill's submission that the best
         interest's assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness
         question. If Parliament had wanted the child's  best  interests  to
         dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
         so."

113. The instant case involves a British citizen child. By contrast MA
    (Pakistan) addressed "how the test of reasonableness should be applied
    when determining whether to remove a child from the United Kingdom once
    he or she has been resident here for seven years" - see [1] of MA
    (Pakistan). At [45] Elias LJ concluded that when assessing
    reasonableness the wider public interest considerations must be taken
    into account, but that significant weight must be given to the seven
    years length of residence when carrying out the proportionality
    exercise [46].

114. MA (Pakistan) concludes that the reasonableness test in this context
    is wide ranging, effectively bringing back into play all potentially
    relevant public interest considerations, including the matters
    identified in section 117B. Accordingly, when considering the
    reasonableness of the children leaving the UK, a relevant factor is
    that the Appellant had entered into the UK unlawfully and had so
    remained for a significant period and he established a family life in
    the knowledge that he had no right to remain and this strengthens the
    public interest in his removal.

115. However, regardless of the nature of the conduct of the Appellant, I
    am not satisfied that it would be reasonable to expect the children to
    leave the UK. The children are British citizens with a mother who is a
    British citizen. The Respondent's own guidance recognises that it would
    not normally be reasonable to expect a child who is a British citizen
    to leave the UK. See the Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family
    Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or
    Parent and Private Life, 10 year Routes" dated August 2. The guidance
    makes reference to the circumstances whereby it would be appropriate to
    refuse to grant leave and indicates that the conduct of the parent or
    primary carer gives rise to considerations of such weight as to justify
    separation. The circumstances envisaged cover criminality falling below
    the threshold set out in paragraph 398 of the immigration rules and a
    very poor immigration history, such as where the person has repeatedly
    and deliberately breached the immigration rules. When applied to the
    facts of this case, whilst the Appellant entered the UK unlawfully and
    has remained for a significant period establishing family life in the
    knowledge that he had no right to remain, is not in my judgement,
    conduct would fall within those two limbs- it cannot be said that he
    has repeatedly breached the immigration rules nor is there any evidence
    of him having committed any form of criminality. Thus I am satisfied
    that he does not fall within the envisaged exclusion categories.

116. Therefore taking the circumstances as a whole, as I have set out
    above, I find that the Appellant's removal is disproportionate having
    regard to all of those circumstances. I have taken into account the
    best interests of the two children which are a primary consideration
    and the public interest in effective immigration control which is
    engaged in this case and the public interest as it is expressed in the
    S117 considerations. However having taken into account the impact upon
    the children and his spouse which will result upon the Appellant's
    removal, in the light of the specific facts of this particular appeal,
    I find it is not outweighed by the public interest considerations that
    I have identified. Consequently I am  satisfied that there are
    "compelling" circumstances that produce unjustifiably harsh
    consequences to outweigh the public interest in effective immigration
    control in the light of the Appellant's individual circumstances and
    that of his family members.

117. Consequently the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules and on
    human rights grounds outside of the Rules.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   The
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 8/8/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
