
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19451/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 19 June 2013                                 |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 28 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Janaki pathiraja pathiraja waduge


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N M Hashim, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Russell who allowed the appeal of Ms  Waduge  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State has appealed  and,  for  the
    sake of continuity, I shall refer to Ms Waduge as 'the  appellant',  as
    she was in the First-tier Tribunal..

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 30 March  1981.
    On 11 September 2010 she was granted leave to enter the United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  That leave was valid until  30  October
    2012.  On 24 June 2012 during a period of extant  leave  the  appellant
    made a combined application for further leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit.

 3. An appellant in the position of this appellant who has leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom in the  capacity  of  a  student  must  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 245HD(d) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Those
    requirements set out that to qualify for leave to remain as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant an applicant  must  meet  the  requirements  set  out
    below.  Those requirements are contained in 245HD(b)(ii) and they refer
    to the fact that the applicant has  or  has  last  been  granted  entry
    clearance  to  enter  or  leave  to  remain  as  a  student.   In  such
    circumstances the applicant has to meet the  requirements  of  (d)  and
    those requirements are that:

         (1)  the applicant must have completed and passed -

             (i)  A UK  recognised  bachelors  or  masters  degree  (not  a
                  qualification of equivalent level which is not a degree)

             (ii)  A  UK   postgraduate   certificate   in   education   or
                  professional  graduate  diploma  of   education   (not   a
                  qualification of equivalent level), or

             (iii)    the applicant must have completed a minimum of twelve
                  months' study in the UK towards a UK PhD.

    The applicant did not meet those requirements in that she told me  this
    morning that she has not obtained a  degree.   It  is  a  qualification
    which  she  has  not  yet  completed.   In  those   circumstances   the
    requirements of paragraph 245HD(d) have not been met.

 4. This was mentioned in the refusal dated 24 August 2012.   Unfortunately
    it was overlooked by  the  Judge  who  in  his  determination  made  no
    reference to this requirement within the Rules.  I  am  satisfied  that
    that is an error of law and that the result of that is that in allowing
    the appeal as he did the Immigration Judge erred  in  law.   For  these
    reasons I find that there  was  a  material  error  and  I  remake  the
    decision dismissing the appeal.  It is no longer necessary  for  me  to
    deal with the other requirements of the Immigration Rules which may  or
    may not have been met.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-
    make the decision dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
