
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19105/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2nd November 2015                 |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Jerry Uwaifo
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Aghayere, Freemans Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria born 21st  July  1959.   On
         the 26th March 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shamash) allowed
         his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  to
         vary his leave to remain and to remove him from the United  Kingdom
         pursuant to s10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The
         Secretary of State now has permission[1]  to  appeal  against  that
         decision.

      2. The matter in issue is a narrow one. In the decision  before  Judge
         Shamash the Secretary of State had applied  the  'new'  Immigration
         Rules set out in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  At
         the hearing the HOPO had conceded that this  was  not  the  correct
         approach, following the decision in  Edgehill  and  Bhoyroo  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 402. The human rights application had been made  "sometime
         in 2010" so, Edgehill suggested, the  Secretary  of  State   should
         have  decided  the  application  in  line  with  the   Transitional
         Provisions, ie the 'old' rules. This had a particular  significance
         for the Respondent, who  at  the  date  of  application  "may  have
         clocked up 14 years unlawful residence".

      3. Judge Shamash followed the HOPOs concession and allowed the  appeal
         to the extent that the decision was "not  in  accordance  with  the
         law": the decision was remitted back to the Secretary of  State  to
         enable a fresh decision to be taken.

      4. The Secretary of State now appeals  on  the  basis  that  she  had,
         notwithstanding the concession made by the HOPO,  been  correct  to
         assess this claim in light of the 'new' Rules. That is because this
         decision fell outwith the 'Edgehill window' of the 12th July  2012,
         when  the  new  Rules  and  their  Transitional   Provisions   were
         introduced, to 6th September 2012 when HC 565 introduced  paragraph
         A277C into the Rules. Any decision taken after  the  6th  September
         2012 fell to be considered under the new provisions.   Reliance  is
         placed on the decision in Singh and Khaled [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

      5. Before me Mr Aghayere sought to defend the decision on the  grounds
         that a) the HOPO had made a concession b) Edgehill  had  been  good
         law at the date of the determination and c)  the  matter  had  been
         remitted to the Secretary of State to enable  the  decision  to  be
         remade.

    Error of Law

      6. At the date that this appeal was heard the decision in Edgehill had
         been supplanted by that in Singh.  It was therefore a  clear  error
         to have followed the former, regardless of what the  HOPO  thought.
         The decision fell to be considered under the new  rules,  which  is
         exactly what the Respondent did.

      7. The decision is therefore set aside and with the agreement  of  the
         parties the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to enable
         the Appellant to have his substantive appeal heard.

    Decisions

      8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of
         law and it is set aside.

      9. The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  de  novo
         hearing.

     10. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on the  facts
         I see no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           2nd November 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 15th June 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Osbourne

