
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19417/2013
                                                               IA/19420/2013
                                                               IA/19477/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 February 2014                            |On 5 February 2014           |
|Oral judgment                                 |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 Adnan Sabri
                             Bushra Adnan Sabri
                               Muhammad Akbar

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara, counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  an  appeal  by   the   respondents
    (hereafter the claimants) against a decision dated 17th May 2013 of the
    appellant (hereafter the SSHD) to refuse to vary their leave to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) with dependants. The SSHD had also  taken  a
    decision to remove the claimants in  accordance  with  s47  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal  judge  found
    that the claimants did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, in particular paragraph 41-SD(c).

     Variation of leave

2.   The First-tier Tribunal judge allowed the appeal  against  the  refusal
    to vary leave on Article 8 grounds of appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was not proportionate.  The judge referred  in  particular  to
    the need for decisions to be made on a fair and consistent basis  under
    Article 8 and although finding that the claimants had  failed  to  meet
    the requirements of the Rules and although finding that  the  Secretary
    of State was not required to seek  further  information  in  accordance
    with the Rules (such findings not being the subject of challenge to the
    Upper Tribunal) the judge nevertheless found that those  failings  were
    in effect so minimal as to render the decision disproportionate.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the  relevant
    legislation, had paid no regard  to  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and had in effect found that the criteria in the PBS
    Rules impose a higher test than the proportionality test of Article 8.

4.   There is no reference in the determination to the  need  to  weigh  the
    public interest against the individual circumstances of the  claimants.
    The First-tier Tribunal has, I am satisfied, in effect  concluded  that
    the requirements of the Rules imposed too high a burden and could  thus
    be disregarded in the instant case.  I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge to allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds  to
    be remade.

5.   In Naseem & Others (Article 8) [2014] 00025 (IAC)  the  Tribunal  draws
    attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Patel & Others which,
    it says, refocuses attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 and
    in particular that Article 8 is of  limited  utility  in  private  life
    cases, as here, which are far removed from cases  involving  moral  and
    physical integrity.  Naseem considers the relationship between  Article
    8 and work and studies and in paragraph 21 the Tribunal holds that  the
    right asserted or the desire to undertake a period of  post-study  work
    lies at the outer reaches of cases requiring an affirmative answer  for
    the second question in the Razgar questions.  If Article 8 is  engaged,
    then, Naseem says, it is to be resolved decisively  in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State in her role as guardian of the system of immigration
    control.  In paragraph 23 of Naseem, the Tribunal addressed  the  issue
    of "near miss" and reiterated that the focus of such cases was  not  on
    the "near miss" but rather on the significance of the relevant  Article
    8 element.  In this particular case the  only  issues  that  have  been
    raised are failures to meet the requirements of the Rules as opposed to
    any other compelling or compassionate or family issues.

6.   On the evidence before me  I  am  satisfied,  weighing  the  legitimate
    interest of the SSHD in the maintenance of immigration control and  the
    matters raised in favour of the claimants as set out  above,  that  the
    decision  to  refuse  the   claimants'   leave   to   remain   is   not
    disproportionate.

7.   I therefore allow the appeal of the SSHD; the appeal by  the  claimants
    against the decision by the SSHD to  refuse  to  vary  their  leave  is
    dismissed.

     S47 removal decision

8.   The decision of the SSHD was taken  on  17  May.   This  postdates  the
    change in the legislation which enables a Section  47  decision  to  be
    taken at the same time and on the same piece of paper as a decision  to
    refuse a variation of leave application.  The decision  to  remove  the
    claimants in accordance  with  Section  47  is  thus  a  lawfully  made
    decision.  The claimants appealed that decision but  unfortunately  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to reach a decision  on  that  appeal;
    this amounts to an error of law; a blatant failure on the part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to determine any  matter  raised  as  a  ground  of
    appeal, contrary to s86 (2)  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

9.   S12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires a case to be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal with directions or for it  to  be  remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Where there has been no hearing on the issue before the First-
    tier Tribunal as here I conclude that the decision should  be  remitted
    to a First-tier Tribunal judge to determine the appeal.

10.  Mr Melvin objected strenuously to  remitting  the  appeal  against  the
    removal decision.   I  have  considerable  sympathy  with  Mr  Melvin's
    argument but the fact remains that after 8 May the claimants were  able
    to appeal not only the decision to refuse to vary their leave to remain
    under the Rules but also a lawfully made removal decision.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal in this case, probably because the decision was made very
    shortly after the change in the legislation,  has  failed  to  actually
    reach a decision on the removal decision.

11.  I therefore find that there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in failing to reach a decision on a matter that was before it.
     That matter is to be determined by the First-tier Tribunal as  opposed
    to by me and I therefore remit  the  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    remove in accordance with Section 47 to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    heard as soon as possible.



Signed                                  Date 4th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

