
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19804/2012
     IA/19805/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  22 March 2013                             |On 27 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ABDUL WAHEED
                                JAMILA KOUSAR
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Mr Z. Malik, Counsel instructed by Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is the Secretary of State. However, for convenience  I
       refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the appellants are citizens of Pakistan, born on 4 April  1955
       and 6 March 1961, respectively. They  are  husband  and  wife.  They
       arrived in the UK on 26 June 2011 with leave to enter  as  visitors,
       that leave valid until 26  December  2011.  On  11  July  2011  they
       applied under the Immigration Rules for indefinite leave  to  remain
       as  dependent  relatives.  That  application  was  refused  and  the
       appellants then submitted an in-time  application,  on  19  December
       2011, for further leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.  Those
       applications were also refused in decisions to refuse to vary  leave
       to remain made on 7 September 2012.

    3. They appealed against those decisions and their appeals were allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins after a hearing on 29  November
       2012. Permission to appeal having been  granted,  the  appeals  came
       before me.

Submissions

    4. The following is a summary of the submissions made on behalf of  the
       parties. Further reference to the submissions  is  made  during  the
       course of my assessment of the competing arguments.

    5. Ms Kenny submitted that the 'new' Immigration Rules in  relation  to
       Article 8 should have been taken  into  account  by  the  First-tier
       judge in terms of the public interest, namely paragraph  276ADE  and
       Appendix FM. I  was  referred  to  paragraph  91  of  HC  194  which
       introduced the relevant Rules. The grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal were relied on, Ms Kenny reiterating that  no  account  was
       taken of the public interest in  terms  of  immigration  control  as
       reflected in the Immigration Rules. It was also submitted that there
       was a lack of adequate reasons for finding that the  appellants  are
       dependent on family here. Various factual matters were  referred  to
       in submissions on behalf of the respondent.

    6. Mr Malik relied on his skeleton argument. Referring  to  HC  194  he
       submitted that it was clear from the preamble that those  Rules  did
       not apply to applications made prior to 9 July  2012.  It  was  only
       Rule A279 and the  suitability  requirements  that  applied  to  all
       immigration decisions on or after 9 July 2012 and  those  provisions
       do not apply to the circumstances of these appeals.

    7. Even if the 'new' Article 8 Rules did apply, there was no  error  of
       law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Reference  was  made
       to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new
       rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) at [41]-[41] and [43]. As  was  noted
       in that decision, those Rules do not in every  respect  reflect  the
       law in relation to Article  8.  In  relation  to  family  life,  the
       Secretary of State's arguments amount only to  a  disagreement  with
       the findings of the First-tier judge.

    8. Ms Kenny in reply referred to the determination to suggest  that  it
       had been accepted before the First-tier judge  that  the  appellants
       were  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the   Rules.   The
       applicability  of  the  Rules   extends   beyond   the   suitability
       requirements.

My assessment

    9. I am not satisfied that there is any error of  law  in  the  judge's
       decision in terms of the failure to consider the public interest  in
       the proportionality assessment in terms of the  application  of  the
       'new' rules. Those rules  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012.  The
       applications for leave to remain were made on 19 December  2011.  HC
       194 states in the preamble that applications made before 9 July 2012
       are not covered by the Rules introduced  by  HC  194.  The  preamble
       materially states  as  follows:  "...if  an  application  for  entry
       clearance, leave to remain or indefinite leave to  remain  has  been
       made before 9 July 2012 and the application has not been decided, it
       will be decided in accordance with the rules  in  force  on  8  July
       2012."

   10. The argument on behalf of the respondent with reference to paragraph
       91 of HC 194 does not assist in establishing  the  applicability  of
       the Rules in HC 194. Paragraph 91 of HC  194  materially  states  as
       follows:

           "Transitional provisions and  interaction  between  Part  8  and
           Appendix FM

           A277 From 9 July 2012 Appendix FM will apply to all applications
           to which Part 8 of these rules applied on or before 8 July  2012
           except where the provisions of Part 8 are preserved and continue
           to apply, as set out in paragraph A280.

           A278 The requirements to be met under Part 8 after 9  July  2012
           may be modified or supplemented by the requirements in  Appendix
           FM.

           A279 The requirements of sections  "S-EC:  Suitability  -  entry
           clearance"  and  "S-LTR:  Suitability  -  leave  to  remain"  of
           Appendix FM shall apply to all applications made  under  Part  8
           and paragraphs 276A-276D and paragraphs 398-399A shall apply  to
           all immigration decisions made  further  to  applications  under
           Part 8 and paragraphs 276A-276D where a decision is made  on  or
           after 9 July 2012, irrespective of the date the application  was
           made."

   11.  As  suggested  on  behalf  of  the  appellants,   the   suitability
       requirements do not apply in any event. Furthermore, as I  indicated
       to the parties, I am  not  satisfied  that  paragraph  276ADE  comes
       within paragraph 91 because it is not part of 276A-D; it comes after
       it in the Rules. Paragraph 91 of HC 194 is ambiguously worded but  I
       am satisfied that the preamble is clear in stating that the relevant
       part of the Rules, here paragraph 276ADE, did  not  apply  to  these
       appellants. Even if 276ADE did apply, the effect of paragraph 91  is
       to  limit  its  application  in  this  case   to   the   suitability
       requirements. In addition, paragraph 276ADE is outside of the  range
       of applicable Rules described in paragraph 91. Lastly, in so far  as
       there could be  said  to  be  any  remaining  ambiguity  because  of
       inconsistency between paragraph 91 and the preamble, that  ambiguity
       should be resolved in favour of the appellants. If it  was  intended
       that paragraph 91 should apply to applications such as  these,  that
       intention would have to have been clear and unambiguous.

   12. It was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  it  had
       been conceded before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellants
       were not able to meet the requirements of the  new  Rules.  In  this
       respect  I  note  [55]-[56],  and  in   particular   [61]   of   the
       determination.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that   the   appellants'
       representative was wrong to  make  that  concession.  It  is  not  a
       concession that can have any effect in  the  circumstances  of  this
       appeal, because it is wrong in law. The situation would arguably  be
       different if it were a concession of fact as opposed to one of law.

   13. It follows, that I am not satisfied that there is any merit  in  the
       Secretary of State's first ground of challenge to the  determination
       of the First-tier Tribunal in terms  of  the  applicability  of  the
       Immigration Rules relating to Article 8 of the ECHR.

   14. The Secretary of State's second  ground  of  appeal  refers  to  the
       finding made by Judge  Martins  at  [65]  that  the  appellants  are
       dependent on their children in the UK. The  respondent  contends  in
       the grounds that the appellants'  children  can  continue  to  offer
       emotional support from the UK and can visit the appellants  and  the
       appellants can visit the UK as they have previously done. They  have
       family in Pakistan who can support them. The grounds  continue  that
       the Tribunal has given inadequate reasons for  its  findings  "which
       are scant" and do not give  sufficient  detail  as  to  the  claimed
       dependency and how the appellants are said to have  developed  close
       ties, beyond ordinary emotional ties, with their grandchildren.

   15. Ms Kenny relied on  evidence  that  there  were  other  siblings  in
       Pakistan in the near vicinity. Medical treatment would be  available
       for the appellants.  The appellants have a home, a car and employ  a
       driver and a housekeeper. Their relationship with the  grandchildren
       has endured for only 18 months.

   16. However, Judge Martins' determination set out in detail the  written
       and oral evidence, and the respective submissions  of  the  parties.
       She referred to the Secretary of State's contentions in terms of the
       availability of treatment in Pakistan for  the  appellants'  medical
       conditions. She also addressed the competing arguments and  evidence
       in terms of the appellants' financial  situation  and  their  family
       relationships both here  and  in  Pakistan,  the  appellants  having
       explained why the Secretary of State's analysis of  their  situation
       was wrong.

   17. At [62] she stated that having seen and  heard  the  appellants  and
       their sons give evidence, which she found to be "straightforward and
       helpful", she found them to be credible.

   18. At [63] she noted that the appellants had visited the UK on numerous
       occasions and that they had always abided by the immigration  rules.
       She referred to the second appellant's  depression  (and  there  was
       detailed evidence, set out in the determination, of  the  effect  on
       the appellants  of  that  condition).  She  noted  the  efforts  the
       appellants'  children  had  made  to  try  to  manage   the   second
       appellant's  depression  but   that   the   situation   had   become
       unmanageable because of  age  and  possibly  the  first  appellant's
       physical health. There was evidence that he had retired from work on
       health grounds, had a heart bypass and has severe diabetes.

   19. She concluded at [63] that the evidence established that between the
       three sons in the UK they are able to maintain and  accommodate  the
       appellants without recourse to public funds.

   20. At [64] she found that prior to coming to the UK and since 2008  the
       appellants have been wholly dependant on their children in  the  UK.
       She accepted the evidence in relation  to  the  extended  family  in
       Pakistan, that they have  their  own  families  and  are  not  in  a
       position to assist the appellants and that the first appellant's two
       brothers are estranged from him.

   21. Next, at [65] she concluded that taking into account the appellants'
       medical conditions, and the "difficult nature of the  emotional  and
       psychological state of the second appellant",  there  is  dependency
       between the  appellants  and  their  children  that  extends  beyond
       ordinary emotional ties. Thus, she found that there was family  life
       between them.

   22. Judge Martins also found that the appellants had  developed  a  bond
       with their grandchildren, in particular the eldest daughter of their
       eldest son, such that there was family life with  the  grandchildren
       also.

   23. She concluded that if the  appellants  returned  to  Pakistan  there
       would be an impact not only on the appellants but also on their sons
       and  families  since  the   families   could   not   relocate   (the
       grandchildren being British citizens).

   24. The legitimate aim of immigration control was referred  to  at  [65]
       and at [66] the conclusion was  reached  that  the  decision  was  a
       disproportionate interference with the appellants' Article 8 rights.
       Judge Martins again referred to the appellants'  ill  health,  their
       "complete  financial  dependence"  on  their  children   and   their
       psychological and emotional dependence, as well as the bond  between
       them and their grandchildren.

   25. Neither the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  nor  the  oral
       submissions persuade me that there  is  any  error  of  law  in  the
       judge's assessment under Article 8. Submissions in relation  to  the
       support that could be provided on their return,  to  relatives  they
       have in Pakistan, or to the appellants' circumstances there,  reveal
       nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's evaluation of  the
       evidence and her assessment of proportionality.

   26. As I indicated at the hearing, there is some conflation  of  factors
       in the Article 8 assessment  but  this  is  a  matter  of  form  not
       substance.  The  judge  analysed  the  relationships  in  terms   of
       assessing the extent of  family  and  private  life,  evaluated  the
       extent of any interference with the appellants'  Article  8  rights,
       recognised  the  legitimate  aim  that  was  pursued  and  made   an
       assessment of proportionality based on the findings of fact that she
       made. The weight to be attached to any aspect of the evidence was  a
       matter for the judge.   When  a  holistic  view  of  the  Article  8
       consideration is taken, it is clear that the conclusion  that  Judge
       Martins came to in terms of the disproportionate  interference  with
       the appellants' Article 8 rights was a conclusion that was  open  to
       her on the evidence.

   27. In these circumstances, there is no need to go on  to  consider  the
       separate argument made on behalf of the  appellants  to  the  effect
       that the decision to refuse to  vary  leave  to  remain  is  not  in
       accordance with the law and thus unlawful because it was a  decision
       that  applied  the  Article  8  Immigration  Rules  which  have   no
       application.

Decision

   28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal of each appellant under Article 8  ECHR
       stands.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 25/06/13
