



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19729/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 21st August 2015                             |On 1st October 2015        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                            Mrs kamola ibragimova
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sufi, Immigration Law Specialists Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Uzbekistan (born 14th January 1985)  appeals
    with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Tiffen) in which it  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 15th April 2014 refusing her leave to remain on  the  basis
    of her family/private life in the UK under Article 8 ECHR.





Background

 2. From the limited papers  before  me,  it  appears  that  the  Appellant
    entered the UK as a student in 2005. She was granted  leave  to  remain
    until 2013.

 3. In April 2007, she married Khusniddin Musaev (date  of  birth  3rd  May
    1979). The marriage ceremony took place at the  Uzbekistan  Embassy  in
    London. Khusniddin Musaev is also a citizen of Uzbekistan.

 4. In April 2008 their child S was born in the UK and  in  September  2010
    their second child Sd was also born here.

 5. On 24th January 2014 (before the date of the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's leave),  the  Appellant's  husband  was  granted
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.  Accordingly  both  of  the
    Appellant's children were granted British citizenship on  22nd  October
    2014 in line with  their  father's  status.  These  grants  of  British
    citizenship to the children  post-dated  the  Respondent's  refusal  to
    grant the Appellant leave to remain  but  importantly  the  information
    that the Appellant's husband had applied for indefinite leave to remain
    was pointed out to the Respondent in the FLR (O) form.

The FtT Hearing

 6. When the appeal came before the FtT  Judge,  she  had  before  her  the
    Respondent's  refusal  letter  dated  15th  April  2014.  That   letter
    acknowledged that there was a duty under  Section  55  of  the  Border,
    Citizen and Immigration Act 2009 to  consider  and  factor  in  to  any
    decision, the welfare of the Appellant's two  children  who  were  both
    present in the United Kingdom.

 7. In discharging that duty the decision letter said only this:

         "Consideration has been given to  Section  55  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, and it is not  considered  unreasonable  to  expect  you  to
         return to Uzbekistan and continue your family life there with  your
         children, alternatively, you could make a  fresh  application  from
         Uzbekistan to re-enter the UK with valid leave to enter."

    This consideration was predicated of  course  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had no British children in the UK and  that  neither  of  her
    children had lived in the UK for at least seven years.

 8. The FtT Judge directed  herself  on  ZH  Tanzania  and  then  said  the
    following at [20],

         "Although nationality was not a "trump card" it was  of  particular
         importance in assessing the best interests of the  child.  In  this
         appeal the Appellant's children acquired their British  citizenship
         by the accident of being born here. (My emphasis)

         It is obvious that the children can live with their  parents  in  a
         country where the Appellant has spent at least 20 years of her life
         and where the customs and way of life will be second nature to  her
         and her husband. The children are of such an age that they will  be
         able to integrate easily into Uzbekistan. They  do  not  appear  to
         have any heath difficulties or any other reason why they would  not
         be able to integrate".

     The Judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

 9. Permission to appeal  was sought and granted on a  renewed  application
    to the Upper Tribunal in the following terms;

         "The reference now made to JO and others (section 55 duty)  Nigeria
         [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC) is to paragraphs 16 and 17; but  the  general
         guidance contained in them is more concisely  encapsulated  in  the
         judicial head-note at 3:

             The question whether the duties imposed  by  section  55  have
             been duly performed in any given case will  invariably  be  an
             intensely fact sensitive and contextual one. In the real world
             of litigation, the tools available to the  court  or  tribunal
             considering this question will frequently be confined  to  the
             application or submission made to the Secretary of  State  and
             the ultimate letter of decision.

         Arguably the decision letter, in the now familiar standard form  in
         this case, did not comply with the respondent's duty, and  on  that
         basis permission is granted."

     Thus the matter came before me in the UT.

 Error of Law Hearing/Consideration

10. I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Sufi on behalf of the
    Appellant drew my attention to paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of JO and others.
    He  referred  to  the  FtT's  decision  and  submitted  that  both  the
    Respondent and the FtT had failed in their  duty  to  ensure  that  the
    guidance given in JO was followed. The FtT's decision was deficient  in
    this respect. The Judge had failed, to  step  into  the  shoes  of  the
    Secretary of State and thereby make a proper  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's children.  By  the  time  of  the  hearing
    before the FtT, the children had been recognised as  British  citizens.
    The Judge had failed to give proper weight to that factor as  could  be
    seen  by her use of her language at [20] where she said,

         "Although nationality was not a "trump card" it was  of  particular
         importance in assessing the best interests of the  child.  In  this
         appeal the Appellant's children acquired their British  citizenship
         by the accident of being born here."

11. Mr Walker defended the Judge's decision. He submitted  that  the  Judge
    had directed herself properly following ZH  (Tanzania).  She  had  gone
    through the tests outlined in ZH and had found that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for the Appellant, the two children and her  husband,  who
    is also a national of Uzbekistan to relocate there. The decision was  a
    sustainable one.

Consideration

12. In this appeal, I find it is necessary to  start  my  consideration  by
    examining the Respondent's decision  letter  refusing  the  Appellant's
    application. When the Appellant made her initial application for  leave
    to remain, it was clear from the proforma application form that she was
    present in the United Kingdom with her husband and two  daughters.  Her
    daughters were born in the United Kingdom and had lived here all  their
    lives. The eldest had already started school. It was  also  made  clear
    that her husband had applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  here;
    clearly an application which would impact on the family  life  of  both
    the Appellant and her children.

13. The Respondent therefore had a duty under Section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  to  consider,  when  making  her
    decision, as a primary  consideration,  the  best  interests  of  those
    children.

14. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act provides;

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
    that -


                    a)  the  functions  mentioned  in  sub-section  (2)  are
                       discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                       promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                       Kingdom."




     (2)    The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


                   (a) any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                       immigration, asylum or nationality;


                    a) any  function  conferred  by  or  by  virtue  of  the
                       Immigration Acts on an Immigration Officer ...


        (3)    A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,   in
        exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given  to  the
        person by the Secretary of State for  the  purpose  of  sub-section
        (1)".

15. In purporting to discharge that duty the Respondent said,

         "Consideration has been given to  Section  55  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, and it is not  considered  unreasonable  to  expect  you  to
         return to Uzbekistan and continue your family life there with  your
         children, alternatively, you could make a  fresh  application  from
         Uzbekistan to re-enter the UK with valid leave to enter."

    I find that this cursory consideration is insufficient to show that the
    Respondent has discharged the duty imposed upon her under Section 55. t

16. I draw strength for that finding from the  conclusion of  the  decision
    in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT  00223
    (IAC) wherein the Upper Tribunal said at [8],

         "What is required of the Secretary  of  State's  case  workers  and
         decision makers by section 55 of the 2009 Act,  where  it  applies,
         was considered in extenso recently  by  this  Tribunal  in  JO  and
         Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC).   This
         case decided that, fundamentally, it is manifestly insufficient for
         a decision maker to pay mere lip service to the two,  inter-related
         duties imposed by section 55.  The substance of  the  primary  duty
         must be  properly  acknowledged,  the  relevant  children  must  be
         identified and their best interests must then be considered, to  be
         followed by a considered balancing exercise.  In assessing the best
         interests of each  affected  child,  the  decision  maker  must  be
         properly informed.  Furthermore, it must be apparent from the terms
         of the decision that the best interests of each affected child,  as
         assessed, are ranked as a  primary  consideration  and  accorded  a
         primacy of importance, as required by ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4, at
         [26] and [33] especially.  See [7] - [10] of JO (Nigeria)  and,  in
         particular, the following passage in [11]:

         "I  consider  that,  properly  analysed,  there  are  two   guiding
         principles, each rooted in duty.  The first is  that  the  decision
         maker  must  be  properly  informed.   The  second  is  that,  thus
         equipped, the decision maker must conduct a careful examination  of
         all relevant information and factors .....
         Being adequately informed and conducting a scrupulous analysis  are
         elementary pre-requisites to the inter-related tasks of identifying
         the child's best interests  and  then  balancing  them  with  other
         material considerations.  This balancing exercise  is  the  central
         feature of cases of the present type.  It cannot  realistically  or
         sensibly be undertaken unless and until  the  scales  are  properly
         prepared."





17. Following on from the above, I am satisfied that the Respondent did not
    conduct  a  careful  consideration  of  the  best  interests   of   the
    Appellant's children. For example I return to the point that  when  the
    Appellant's application was made, evidence was put before the  decision
    maker that the Appellant's husband, the father of the two children, had
    made a long residence settlement application.  The  children  had  both
    been born in the UK and had lived here all their lives. It follows that
    any consideration should have  factored  in  the  relationship  of  the
    children with their father and their mother and how that played out  in
    the family unit as a whole.

18. Therefore, I am satisfied that the Respondent's consideration  of  this
    in her decision  falls far  short  of  that  required  under  the  duty
    imposed her by Section 55.

19. When the matter came before the FtT, it is correct to  say  that  there
    was an opportunity to put right that failure.

20. In doing so this required the  FtT  to  step  into  the  shoes  of  the
    Respondent and effectively become  the  primary  decision  maker.  This
    entailed carrying out a careful examination of all relevant factors and
    giving appropriate weight to those factors. This I find the FtT has not
    done. I say so for  the  following  reasons.  At  [20]  the  Judge  has
    directed  herself  properly  that  she  must  take  into   account   ZH
    (Tanzania). However, whilst she has set out the compendium of questions
    asked in ZH (Tanzania) instead of answering those questions  the  Judge
    has formed conclusions by saying,

         "In this appeal the Appellant's  children  acquired  their  British
         citizenship by the accident of being born here. It is obvious  that
         the children can live with their parents in  a  country  where  the
         Appellant has spent at least 20 years of her  life  and  where  the
         customs and way of life will  be  second  nature  to  her  and  her
         husband. The children are of such an age that they will be able  to
         integrate easily into Uzbekistan. They do no  appear  to  have  any
         health difficulties or any other reason why they would not be  able
         to integrate. "

21. I find it hard to see why the Judge concluded  that  "it  was  obvious"
    that the children can live with their parents in a  country  where  the
    appellant has spent at least 20 years of her life. There is no analysis
    explaining why she finds it obvious that the Appellant's  children  can
    live with their parents which includes their father in Uzbekistan. More
    particularly there is no analysis of  what  must  be  regarded  as  the
    important  considerations  in  this  case;  the  children  are  British
    citizens, their father who is the main breadwinner of this family  unit
    has been granted indefinite leave to remain. He enjoys a settled status
    and works here earning a good salary. The children have lived all their
    lives in the UK; and by the time of this  decision  not  only  has  the
    eldest started school here, but I would expect that their youngest will
    have as well.

22. I have no hesitation in finding therefore, for the  foregoing  reasons,
    that the FtT erred in its decision and that decision must be set aside.



The Way Forward

23. I have considered how  best  to  deal  with  this  matter  since  I  am
    conscious that this family unit involves two young children.  I  return
    therefore to the original decision made against the appellant which was
    a decision against a refusal to grant her leave to remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. I am satisfied that  proper  consideration  has  not
    been given to that application by the Respondent.

24. The correct way forward therefore is for me to  allow  the  Appellant's
    appeal, on the basis that the Respondent's refusal is not in accordance
    with the law.

25. This leaves the application outstanding. It will now be incumbent  upon
    the Secretary of State to remake  the  decision,  after  making  proper
    enquiry and giving proper consideration to all the relevant factors  in
    this Appellant's case particularly those concerning the best  interests
    of the two children.

26. It is to be hoped, bearing in mind that young children are involved  in
    this process, any decision would be made sooner rather than later.

Decision

27. The appeal of Kamola Ibragimova is allowed  in  that  the  Respondent's
    decision is not in accordance with the law.

28. Appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated

Fee Award

As I have allowed the appeal to the extent set  out  above,  I  make  a  fee
award.


Signature                                             Dated

