
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19843/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st December 2017                         |On 15th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                            Khurram Shahzad Virk
                        (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Visa Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's  application  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis that  it  was  a
    sham marriage.  That decision followed interviews of both the appellant
    and his sponsor.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The grounds for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  advanced
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in  law  by  not  applying
    Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 properly.   It  was  asserted  that  the
    Secretary of State must first discharge the evidential  burden  showing
    the marriage was one of convenience prior to the burden shifting to the
    appellant.  The judge  failed  to  adopt  that  approach  in  practice.
    Further, the judge erred in his reliance on the interviews  which  were
    fundamentally flawed.  The conduct of the interviews was aggressive and
    intimidatory and their evidential worth  limited.  The  judge  did  not
    taken into account the evidence of the  appellant  and  submissions  in
    relation to the interviews such that the interviews were carried out in
    an inappropriate manner.  The judge failed  to  take  into  account  or
    given  weight  to  the  evidence  before  him   as   to   the   alleged
    discrepancies.

 3. I find that there is indeed an error of law and the decision  shall  be
    set aside for the following reasons.

 4. I make these brief observations. At paragraph  [18]  the  judge  stated
    that the burden was on the appellant to establish the facts in  respect
    of matters relied upon. That is not correct. Although there followed  a
    citation from Papajorgji (EEA spouse  - marriage of convenience) Greece
    [2012] 00038 (IAC) nowhere was it manifest that the judge followed  and
    applied the procedure laid down in Papajorgji and  now  established  in
    Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.   The  burden  of  proof  lies  on  the
    authorities seeking to restrict rights under the Directive  2004/38/EC.
    The legal burden of proving the marriage is  one  of  convenience  lies
    throughout on the SSHD but the  evidential  burden  may  shift  to  the
    appellant by proof of facts which justify the inference that a marriage
    is not genuine.  The judge did not in practice deal with this.

 5. Even if the Secretary of State had discharged  the  initial  evidential
    burden  which  then  passes  to  the  appellant,   the   evidence   and
    explanations produced by the appellant needed to be  addressed  by  the
    judge. The appellant's evidence was not  adequately  addressed  or  its
    rejection explained.  The judge  factored into  his  deliberations  the
    interview  conducted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  but   there   were
    significant concerns raised in respect of those interviews at the  time
    of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  does  not
    address those concerns.

 6. For example, at question 12 of the immigration interview of the sponsor
    (who was pregnant at the time),  the interviewer sets the tone  of  the
    interview explaining at the outset that the sponsor  was  advised  that
    she could be

           'committing a range of offences should you enter into a marriage
           for immigration purposes. The penalties can  include  up  to  14
           years imprisonment for an EEA National.

           ...

           you or your husband could be kept at a detention centre, so that
           could happen if it's  decided  the  relationship's  not  genuine
           today your husband could be taken to a detention centre and then
           removed from the UK, all right'

    This is merely an extract of  the  warnings  given.   It  is  no  doubt
    correct that a clear  picture  of  the  consequences  of  giving  false
    information should be transmitted to an interviewee  but  the  warnings
    outlined above are not the only indication that the interview might  be
    construed as overbearing  from  the  outset  and  thus  deficient.  The
    interview proceeded to 125 questions and continued  after  the  sponsor
    stated at question 112 that she wanted

           'to stop the interview because I feel like throwing up.'

    The interviewer was therefore told by the sponsor that she was not well
    enough  to  continue  as  she  was  pregnant,   but   the   interviewer
    nevertheless persisted.  It  would  appear  indeed  that  although  the
    interviewer accepted that the interview would have to be concluded,  he
    nonetheless continued and proceeded to  ask  further  questions.  These
    were not of a minor nature and as the interviewer  stated  at  question
    121 'I'm asking a serious question'.

 7. The difficulty is that the judge did not  make  any  reference  to  the
    nature and content of the interview notwithstanding  that  its  conduct
    was challenged. It is a matter for the judge as to  the  weight  to  be
    accorded to the evidence but Mr Briddock drew my attention to an  array
    of criticisms of the interview which, if correct,  would  substantially
    undermine the value of such evidence.  The judge did  not  address  the
    concerns which were identified in both the witness  statements  of  the
    appellant and sponsor as to the conduct of the interview  and  nor  did
    the judge make any reference to the explanations by the  appellant  and
    sponsor of the explanations of the discrepancies. That is an  error  of
    law.

 8. Mr Duffy conceded that the interviews were at the  least  questionable.
    In relation to such interviews, I suggest the possible  application  of
    the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and its  attendant  Codes  of
    Practice (which attempts to strike a balance between the powers of  the
    authorities and the rights and freedoms of the public)  should  perhaps
    be drawn to the attention of the Secretary of State.  At the very least
    the conduct of such interviews should  be  reviewed  and  possibly  the
    subject of training because of the profound  implications  for  justice
    and resources.

 9. I declined, however, to allow the appeal outright as there  can  be  no
    preserved findings of fact.  I will  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety.

10. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 21st December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

