
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19168/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 July 2013                                 |On 8 October 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             phathokuhle ndlovu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Ashraf, Girlington Advice and Training
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Phathokuhle Ndlovu, was born on 17 May  1964  and  is  a
    citizen of Zimbabwe. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 16 August 2012 to remove her from  the
    United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.  The First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 25 October  2012,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are confined  to  Article  8  ECHR.   First,  the
    grounds challenge the judge's finding, his determination at [35(i)]:

         "I now  turn  to  deal  with  the  appellant's  family  life.   The
         appellant cannot I find argue she has a close family life with  her
         sister in Aylesbury and at the same time  argue  that  she  has  an
         established private life in Bradford.   These  are  not  compatible
         arguments."

 3. The grounds assert that the maintenance of an individual's private  and
    family life should not be mutually exclusive simply by reason  of  that
    individual's  geographical  separation  from  other   family   members.
    However, I believe that the point that the judge was making is that the
    Appellant has shown, by adducing a great deal of evidence of  her  many
    private life activities in Bradford, she would not have  the  time  and
    resources remaining to maintain an active family life with  her  sister
    in Aylesbury.  She does not live with her sister and she  is  unlikely,
    as a consequence of her  commitments  in  Bradford,  to  make  frequent
    visits to her sister's  home.  That  was  a  finding  which  the  judge
    reasonably drew from the evidence before him.  I agree that  the  judge
    could have  expressed  himself  somewhat  more  clearly.  However,  his
    finding later in the same sub-paragraph that there are "no  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances  in  this  case  which  would  justify  any
    finding that the relationship is any other than a  normal  relationship
    that exists between siblings" was clearly available to the judge on the
    evidence before him.

 4. The grounds also raise the question of delay  by  the  Home  Office  in
    dealing with the appellant's representations made following  a  refusal
    for leave in January 2002.  The judge has very helpfully set out at [2]
    a very detailed chronology of the appellant's immigration history.   It
    appears that the appellant applied for leave to remain as a student  in
    September 2001 and was refused in January 2002.  Nothing  then  appears
    to have happened (despite having no leave to remain, the appellant  did
    not leave the country) until July 2003 when he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a student.  On this occasion, the  leave  was  granted  until
    January 2004.  Thereafter, the appellant applied for several extensions
    of  her  student  leave  which  finally  expired  on  30  April   2009.
    Subsequent applications then made by the appellant to remain under Tier
    4 and Tier 1 were refused but the appellant was eventually served  with
    a form IS151A on 14 October 2011.

 5. It is difficult to see how the issue of  delay  arises  in  this  case.
    When the appellant was refused leave to remain as a student in  January
    2002, she had the obvious option of leaving the country  and  returning
    home.  She benefited from the delay in removing her at that  time  and,
    perhaps surprisingly, acquired leave to remain as a  student  in  2004.
    Thereafter, it is difficult to see there has been any reasonable  delay
    on the part of the Home Office in dealing  with  her  applications  for
    further leave to remain.  I find  that  the  judge  did  not  err  when
    considering the relevance of delay in the Article 8 ECHR appeal.

 6. Paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal complain that the  judge  did  not
    follow "the five stage test" set out in Razgar.  Having considered  the
    determination carefully, I am in no doubt that the judge has  carefully
    addressed all the relevant evidence in reaching his conclusions in this
    appeal.  It is  true  that  he  has  not  referred  in  any  detail  to
    jurisprudence relating to Article 8 ECHR but that  is  not  the  point;
    what is important is that he has applied the principles  enunciated  in
    the case law.  As he rightly observed at [35(j)],  proportionality  was
    the central issue in the Article 8 ECHR appeal.  The judge's conclusion
    that there would  not  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights in respect of both family and private life
    was clearly open to him  on  the  evidence  and  I  find  that  he  has
    supported his decision with clear and cogent reasons.  By contrast, the
    skeleton argument supplied to the  Upper  Tribunal  contains  extensive
    quotations from case law only to conclude with the bold assertion that,
    "the  Appellant's  right  to  a  family  and  private  life   will   be
    disproportionately interfered with  by  refusing  him  (sic)  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom."  The judge's determination,  unlike  the
    skeleton argument, has sought to apply the principles of law arising in
    an  Article  8  ECHR  appeal  and  to  the  particular  facts  of  this
    Appellant's case.  His analysis portrays no error  of  law  so  serious
    that the determination falls to be set aside and, as a  consequence,  I
    dismiss this appeal.

DECISION

 7. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 10 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

