
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19571/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2013                                |On 30 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                             pandidurai krishnan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Singarajah, Counsel instructed by Messrs KTS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  31
    August 2012, to refuse to vary the Appellant's leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and to remove him by way of directions under s.47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The brief immigration history of the Appellant is that he  was  granted
    conferred leave to enter the United Kingdom on 12 November  2010  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student until 30 August 2012,  subject  to  conditions
    restricting employment and prohibiting recourse to public funds.

3.   On appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 13 February 2013 the First-tier  Judge  noted  that  the
    decision of the Respondent was considered not to breach  Article  8  of
    the ECHR. but that the removal directions at the same time  under  s.47
    had "to fall by the wayside as they should not now be made at the  same
    time as making a decision on refusal to vary leave".   In  that  regard
    reference was made to the guidance of this Tribunal  in  Ahmadi  (s.47:
    decision: validity; Sapkota) Afghanistan  [2012]  UKUT  147  (IAC)  and
    Adamally and Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures)
    Sri Lanka [2012] UKUT 414 (IAC).  To that extent therefore  the  First-
    tier Judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Section  47
    decision and set aside the removal directions.

4.   At paragraph 7 of his determination the First-tier  Judge  recorded  as
    follows:

         "Today however, at the outset of the  Appellant's  submissions,  it
         was accepted by  the  Appellant  through  his  Counsel,  and  quite
         sensibly, that the Immigration Rules did not assist the  Appellant.
         He did not qualify  under  them  or  under  any  interpretation  or
         application of policy guidance or shortage occupation list  or  SOC
         Code 5434 of the Respondent.  Only Article 8 was relied upon."

5.    In  consequence  the  First-tier  Judge  proceeded  to   dismiss   the
    Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

6.   In terms of the Judge's consideration  of  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    appeal, he had this to say:

         "12. In regard to Article 8, I conducted an assessment  of  whether
             the Appellant had a family or  private  life  in  the  UK  and
             concluded that whilst he may have a private life, he  had  not
             established that he enjoyed a family life whilst  in  the  UK.
             He actually  provided  no  particulars  of  either  family  or
             private life.  He relied instead on the lack  of  transitional
             provisions, being somehow  an  infringement  of  his  'rights'
             under Article 8.  I fail to see how that could be  so.   There
             was no legitimate expectation argument put forward  in  regard
             to the absence of transitional rights.  If there are new Rules
             which assist him in the future then so be it - there has to be
             a start date and an end date for most things.


         13.  In regard to his private life, he always entered and  remained
             in the UK under no illusions that he was here  for  a  limited
             period.  His home is very much elsewhere and the vast majority
             of his life from 1983 was spent in his home country.


         14.  In the balancing exercise I  undertake,  and  considering  all
             matters put to me, I conclude that the scales began in  favour
             of the Respondent.  On the case put forward,  I  am  satisfied
             that any interference with private life by this decision is  a
             proportionate  one  given  the  aims  of  the  Respondent   in
             protecting and upholding the law in this  area  especially  in
             regard to economic issues." (Emphasis added)

7.   The First-tier Judge proceeded to dismiss  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    ECHR appeal.

8.   The Appellant's initial  application  for  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision failed and in giving his reasons for refusing the  application
    First-tier Judge Pooler had inter alia this to say:

         "3.  The Judge recorded at paragraph  7  Counsel's  acknowledgement
             that the Appellant was unable to meet the requirements of  the
             Immigration Rules, a concession  which  was  repeated  in  the
             grounds.  In these circumstances, the Judge made no  error  of
             law by failing to make findings in respect of matters  arising
             under the Rules since those matters were no longer in  dispute
             between the parties.


         4.   The Article 8 appeal relied solely on the Appellant's  private
             life in circumstances  where  he  had  entered  the  UK  on  a
             temporary basis under the PBS and could not have  expected  to
             be allowed to remain if he did not meet  the  requirements  of
             the Rules: see for example MM (Tier 1  PSW;  Art  8;  'private
             life') Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037.   The  Judge  recorded  at
             para 12 that the Appellant had given  no  particulars  of  his
             claimed private life in the UK.  Against this  background  the
             grounds do not disclose any arguable error of law."

9.   However, the Appellant's renewed application to the Upper Tribunal  was
    granted when Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane concluded that the  Record
    of Proceedings disclosed that the submissions regarding  the  operation
    or the guidance along the lines set out in the grounds,  were  advanced
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the context of Article 8 of the
    ECHR and that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  analysis  contained  no
    reference to those submissions which  were  arguably  relevant  to  the
    Article 8 case.

10.  The Tribunal subsequently received from the Respondent  their  Rule  24
    response that inter alia had this to say:

         "The Respondent has considered the refusal of the  FTT  Judge.   It
         appears that it was conceded that the Appellant could not meet  the
         Rules and little  evidence  was  advanced  as  to  the  Appellant's
         private life demonstrating that refusal  of  further  leave  was  a
         disproportionate interference with the Appellant's rights.


         The Respondent cannot conclude that a material error  is  disclosed
         and request an oral hearing."

11.  Thus the appeal came before me on 9 July 2013 when my  first  task  was
    to  determine  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Judge
    disclosed an error on a point of law.

12.  In that regard and at the outset of the  hearing,  Mr  Singarajah  most
    helpfully and in my view realistically informed me as follows:

         "I am not instructed to withdraw but I have spoken to Ms  Kiss  the
         Presenting Officer and I am somewhat confused as to the basis  upon
         which the UTJ granted permission in the first place.


         It  appears  from  the  grounds  and  the  determination  that  the
         Immigration  Rules  were  not  relied  upon  -   thus   leaving   a
         consideration of Article 8.


         It is apparent from the determination that certainly there  was  no
         reference to  a  consideration  of  the  balancing  exercise  under
         Article 8."

13.  Mr Singarajah continued that he was duty bound to submit to me that  he
    did not see how submissions regarding matters relating to the  relevant
    Policy Guidance were "relevant under the framework".

14.  Mr Singarajah added that whilst he might advance the argument that  the
    First-tier  Judge's  Article  8  reasoning  was  inadequate  and   more
    particularly that such reasoning  did  not  include  a  record  of  the
    balancing exercise under Article 8, he nonetheless had nothing  further
    to add.

15.  Ms Kiss in response, referred me to the  Appellant's  original  written
    grounds of appeal that, as she rightly stated, were extremely brief and
    in terms of the Human Rights Act 1998 simply argued that the removal of
    the Appellant from the United Kingdom would be "unlawful under  Section
    6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998...  as  being  incompatible  with  the
    Appellant's Convention rights."

16.  Indeed as I observed those brief grounds made no reference  at  all  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

17.   Ms  Kiss  whilst  appreciating  Mr  Singarajah's  frank  and   helpful
    submissions, further pointed out that the Statement of Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules relevant to this appeal took effect on 14  June  2012
    and under the sub-heading "Implementation" the following inter alia was
    stated:

         "However, if  an  applicant  has  made  an  application  for  entry
         clearance or leave before 14 June 2012 and the application has  not
         been decided before that date, it will  be  decided  in  accordance
         with the Rules in force on 13 June 2012."


    Further the Explanatory Memorandum to the Statement of  Changes  stated
    inter alia at paragraph 3.3 as follows:


         "These changes must come into force on 6 April 2012 as the existing
         Tier 2 (General) limit expires on 5 April 2012."

18.  Further at paragraph 3.5 the following was inter alia stated:

         "The changes to the skills threshold will come  into  force  on  14
         June 2012...".

19.  It followed  from  the  above  that  there  could  be  no  transitional
    provision.  Ms Kiss further referred me to the decision of the Court of
    Appeal in Miah that  held  inter  alia  that  there  was  no  near-miss
    principle applicable to the Immigration Rules.

20.  Miss Kiss  otherwise  endorsed  the  Respondent's  contention  that  no
    material  error  of  law  was  disclosed  in  the  First-tier   Judge's
    determination for the reasons set out in the Rule 24 response  dated  5
    June 2013.

21.  Mr Singarajah did not choose to respond to Ms Kiss's submissions.

Assessment

22.  At the close of the parties' submissions I  was  able  to  inform  them
    that I had concluded that the determination of the First-tier Judge  in
    terms of his Article 8 ECHR assessment disclosed no error on a point of
    law.

23.  In reaching that conclusion I have considered  the  First-tier  Judge's
    determination with care and  taken  account  of  Mr  Singarajah's  most
    realistic and helpful clarification of the Appellant's position on that
    issue. I find myself in accord not only with the submissions raised  by
    Ms Kiss before me but also the reasons put forward by the Respondent in
    her Rule 24 response.

24.  The First-tier Judge had recorded at paragraph 7 of  his  determination
    the  concession  of  the  Appellant  through  his  Counsel   that   the
    Immigration Rules did not assist him.

25.  At paragraph 12 of his determination the  First-tier  Judge  was  clear
    that the Appellant had "... actually provided no particulars of  either
    family or private life".

26.  Whilst the First-tier Judge noted that the Appellant relied instead  on
    the lack of transitional provisions being somehow  an  infringement  of
    his rights under Article 8 the Judge "failed to see how that  could  be
    so". Such a conclusion, as indeed illuminated by Ms Kiss in her closing
    submissions for reasons with which I concur, was  proper  and  correct.
    The Appellant's Counsel's representations before the  First-tier  Judge
    based on fairness  or  legitimate  expectation  could  only  impact  on
    proportionality and did not alter the essential feature of  this  case,
    namely that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom with  leave  in  a
    limited capacity and had advanced no evidence to support  a  conclusion
    that requiring him to return to his country of origin India, would be a
    disproportionate interference with his right to private life.

27.  It is thus apparent  to  me  that  the  First-tier  Judge's  Article  8
    findings however brief, were in the circumstances properly open to  him
    and  supported  by  the  evidence  or  indeed  lack  of  it,  and  thus
    sustainable in law.

28.  Where a claimant fails to  establish  a  substantive  right  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules, he will have to put forward evidence of  a
    private/family life of such significance to show that removal would  be
    disproportionate.  It is apparent that no such compelling evidence  was
    put before the First-tier Judge in the present appeal.

29.  I find that it cannot be said that the Judge's Article 8 findings  were
    irrational  and/or  Wednesbury  unreasonable  such  as  to  amount   to
    perversity.  It cannot be said that  they  were  in  the  circumstances
    inadequate. This is not a case where the Judge's  Article  8  reasoning
    was such that  the  Tribunal  was  unable  to  understand  the  thought
    processes that he employed in reaching his decision.

30.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that he considered to be critical to his  Article  8  decision  on  the
    material issues raised before him in this appeal.

Conclusions

31.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

32.  I do not set aside the decision.



Signed                                  Date 29 July 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
