
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19047/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 14 July 2015                        |                On 27 July 2015      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr Swagata Roy Chowdhury
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)

                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, (Counsel instructed by Uzma Law Limited)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law decision.  For convenience  I  shall  refer  to
    the parties as the Secretary of State who  is  the  appellant  in  this
    matter and to Mr Chowdhury as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant born on 2  October  1981  and  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,
    appealed the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur under paragraph 245DD of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

3.   In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15 December  2014  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (Judge  Metzer)  (FTT)  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The FTT found the evidence given by  the  appellant
    to be credible.  The FTT decision  made  reference   to  a  substantial
    Reasons for Refusal Letter challenging that the Claimant was a  genuine
    entrepreneur and to a witness statement prepared  by  the  Claimant  in
    response dated 3 November 2014.  At [20] the FTT  found  "I  found  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.  Although not all the documentation
    had been provided at the time of  the  application,  I  find  that  the
    appellant did provide sufficient information to address all the  issues
    the respondent raised concerning whether the appellant  was  a  genuine
    entrepreneur.  Given  the  appellant's  qualifications  and  employment
    history and, as the respondent acknowledges, his  previous  immigration
    history which had not caused any difficulties, I find the appellant has
    established to the relevant standard that he is a genuine entrepreneur.
     I find that he has addressed all the concerns the respondent raised in
    the refusal letter."

Grounds of Application

4.   The Secretary of State argued that the FTT failed to  give  reasons  or
    adequate reasons for findings on material matters.  The refusal  letter
    referred in detail to the application and  discrepancies  were  raised.
    The credibility of the funds and credibility of the business plans were
    of concern.  An advert on Gumtree was no longer running, and  reference
    was made to a previous application refused for credibility reasons, and
    because the appellant lacked qualifications to take  up  the  position.
    The FTT failed to engage with any of the credibility points or  provide
    reasons for allowing the appeal.

5.   The  second  ground  relied  on  was  that  the  FTT  made  a  material
    misdirection of law.  The FTT [10] admitted evidence  not  included  in
    the application (Ahmed and Another (PBS:  admissible  evidence)  [2014]
    UKUT 365 (IAC)).  No points had been awarded under the three categories
    of Appendix A.

Permission

6.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  PJG
    White) who found arguable errors of law,  firstly  as  to  the  central
    issue in the appeal, the viability and credibility of  the  appellant's
    proposed business.  Secondly that  the  FTT  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings on many of the numerous issues raised in  the  refusal  letter
    and thirdly that the  FTT  wrongly  took  into  account  documents  not
    submitted with the application (Ahmed).


Rule 24 Response

7.   The Claimant submits that it is not necessary for the  FTT  to  address
    every single issue in the determination.  The FTT was entitled to  come
    to the decision it did having heard the evidence and read the documents
    in support.  Reasoning need not be extensive if the decision as a whole
    makes sense.  There was no misdirection of law.  Reliance was placed on
    Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 0085.

8.   The Secretary of State raised no issues in relation  to  the  mandatory
    evidence.  It was submitted that Ahmed was not applicable.

Submission made at Error of Law Hearing

9.   At the hearing before me both  representatives  made  submissions.   Ms
    Holmes relied on the grounds of appeal.

10.  Mr Karim produced a skeleton argument upon which he sought to  rely  in
    preference to the Rule 24 response.

11.  He submitted that the FTT was fully aware of the  respondent's  reasons
    why the matter was refused.  The FTT decision set out evidence given by
    the Claimant which correlated with the concerns raised by the Secretary
    of State and with his account given in interview.  Documentary evidence
    did not have to be provided to establish credibility  of  the  Claimant
    and/or his business.  The Claimant submitted all the documents  needed,
    he attended an interview and had not  been  asked  to  produce  further
    documentation.  It was  open  to  the  FTT  to  accept  the  Claimant's
    credible oral evidence.  It was unfair that the Claimant was not  given
    the opportunity to produce new documents following the interview.

12.  In Ahmed the Secretary of State was prepared to  give  the  opportunity
    to provide further documentation post interview.  Reliance  was  placed
    on Ex parte Gondolia and Shizad (headnote (2)).

13.  Mr Karim further submitted that the second ground  disclosed  no  error
    of law in light of the fact that the FTT had already found the Claimant
    to be credible.

 14.   Ms Holmes responded that it was simply not sufficient for the FTT  to
    indicate that the Reasons for Refusal Letter had been read, to set  out
    evidence and allow the appeal on credibility  findings.   There  was  a
    necessity to make actual findings which engaged with the issues  raised
    in the refusal letter.

15.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.  Ms Holmes  submitted
    that in the event of finding a material error, it was open to the Upper
    Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on the basis of the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Karim argued that if it is concluded that  the
    Tribunal failed to grapple with the evidence and issues, a rehearing by
    the FTT was needed.  There were issues of fairness to be pursued before
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Discussion and Decision

16.  I find a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   Whilst  accepting  that   reference   was   made   to   the
    "substantial" Reasons for Refusal Letter and to the Claimant's  witness
    statement responding to concerns raised by the Secretary of State,  the
    FTT failed to engage in any further detail or at all.

17.  The Secretary of State raised concerns about the provenance and  source
    of the investment funds that the Claimant was seeking to  rely  on  and
    was not satisfied with the Claimant's explanation that they  came  from
    his savings, his parents and from a previous business. For example bank
    statements showed large amounts credited to the account on  four  dates
    in October 2013 and no evidence was provided as to  the  provenance  of
    those funds. The Secretary of State raised concerns as to the viability
    and credibility of the business plans and market research and as to the
    Claimant's previous educational qualifications  and  lack  of  business
    experience.  The Claimant failed to provide a transcript or diploma  to
    show what modules were studied and there was  no  evidence  to  confirm
    that he was working for Costa Coffee as an assistant manager.

18.   I am satisfied that the FTT erred in law by a  failure  to  show  that
    careful consideration was given to the concerns raised by the Secretary
    of State and/or give any or any adequate reasons for finding  that  the
    Claimant was a credible and reliable witness  and/or  reasons  why  his
    oral evidence was capable of meeting the concerns raised.  Other than a
    finding that the Claimant was a credible witness the FTT did  not  make
    any findings of fact in terms of establishing that the Claimant  was  a
    genuine entrepreneur with reference  to  the  concerns  raised  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.

19.  As was emphasised on behalf of the Claimant at the hearing  before  me,
    no concerns were raised by the Secretary of State as to the reliability
    of the documents produced in support of the application and  which  are
    listed in the hearing bundle marked C-R.  However, I am satisfied  that
    the FTT admitted  in  evidence  documents  that  were  not  before  the
    decision maker and which were produced at the hearing, for example  the
    Lloyds bank statements appearing at pages 27  to  29,  P60s,  documents
    from Costa Coffee, leaflets, a business card, market  research  and  an
    MBA transcript.  In so doing the FTT failed to apply Section 85A(4)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   This  statutory
    provision is expressed as an exception  to  a  general  Rule  that  all
    relevant evidence may be considered  and  applies  where  there  is  an
    appeal against an immigration decision under the  points-based  system.
    As was held in Ahmed "the purpose of that provision is quite clear.  It
    is that where a points-based  application  is  made  and  refused,  the
    assessment by the judge is to be of the material that  was  before  the
    decision maker rather  than  a  new  consideration  of  new  material."
    Further, the Tribunal in Ahmed found no  distinction  as  between  non-
    points based and points based matters.  I am satisfied that the FTT did
    take into account evidence that was not before the decision  maker  and
    as evidenced in the decision  at [6, 9,  11,  12  and  16],  and  which
    amounts to an error of law.


20.  I find material errors of law in the decision.  I set aside the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.



Remaking the Decision

21.  I have considered the submissions made by both  representatives  as  to
    how this matter should be remade.  The decision is lacking as a  result
    of the absence  of  findings  of  fact  and  reasons  demonstrating  an
    engagement with the detailed concerns raised by the Secretary of State.
     I find that aside from the Claimant's oral and  written  evidence  the
    Claimant himself has failed to adequately address  the  matters  raised
    and has failed to discharge the burden  of  proof  (  to  the  required
    standard) on him to show that he meets the relevant Rules.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal took into account evidence that was  not  admissible  and
    that was not before the decision maker.  I am prevented by statute from
    admitting that evidence.  I see no merit in a fresh hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal notwithstanding that lack of findings made. On  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal there was no  prospect
    of the Claimant succeeding in  his  appeal  without  more  evidence.  I
    dismiss the appeal on immigration grounds.  It is of course open to the
    Claimant to submit a fresh application and to  rely  on  the  documents
    that have since been provided in support of his application.

Notice of Decision

22.  I find material errors of law by the FTT.

23.  The decision is set aside.

24.  I remake the decision by substituting my decision that  the  appeal  is
    dismissed on immigration grounds.


No anonymity order is made.


Signed                                  Date 24.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and so there is no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 24.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
