
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19642/2015
     IA/20637/2015
     IA/20539/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2016                           |On 11 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ABISOLA SOTIN-ABRAHAM
                                     OA
                                     NA
 (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE IN RELATION TO SECOND AND THRID RESPONDENTs ONLY)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Oji, Counsel instructed by Nathan Aaron
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS




1.   The respondents (hereafter the claimants) are citizens of Nigeria.   On
    5 May 2016 First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Swinnerton  allowed  their
    appeals  against  decisions  made  by  the  appellant  (hereafter   the
    Secretary of State or SSHD) refusing them leave to remain on Article  8
    grounds.  On 27 October Upper Tribunal Judge (UTJ) Blum set  aside  the
    FtT Judge's decision for error of law.  He held that she had failed  to
    take into account relevant considerations in concluding that it was not
    reasonable for the second claimant to return to Nigeria  and  that  she
    had reached conclusions not open to her on the evidence before her.  At
    [16] and [17] he acquiesced in an application made to adjourn to enable
    further evidence to be provided in respect of the second  claimant  and
    the impact of the proposed removal on him.  He also  recorded  at  [17]
    that:

         "[T]he primary findings of fact made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge were not challenged by the [Secretary  of  State]  and  those
         core factual findings stand.  The legal inferences drawn from those
         factual findings by the First-tier Tribunal do not stand."

2.   At the resumed hearing before me Ms Oji  on  behalf  of  the  claimants
    highlighted the further evidence made  available  regarding  the  third
    claimant who is now 10 years old.  She submitted that these showed that
    he had established his life in the UK and  because  of  his  move  from
    London to Liverpool now had friends in both  cities.   He  is  actively
    involved in school life.  He has spent his whole life in the UK and has
    a legitimate claim to being able to stay on the  basis  of  ten  years'
    residence.

3.   Ms Oji submitted that the immigration status of the parents, the  first
    two claimants, could not be held against the minor claimants.   Because
    the third claimant had been in the UK for over seven years,  there  had
    to be strong reasons to remove him and his family. The family  had  not
    had recourse to public funds.  On a proper consideration  of  case  law
    principles including those set out in EV (Philippines) the  balance  of
    factors to be considered fell  in  favour  of  him  being  entitled  to
    succeed under the Rules and the other claimants to succeed in line.  Mr
    Kotas for the SSHD said he accepted  that  the  third  claimant's  best
    interests may be in remaining in the UK, but the reasonableness of  the
    question of  him  being  expected  to  return  to  Nigeria  had  to  be
    considered in the context that he would be removed  together  with  his
    family members as a unit, that the claimants had family connections  in
    Nigeria and Nigeria  was  an  English-speaking  country  with  adequate
    educational facilities.

4.   On the basis of the preserved findings of fact,  the  claimants'  basic
    particulars are as follows.  The first claimant came to the UK in 2004.
     The first claimant met the man who became father of  her  children  in
    2005.  In February and November 2013 the SSHD refused her  applications
    to remain as a dependent spouse.  Following separation in 2004 she does
    not have any contact with him.  He no longer has leave to remain in the
    UK.  The first claimant has worked for various periods  of  time  since
    being in the UK and last worked in 2008.  Friends and  members  of  the
    church have been supporting her financially.  She moved to Liverpool in
    July  2015.   The  second  and  third  claimants  are  aged  10  and  5
    respectively.  The second claimant attended primary schools  in  London
    obtaining very good  school  reports.   He  is  presently  attending  a
    primary school in Liverpool  as  is  his  younger  brother,  the  third
    claimant.

5.   The second claimant suffers from asthma, although it is not  a  serious
    medical problem.  The third claimant also gained  good  school  reports
    from his first primary school in London, being described  as  a  superb
    role model for the rest of the class.

6.   As regards the claimant's family  connections  in  Nigeria,  the  first
    claimant maintains contact with her mother and siblings there  and  the
    two children have family  connections  in  Nigeria  through  the  first
    claimant.  However, the first claimant has not  visited  Nigeria  since
    2004 and the children have never visited there.

7.   I observe first of all that as a result of UTJ  Blum's  directions  the
    claimants have been afforded adequate opportunity  to  produce  further
    evidence particularly as regards the best interests of the children and
    the documentation produced in response includes  a  handwritten  letter
    from the second claimant outlining his feelings regarding the  appeals.
    He states, inter alia, that "[l]iving  in  Nigeria  will  cause  me  to
    losing all my friends and loved ones".  He also describes  achievements
    made in school by him and his brother.

8.   The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimants'  appeals.   I  have
    to consider the appeals of all three claimants but it is common  ground
    that their strongest argument relies on  the  position  of  the  second
    claimant.  As regards the first  claimant,  it  is  manifest  that  she
    cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   She  has
    remained in the UK as an overstayer since 2005 and has  chosen  not  to
    leave the UK even after her applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependent  spouse  were  refused.   She  met  her  husband   when   her
    immigration status was precarious and little weight can be attached  to
    her own private life ties in the UK, although it is fair to say she has
    a history of working and it is not contended by the SSHD that  she  has
    been dependent on public funds.

9.   It is common ground that the second claimant fulfils  the  requirements
    of para 276ADE(i)(iii) that he be under the age of 18 and has lived  in
    the UK for at least seven years.  What is in dispute is whether he  can
    meet the further requirement that it is unreasonable to expect  him  to
    leave the UK.  In respect of the very similar  provision  contained  in
    s117B(6) it is clear that the second claimant is a qualifying child  by
    virtue of his being in the UK for at  least  seven  years.   Here  too,
    however, there is a requirement of reasonableness of departure from the
    UK.

10.  As regards the requirement of reasonableness, there is recent  guidance
    furnished by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  377.
    In [46]-[47] Elias LJ stated that:

         "46. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that
             a  child  has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be   given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
             leave (para 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when
             the cases now subject to appeal were  determined,  but  in  my
             view they merely confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy
             of this nature. After such a period of  time  the  child  will
             have  put  down  roots  and  developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get  older.  Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.
          1. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test  where
             the focus is on the child alone,  it  would  not  in  my  view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best
             interests are in favour  of  remaining.  I  reject  Mr  Gill's
             submission that the best  interests  assessment  automatically
             resolves the reasonableness question. If Parliament had wanted
             the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of the leave
             application, it would have  said  so.  The  concept  of  'best
             interests' is after all a well established one. Even where the
             child's best interests are  to  stay,  it  may  still  be  not
             unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will  depend
             upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the  links
             in the UK and in the country where it is  proposed  he  should
             return. What could not be considered, however,  would  be  the
             conduct and immigration history of the parents."
11.  At [48]  Elias  LJ  cited  with  approval  the  guidance  given  in  EV
    (Philippines) as to how a tribunal  should  apply  the  proportionality
    test where wider public interests are in play.  He then commented:

         "49. Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
             construction of section 117B(6),  the  same  principles  would
             apply in such a case. However, the fact  that  the  child  has
             been in the  UK  for  seven  years  would  need  to  be  given
             significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
             related  reasons:  first,  because   of   its   relevance   to
             determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
             interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
             point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
             reasons to the contrary."


12.  I derive from the above guidance  the  following.  The  fact  that  the
    second claimant has been in the UK for seven years needs  to  be  given
    very significant weight and that my starting point should be that leave
    should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary.
    In my judgment there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

13.  In the first place an essential element to the child's  best  interests
    is to reside with his sole parent, the first claimant, and she  has  ho
    basis of stay in the UK.

14.  In the second place, the claimant and his family would be returning  to
    their  country  of  citizenship  in  which  they  have   family   ties.
    Relocation would re-unite the claimants with  their  extended  maternal
    family.

15.  Third, although the second claimant has been in the UK for eight  years
    and has progressed extremely well in his primary school education,  the
    country to which he would return (Nigeria) is one that has an  adequate
    educational system and has English as its national language.  The  same
    can be said of the third claimant.

16.  Fourth, although it is clear that the claimant  and  his  brother  have
    integrated extremely well into the  UK  educational  system,  they  are
    still of primary school age and the ties they have formed during  their
    school life are less developed than would be the case if they  were  in
    their teens.  For them the centre of their life is  clearly  their  own
    family life with their mother.

17   Fifth, whilst it is clear from the  evidence  that  they  identify,  as
    English, it is not suggested that their parents have brought them up in
    ignorance of Nigerian culture and tradition and the  financial  support
    the first claimant has received from friends and community  members  is
    not said to come primarily from outside the Nigerian community.

18.  Sixth, the second claimant has no significant health difficulties.

19.  These are the principal considerations that arise  in  the  context  of
    assessing the second claimant's best interests and their effect is that
    although his best interests are on balance to remain in  the  UK  there
    are several factors indicative that his  best  interests  will  not  be
    adversely affected by return to Nigeria, e.g. in terms  of  having  the
    potential to develop family ties with members of  the  extended  family
    there.

20.  In it clear from MA (Pakistan) that  when  moving  on  to  conduct  the
    wider proportionality assessment, I have also to  factor  in  the  poor
    immigration history of the first claimant and her  husband  neither  of
    whom are in the UK with valid  leave.   As  already  noted,  the  first
    claimant has been here unlawfully  since  2004  and  entered  into  her
    marriage when her immigration status was precarious.  She has  remained
    in the UK even after being  required  to  leave  following  refusal  of
    application as a dependent spouse in 2013.  The period of her  overstay
    is longer than the eight years of residency by her child on  which  she
    seeks to rely.  Although the second claimant is not to  blame  for  the
    immigration misconduct of his mother, it remains the case that  neither
    he nor his brother has ever had leave to remain.  In such circumstances
    I consider that strong weight has to be given to the need  to  maintain
    immigration control.

21.  Considering the evidence as a whole and having regard  to  the  factors
    relevant  to  the  best  interests  of  the  child  identified  in   EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and to  the  overall  proportionality
    assessment  I  am  required  to  make  in  the  context  of   assessing
    reasonableness of return, I conclude that even attaching strong  weight
    to the fact that the second claimant has  been  in  the  UK  for  eight
    years, the preponderance of considerations point to a finding  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the second claimant to return.

22.  My finding as regards the position of the second  claimant  under  para
    276ADE(i)(iv) have obvious consequences for the ability  of  the  first
    claimant to succeed under para EX.1(a)(ii) and the  third  claimant  to
    succeed under para 276ADE.  It also has obvious  consequences  for  the
    consideration of the Article 8 circumstances  of  the  three  claimants
    outside of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  fact  that  none  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules is  a  relevant  factor  when  assessing  the
    public interest in their case.  For the same reasons I have  given  for
    finding that it would not be unreasonable to expect  the  claimants  to
    return as a  family  unit  to  Nigeria,  I  conclude  that  it  is  not
    disproportionate for the respondent to refuse them leave to remain  and
    to direct their removal to Nigeria.

     For the above reasons:-

     The FfT judge has already been found by UTJ Blum to have erred  in  law
    and her decision has been set aside.

     The decision  I  re-make  is  to  dismiss  the  appeals  of  all  three
    claimants.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 made in respect of second and third respondents only:-

Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  two  minor
appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies  both  to  the
two minor respondents and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date
                [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
