
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19094/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th September 2015               |On 16th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                        Mr Tolulope Opeyemi Toluwade
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Tolulope Opeyemi Toluwade date of birth 31st December
    1980 is a citizen of Nigeria.  Having considered all the  circumstances
    I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cox promulgated on 12th  March  2015,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated 8th April 2014. The decisions by the  respondent  were
    to refuse the appellant further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    and thereupon to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.

 3. By decision made on the 12th May 2015 leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. On 2 October 2012 the appellant had been granted  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  The  appellant's
    leave was valid until 29 February 2014.

 5. On the 26th February 2014 the appellant made  application  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules  on
    the grounds of Rights under the ECHR specifically Article 3 and Article
    8 Family and Private Life.

 6. The grounds for that claim are set out in the  letter  from  his  legal
    representative  and  in  a  brief  unsigned  statement.  The  documents
    referred to a number of matters including:-

          a) The appellant had  gone  to  university  and  was  shocked  to
             discover  the  amount  of  unchecked   immoral   and   cultist
             activities on campus.  He  therefore  began  to  campaign  and
             promote Christian faith. He claims that war was declared  upon
             him. No details are given as to what exactly this war was. The
             appellant otherwise claims that he had sought to obtain police
             reports but had failed to get  any  reports.  No  details  are
             given as to what declaring  war  had  entailed.   No  specific
             details are given.

          b) The appellant otherwise claims that he has come to the  United
             Kingdom and that he feels safe in a lawful environment. In the
             letter from the representatives there is reference  to  family
             life but there is no evidence that the appellant  is  married,
             has any children or is in a serious relationship  or  has  any
             family in the UK.

          c) By  comparison  the  letter  from  the  legal  representatives
             indicates that the appellant is seeking to rely upon  appendix
             FM and paragraph 276 ADE but then concedes that the  appellant
             cannot meet the requirements of the rules in respect  thereof.
             The letter then seeks to rely upon Article 8 private life. The
             letter refers to the fact that the appellant came as a student
             and that his current  leave  has  expired.  He  claims  to  be
             working and to be involved in a  local  Christian  Church.  No
             other aspect of Article 8 Private Life have been raised

          d) That is the extent of the assertions made to support  a  claim
             under Article 8.

          e)  It is accepted that Njomane  Immigration  Law  Practice  were
             appointed  to  act  as  representatives  on  behalf   of   the
             appellant. They were the authors of the letter.

 7. Initially the case was listed for hearing on 22 September  2014.  Three
    days before the hearing the case was taken out to be  relisted.  Notice
    of that was sent out on 19 September 2014  to  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives. I would note that despite the fact  that  the  hearing
    was only three days away no evidence had been submitted to substantiate
    any part of the appellant's case. No statements or documentary evidence
    or other supporting evidence had been submitted to the Tribunal  or  to
    the Home Office.

 8. On 22 September Notice of the new hearing date was  sent  out.  I  note
    within paragraph 6 of the decision by Judge Cox it is noted at the date
    of the hearing there was no  attendance  by  the  appellant  or  anyone
    appearing on his behalf. The clerk to the  Tribunal  had  attempted  to
    contact the legal representatives but that had been unsuccessful. Judge
    Cox noted that notice of hearing been sent out in accordance  with  the
    Procedure Rules.

 9. Judge Cox determined that notice  of  hearing  had  been  sent  out  in
    accordance with the Procedure Rules  and  therefore  it  was  just  and
    proper to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of  the  appellant.
    Having determined to proceed with the hearing Judge Cox then noted that
    the appellant had failed to provide any evidence  to  substantiate  any
    part of his  claim.  There  was  no  signed  statement.  There  was  no
    documentary evidence to support the appellant's claims.  There  was  no
    evidence of involvement with a local church or any other aspect of  the
    appellant's private life.

10. In the circumstances the judge determined to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

11. By letter sent to the  Tribunal  the  appellant  appealed  against  the
    judge's decision. With regard to his non-attendance at the hearing  the
    appellant claims that he did not receive  notice  of  hearing.  He  has
    asserted otherwise that his representatives did not receive the  notice
    of hearing nor did they inform him of the hearing if they  did  receive
    notice of hearing. There is no evidence from the representatives.

12. From the file papers on the correspondence section  it  is  clear  that
    notice of hearing was sent out on 22 September  2014.  That  notice  of
    hearing was the sent the appellant's representatives.

13. The appellant was asked when  last  he  had  been  in  touch  with  his
    representatives and indicated that it was in  September  2014.  However
    when being questioned further about his receipt of the judge's decision
    and the dismissal of his claim the appellant then stated  that  he  had
    been in touch with his representatives in March 2015.  He then  claimed
    to have dismissed his solicitors but could not state on what day he had
    dispensed with their services. He accepted however that  he  had  never
    informed the Tribunal or the Home Office of such.

14. When asked why no evidence had been lodged for the  first  hearing,  he
    could give no valid reason  why  no  evidence  or  statement  had  been
    submitted prior to the original  hearing  of  22  September  2014.  The
    Notice of Hearing, dated 14th May 2014, had  directed  that  statements
    and other evidence had to be lodged and served within  three  weeks  of
    the Notice. No evidence had been lodged.

15. When asked to explain  his  circumstances  in  the  UK,  the  appellant
    indicated that he had wanted to study a PhD but had not had  sufficient
    funds. He had therefore lodged this application. He could give no valid
    explanation why, when he was  seeking  to  assert  that  he  was  being
    mistreated and harmed because of his  religious  beliefs,  he  had  not
    sought to claim asylum. The only place that the appellant had sought to
    suggest where "war" was being waged against him was  at  University  in
    Nigeria. However the appellant had now completed his university courses
    and would not be returning to university in Nigeria. The appellant  had
    failed to lodge any evidence in support of his claim. In any event  the
    appellant had failed to show that he would be at  risk  anywhere  other
    than at university or that there would be any  continuing  interest  in
    him.

16. The basis of the appellant's claim to set aside the judge's decision is
    that he did not receive  the  notice  of  hearing.  However  Notice  of
    Hearing had been sent out to his legal representatives.  There  was  no
    evidence that the  representatives  did  not  receive  that  notice  of
    hearing and in accordance with Rule 12 (4) that was valid service  upon
    the appellant.

17. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to proceed with the hearing
    in the absence of the appellant. The judge was entitled, on  the  basis
    that no evidence  had  been  lodged  to  substantiate  the  appellant's
    claims, to dismiss the appellant's claims and dismiss the appeal.

18. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
