
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19663/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 July 2016                        |On 12 July 2016                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD KASHIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, Muhammad Kashif, a citizen of Pakistan born  on  19
    September 1982, as the appellant herein.
2.   The appellant entered the UK on 31 May 2014  with  an  entry  clearance
    valid until 16 November 2014.  He applied for a  residence  card  on  7
    November 2014.  The appellant married Simona Kermavnar  on  14  October
    2011.  The appellant's wife is a citizen of Slovenia.

3.   The application for a residence card was refused for  reasons  set  out
    in a letter dated 7 May 2015.  The refusal followed a home visit  on  6
    May 2015 where the appellant was spoken to but he said  that  his  wife
    was visiting her sister who  was  in  hospital.   It  is  recorded  and
    disputed that his wife had gone to Slovakia for the visit.

4.   The appellant claimed he had been married for five years and living  at
    the address for one year.  He said that his wife had not currently  got
    a job and had not been working for the previous four months.

5.   The Immigration Officers found scant evidence of a woman's presence  at
    the house and there was a lack of photographs and phone  records,  etc.
    The officers did not believe that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  It was further considered that the appellant was party  to
    a marriage of convenience within the meaning of the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations  2006.   Furthermore  it  was  considered  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to demonstrate  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom as defined in Regulation
    6 of the Regulations.  The appellant had relied  on  wage  slips  dated
    October 2014.  The department had contacted Davina's Retail Limited who
    confirmed that the appellant's wife currently  worked  for  them  part-
    time.  However this was taken to contradict the information supplied by
    the appellant to the Immigration Officers that his wife  had  not  been
    employed for four months.  As the appellant's wife's  employment  could
    not be verified he did not meet the requirements of Regulation 6.

6.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 4 December 2015.  He was not represented then and is not represented
    before me.

7.   The judge in paragraph 4 of his  decision  summarises  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  It was said that the record  of  the  appellant's  replies  at
    interview  was  inaccurate  and  incomplete.   He  had   struggled   to
    understand the officer's accent and there had been no interpreter.

8.   The  judge  correctly  addressed  himself  in  paragraph  5  about  the
    shifting burden of proof in EEA cases and the shifting of an evidential
    burden as set out in Papajorgii (EEA Spouse - Marriage of  Convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  The determination is  very  short  and
    reads as follows:

         "6.  In addition to the Home Office bundle the Appellant provided a
             file of documents including photographs and a large number  of
             letters, bills and the like addressed to both himself and  the
             Sponsor.  Both attended  the  hearing  and  gave  evidence  in
             English, the oral evidence and submissions are set out in  the
             Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.


         7.   It is not disputed that the Appellant and Sponsor are  legally
             married and that the Appellant has previously been issued with
             a residence card.  It is also clear  that  the  Appellant  was
             visited by a UKBA team on the 6th May 2015  and  was  asked  a
             number of questions and the flat where he lives was  inspected
             and that at the time the Sponsor was out of the country.   The
             contents of the interview, the  state  of  the  flat  and  the
             inferences drawn and whether the Sponsor was exercising treaty
             rights are all in dispute.


         8.   There is a minor point with regard to the Refusal Letter which
             clearly upset the Sponsor.  In the letter there is a reference
             to  her  being  Slovakian.   This  is  incorrect  as  she   is
             Slovenian.  The  error  in  the  Refusal  Letter  and  in  the
             Immigration Enforcement report at page L1 of the  Home  Office
             bundle is not such as to undermine the Refusal  Letter  itself
             but does raise a concern about the  care  with  which  it  was
             produced.


         9.   For the hearing the Appellant provided a  bundle  received  by
             the Tribunal on the 13th of November 2015.  That contains  the
             Notice  and  Grounds  of  Appeal,  the  original  application,
             documentation sent to the Appellant and to the Sponsor at  the
             address where they both live,  a  tenancy  agreement  in  both
             names, a return ticket for the Sponsor of the  6th  June  2015
             and photographs.


         10.  At the hearing both gave evidence in English without the  need
             for an interpreter  and  with  the  Sponsor  absent  from  the
             hearing  room  whilst  the  Appellant  gave   evidence.    The
             Appellant maintained his objections to the manner in which  he
             was questioned and the way in which the  visit  was  reported.
             His view was that the officer wanted to find that the marriage
             was one of convenience although he accepted that  the  officer
             had nothing to gain from lying about it.


         11.  The Appellant and Sponsor  were  consistent  about  where  she
             works, Dosa Indian fast food restaurant, and that tax  is  due
             in January next year.  They were also consistent about details
             such as the bedroom furnishings,  sleeping  arrangements,  and
             details such as what  they  had  for  breakfast.   There  were
             differences over what they did  last  weekend.   They  do  not
             appear to have a current  tenancy  and  may  be  holding  over
             pending renovation of the property by the landlord.


         12.  It would be surprising if a couple were completely  consistent
             in their evidence relating to domestic arrangements and  daily
             activities.  Differences over  fundamental  matters  would  be
             telling and could lead to a finding that  a  marriage  is  not
             genuine.  However in  this  case  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
             Appellant and  Sponsor  do  not  have  the  benefit  of  legal
             representation and that the case has  not  been  presented  as
             clearly  as  it  might  have  been,  the  absence   of   legal
             representation is not to be held against the Appellant.


         13.  The documentation  that  has  been  provided  shows  that  the
             Appellant and Sponsor have been  joint  signatories  to  their
             tenancy agreements which shows  that  they  jointly  occupy  a
             small flat with a single bedroom and have  done  so  for  some
             time.  It is not the case that they occupy different rooms  in
             the same building.  The evidence is that the Sponsor  was  out
             of the country  when  the  Appellant  was  visited,  there  is
             evidence of her return in addition to the  extensive  evidence
             of her living at  the  address  given  and  her  presence  and
             evidence at the appeal hearing.  There are joint accounts such
             as the Santander Everyday Current Account which supports their
             claims.


         14.  Whilst the Secretary of  State  was  justified  in  expressing
             concerns about the nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
             Appellant and the Sponsor I am satisfied, taking into  account
             the documentary and oral  evidence,  that  the  Appellant  has
             discharged the evidential burden and has shown that the  [sic]
             and the Sponsor are genuinely married and that  it  is  not  a
             device  to  facilitate  his  remaining  in  the  UK.   As  the
             Appellant and Sponsor are genuinely married I  find  that  the
             Appellant    is    entitled    to    a    residence     card."



9.   The respondent  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  was
    granted by First-tier Judge Holmes on 1 June  2016.   It  was  apparent
    that the judge had allowed the appeal only as a result  of  information
    provided at the hearing of the appeal.

10.  Paragraphs 4 and 5 of the grant of permission read as follows:

         "4.  It is arguable, as the grounds  set  out,  that  the  decision
             fails to identify with the requisite clarity whether the judge
             was satisfied that the sponsor was a qualified  person,  given
             this was disputed, and given there is no such finding.


         5.   Moreover, given that the judge considered  that  the  evidence
             before the respondent justified her decision that this  was  a
             marriage of convenience, it is arguable that he has failed  to
             identify with the requisite clarity what evidence  was  placed
             before him which had led him to the  conclusion  that  it  was
             not.  The answers given when the appellant was interviewed  at
             his home (when the sponsor was on his own account out  of  the
             UK) were not disputed as having been given by  him.   Arguably
             the judge failed to engage  adequately  or  at  all  with  the
             content of that interview in his decision."


11.  The standard directions were sent to the parties  with  the  notice  of
    hearing on 8 June 2016.  No bundle was lodged or response on behalf  of
    the appellant.
12.  Mr Melvyn relied on the grounds and submitted that the first issue  was
    the question of whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

13.  The sponsor had not been present at the time of the visit  and  it  was
    argued  that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.   The   judge's
    determination was inadequately reasoned.  There was a question  of  the
    joint tenancy agreement and there appeared to be  no  current  tenancy.
    There were inconsistencies in the account.  There was a lack of clarity
    in paragraph 11 in referring to tax due in January  next  year  as  the
    grounds said it was not clear what if any supporting documentation  had
    been produced as evidence.  There had been no finding that the  sponsor
    had been exercising treaty rights.  It was submitted that  the  reasons
    given for accepting co-habitation were conflicting.  Mr  Melvin  handed
    in the authorities of Rosa v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 14  and
    Agho v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 1198.

14.  I then heard from the appellant,  supported  by  his  wife.   They  had
    helpfully produced a series of points.  It was claimed  that  the  Home
    Office had mixed up the two places where the appellant's wife had  been
    working: Davina's and Dosa.  In the autumn of 2014 she had been working
    in Davina's News and Off Licence which had closed.  She did not have  a
    P60 but had payslips.  She had worked in the Dosa Restaurant in October
    2015 but she had not been issued with payslips.  She only had  payslips
    from January 2016.  The notes take issue with the Secretary of  State's
    decision and account of the visit.  For example, the appellant had been
    recorded as saying that  he  did  not  know  when  his  wife  would  be
    returning.  The sponsor comments: "actually my husband could not  know,
    because also I could not know.  In the end of April  I  visited  Sicily
    and in the meantime my sister in Slovenia had  broken  her  hip.   ..."
    She had remained to assist her sister.

15.  In relation to the tenancy agreements the  point  is  made  that  there
    were two tenancy agreements for the flat.  There  was  a  twelve  month
    agreement from 1 June 2014 and six months from  1  June  2015.   As  no
    bundles had been  submitted  as  required  by  the  directions  it  was
    extremely difficult to establish what material had been  placed  before
    the First-tier Judge.  The court file records that  original  documents
    had been returned to the appellants following the hearing.  I was shown
    the tenancy agreements and the recent tax returns.

16.  Mr Melvin submitted that  the  appellant's  employer  might  have  been
    reluctant to issue payslips because he was  paying  below  the  minimum
    wage.  There was no evidence to show that she had been working  at  the
    material time.  The tax returns had not been sufficient  to  show  that
    she had been exercising treaty rights  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    There was little evidence to  support  the  claim  that  she  had  been
    working prior to the hearing.  It was accepted that there was  evidence
    of the tenancy agreement.  The main problem with the First-tier Judge's
    decision was the lack of evidence to support the reasoning.  There  was
    no corroborative evidence from the employer to show  that  the  sponsor
    worked at the material time.

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the judge's decision if it was materially flawed in
    law.

18.  There are two major problems with this case.  The first is the  brevity
    of the judge's decision and the second is the failure on the behalf  of
    the appellant's to lodge a proper bundle.  With hindsight  they  should
    have been legally represented.  I took a considerable  amount  of  time
    with Mr Melvin to try and establish what material the  couple  had  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal and what was new.

19.  One matter that does appear clear and indeed was accepted by Mr  Melvin
    was that the couple had put in tenancy agreements covering the relevant
    period and I need no longer deal with that point.

20.  In relation to the marriage of convenience issue, it  is  important  to
    record that the First-tier  Judge  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  oral
    evidence from both parties.  He  further  records  that  he  heard  the
    evidence separately so that the sponsor was outside  the  hearing  room
    while the appellant gave his evidence.  The judge  found  the  evidence
    given to be consistent as he records in paragraph 11 of  the  decision.
    The reference to the tax due is explained by  the  subsequent  material
    which was placed before me.  The judge records consistencies as well as
    differences over the activities over the previous weekend.  In my  view
    although brief the  judge  does  deal  with  the  evidence  before  him
    concerning the marriage and it was open to him  to  conclude  that  the
    marriage was not one of convenience for reasons  which  are  adequately
    set out in paragraphs 11 to 14 of the determination.  It  was  open  to
    the judge to find that the  appellant  had  discharged  the  evidential
    burden in relation to the  point  taken  by  the  respondent  that  the
    marriage          was           one           of           convenience.



21.  Unfortunately that does not resolve the difficulties for  this  couple.
    It does appear that the judge was  concentrating  on  the  marriage  of
    convenience issue rather than the question of whether the  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights.  I tried to assist  the  parties  as  best  I
    could but it does appear that there was a dearth of evidence before the
    judge in relation to the sponsor's employment at the relevant time.  As
    I say, I went through the material with Mr Melvin and the appellant and
    his wife in an effort to see whether the point could be resolved.

22.  In the end I am not persuaded that it would be right to gloss over  the
    difficulties on this particular point.  I reach  this  conclusion  with
    some regret because having  seen  the  couple  and  the  material  they
    produced including many photographs I can understand why the First-tier
    Judge resolved  the  question  of  whether  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience in their favour.  Nevertheless, in my view he  concentrated
    on that matter and perhaps overlooked or did not deal properly with the
    question of whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

23.  Because of the deficiencies in the documentary evidence  before  me  it
    is not possible for me to resolve that matter  in  the  favour  of  the
    appellant.  Had the appellant been  legally  represented  and  complied
    with the Rules things might have been different.  However  in  my  view
    the appropriate course in this case is for  the  appellant  to  make  a
    further application to the respondent  supported  by  current  evidence
    that his wife is indeed exercising treaty rights.

24.  For the reasons I have given, the determination  is  materially  flawed
    in law.  I substitute a fresh decision.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity order not made.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and nor do I.






Signed                                  Date 12 July 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
