

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19728/2014
                                                               IA/19741/2014
                                                               IA/19735/2014
                                                               IA/19752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2nd February 2015                 |On 2nd March 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               RAMAK DARVISHI
                      MOHAMMADHOSSEIN AKHLAGI ESFAHANI
                            ARIA AKHLAGI ESFAHANI
                           ARAD AKHLAGHI ESFAHANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Lee of Salam & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. On 11th November 2014 I found an error of law in the determination of
       the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  of  Ramak  Darvishi
       against a decision of the respondent to refuse her leave to remain as
       a Tier 4  (General)  student  migrant  and  to  remove  her  and  her
       dependant husband and children under s47 Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum Act 2006, in the following terms:

       i. The appellants appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
          dismiss the appeal of Ramak Darvishi against a decision of the
          respondent to refuse her leave to remain as a Tier 4 (general)
          Student Migrant and to remove her under s47 Nationality
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2006. The other appellants are her
          husband and children and their applications were as her
          dependants; they were refused in line with her.

      ii. There was no challenge to the decision by the First-tier Tribunal
          to dismiss the appeal under paragraph 245ZX (ha) of the
          Immigration Rules. The challenge, and the basis upon which
          permission to appeal has been granted, was to the decision to
          refuse to grant leave to remain under article 8. It was pleaded
          that the children, who fell to be considered under 276ADE of the
          Immigration Rules and the family as a whole under Article 8,
          should have succeeded in their appeals. Permission was granted on
          the grounds that it was arguable that the judge had failed to have
          adequate regard to material considerations as to the best
          interests of the children, the circumstances to which they would
          be returning in Iran and had failed to follow or distinguish EV
          (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

     iii. It appears that the appellants had not made an application for
          leave to remain on the basis of their private life such as to
          bring them within paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In
          the event this is however technical because the decision of the
          judge to dismiss the appeals on Article 8 grounds was limited to
          consideration of the immigration status of the main appellant and
          that the appeals of the other three appellants were subsumed
          within her immigration status which had always been of a temporary
          nature. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that there were no
          circumstances such as to merit a separate inclusive determination
          of Article 8 and although mention was made of s55 and the best
          interests of the children this was in the context only that the
          children should remain with the parents and that given they were
          going so should the children.

      iv. There was no engagement by the First-tier Tribunal judge with the
          length of time the children had been lawfully in the UK; where
          they had spent their formative years; the stage at which they were
          in their education; their language; the financial and economic
          situation of the parents; the medical condition of the youngest
          child and availability of treatment in Iran and the conditions to
          which they would return to live as a family. Furthermore, although
          submissions were made to that effect, the judge failed to reach a
          decision under s117 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
          which was in force on the date of the hearing before the First-
          tier Tribunal.

       v. The failure to even begin to engage with the situation of the
          children and thus the family as a whole and the failure to give
          any reasons for reaching a decision that removal was
          proportionate, amounts to an error of law.

    2. I made the following directions:

          1. Mr Diwyncz not objecting, I granted leave to the appellants to
             file and serve such other  documentary  evidence  as  advised;
             such documents to be served upon the respondent no later  than
             5 working days before the resumed hearing;

          2. Updating witness statements to be filed and served;  to  stand
             as evidence in chief and to be served upon the  respondent  no
             later than 5 working days before the resumed hearing;

          3. The appellants to file and serve a skeleton argument.

          4. No interpreter will be booked.

    3. Ramak Darvishi, her husband and her two children arrived in the UK on
       20th March 2005. On that date Aria was aged 7 and Arad  was  aged  3;
       they are now aged 16  and  10  respectively.  In  the  light  of  the
       documentary evidence produced it was accepted that the children  have
       each been in the UK in excess of 7 years. S117A and s117B  and  s117D
       Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   applies   to   the
       determination of  these  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds  against
       removal. These read, in  so  far  as  relevant  to  this  appeal,  as
       follows:




          117A Application of this Part

             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required
                 to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                 Acts -

                 (a)   breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                 (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
                 tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                 (a)   in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                 (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.



             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
                 the question of whether an interference with a person's
                 right to respect for private and family life is justified
                 under Article 8(2).




          117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
          cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
                 the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                 speak English -

                 (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons -

                 (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                 (a)   a private life, or

                 (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                 that is established by a person at a time when the person
                 is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
                 established by a person at a time when the person's
                 immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                 the public interest does not require the person's removal
                 where -

                 (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                    leave the United Kingdom.




          .....




          117D Interpretation of this Part

             (1)  In this Part -

                 "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on
                 Human Rights;

                 "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of
                 18 and who -

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                       period of seven years or more;

                  "qualifying partner" means a partner who -

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                       meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section
                       33(2A) of that Act).




    4. Both parties agreed that the two children are qualifying children  as
       defined by s117D NIAA 2002. I asked Mr Diwyncz  what  submissions  he
       wished to make as regards "reasonableness" with  regard  to  s117B(6)
       and the public interest. He submitted that no one would  consider  it
       unreasonable for children to follow their parents to their country of
       origin. In terms of the public interest question he referred  to  the
       children having been educated at public expense  and  that  this  had
       arisen because of their  parents  presence  in  the  UK  and  the  UK
       requirement that they be educated rather than because they  had  come
       here as students. He relied upon no other submissions.

    5. Ms Lee submitted that on the contrary it would  be  unreasonable  for
       the children to be removed from the UK.  The  family,  including  the
       children, have been present in the UK just a few weeks  short  of  10
       years and have been in the UK since the ages of 7 and 3 respectively.
        These are amongst the most formative years of childhood and  are  of
       great significance. Both children are no longer solely dependant upon
       their parents for their private life. They  have  established  social
       and community ties, as evidenced by the documentary evidence. At  the
       date of the decision the older  child  was  within  three  months  of
       sitting public exams and the respondent had failed to take this  into
       account when reaching her decision, contrary  to  her  own  published
       policy. Now he was due to sit his A levels in May. The younger  child
       is at the stage of choosing GCSE options. Both children have done and
       are doing well at school. Neither child speaks more than a few  words
       of Farsi  and  neither  speaks  Arabic,  a  requirement  for  Koranic
       studies. They have not been brought up in a  religious  household  in
       the UK. The parents have raised the issue of the children's  personal
       safety in  Iran  given  their  "Britishness"  and  lack  of  language
       although it is not being submitted  that  these  concerns  reach  the
       level of risk required under the Refugee  Convention  of  Article  3.
       Similarly although the youngest child has health problems  these  are
       not raised as significant issues that meet the threshold for  Article
       3 but that these are additional factors that need  to  be  considered
       and taken into account. She  submitted  that  the  parents  (and  the
       children) speak fluent English. The  uncontested  financial  evidence
       supports the submission that the family are not and  will  not  be  a
       burden to the state; Mr  Esfahani  has  been  employed  by  the  same
       employer for the last 8 years. She submitted that the respondent  had
       manifestly failed to consider s55 and the welfare of the children.

    6. Although not specifically referred to by Mr Diwyncz,  the  appellants
       had not been granted entry clearance and leave to remain in the UK on
       anything other than a temporary basis with no expectation that  their
       status  would  lead  to  permanent  residence.  The  maintenance   of
       immigration control through the  enactment  of  legislation  and  the
       setting out of Rules and policies.  Nevertheless  they  were  granted
       extensions of leave to remain and the fact of residence in excess  of
       seven years for a child is a factor that is  specifically  recognised
       both in paragraph 276ADE and in s117B NIAA 2002 as  meeting  specific
       and different consideration to cases  where,  for  example,  children
       have not been residence for such a lengthy period. The Rules  reflect
       the public interest considerations in s117B NIAA 2002.

    7. The question of whether it is reasonable for these children to  leave
       the UK has to be considered in the real and practical world. Although
       they have been resident for a considerable number of  years  that  is
       not the end of the consideration. Their circumstances, and  those  of
       their parents, have to be considered as a  whole  and  in  the  round
       taking into account the adverse factors which are  that  the  parents
       came  to  the  UK  with  no  expectation  of  being  able  to  remain
       permanently and the requirement to maintain immigration control along
       with all the other factors set out briefly above. It is plain that if
       the parents were forced to leave the UK, the children would leave  as
       well. The impact on them given their age  and  ties  over  and  above
       those they have with their parents and the length of time  they  have
       been in the UK and the other factors as set out above  does  not,  in
       this instance, result it in being reasonable to expect  the  children
       to leave the UK. It is therefore plain that it is NOT in  the  public
       interest for the children to leave the UK.

    8. That however does not answer the public interest question and it  was
       for that reason that I asked Mr  Diwyncz  if  there  were  any  other
       factors over and above those  which  have  already  been  taken  into
       account in  determining  whether  t  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
       children to leave the UK. He was unable to identify any thing at  all
       significant.

    9. Taking full account of all factors including the other  elements  set
       out in s117B and their relevance as referred to above, I am satisfied
       that the decision the subject of challenge  before  me  breaches  the
       appellants right to respect for their family and private life.

   10. I allow all the appeals on human rights grounds.




   Conclusions:

   The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

       I set aside the decisions

       I re-make the decisions in the appeals by allowing them




   Anonymity

   The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. There was
   no request for such an order to be made and I see no reason for  one  to
   be made.






Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date 27th February 2015

