
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd September 2015                |On 16th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          MR Alfredo Escobar David
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tetley of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 7th September 1966 is a  citizen  of  Cuba.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Tetley of Counsel.  The Respondent  was
    represented by Miss Johnstone a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present  and  settled,  on
    9th November 2013.  The Respondent had refused that application on  7th
    April 2014.  The Appellant had appealed that decision  and  his  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox  sitting  at  Stoke  on  6th
    August  2014.   The  judge  had  dismissed  the   Appellant's   appeal.
    Application for permission to appeal had been made and  permission  had
    been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott-Baker  on  20th  March
    2015.  Permission was granted on the basis that the  judge  should  not
    have permitted the Appellant's wife to act as a representative  thereby
    depriving her of the ability to give evidence and  that  the  Appellant
    had incorrectly applied for indefinite leave to remain  but  the  judge
    failed  to  deal  with  the  application  under  the   correct   Rules.
    Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to decide firstly whether
    or not an error of law had been made in this case.

Notice of Decision

 3. It was properly agreed between both Miss Johnstone and Mr  Tetley  that
    an error of law had been made by the judge in  this  case  and  that  I
    should set aside that decision and by  agreement  the  case  should  be
    remitted  back  to  the  Home  Office  to  consider   the   Appellant's
    application properly as an application for limited leave to remain.

 4. Given that was the agreed position between the  parties  and  seemed  a
    sensible approach that is a matter with which I agree.

 5. Accordingly I find that a material error of law was made by  the  judge
    in this case, set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  by
    agreement the matter is remitted back to the  Home  Office  to  make  a
    decision based upon the Appellant's now, application for limited  leave
    to remain.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
