
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: IA/19062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Determination Promulgated       |
|On September 8, 2016            |On September 13, 2016           |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Before

                        MR MOHAMMED MAIJ UDDIN AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant     Mr Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Taj Solicitors
Respondent    Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, applied on July  11,  2011  for
    leave to remain under article  8  ECHR.  The  respondent  refused  this
    application on April 11, 2014 and the appellant appealed on  April  24,
    2014 under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

 2. The appeal was originally heard by Judge JS Law on October 17, 2014 and
    in a  decision  promulgated  on  October  30,  2014  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's claim under article 8 ECHR.  The  appellant  appealed  that
    decision and permission to appeal was given. The case was  then  listed
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  (formerly  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer) on May 13, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on May 20,
    2015 she found there had been a material error and remitted the  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The case was then listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Coates
    on January 21, 2016 and he also dismissed the appeal  under  article  8
    ECHR in a decision promulgated on January 27, 2016.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on February  9,
    2016 on the ground the  judge  had  erred.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Phillips on June  28,  2016
    and the matter was then listed before me on the above date.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated July 5, 2016 in which she
    opposed the grant of permission.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Mr Muquit adopted his skeleton argument and submitted there were  three
    limbs to the appeal.


 8. The first limb concerned the Judge's impartiality or as he put  it  the
    "lack of it". Paragraphs [19] and [22]  were  significant  as  was  the
    concession by the respondent that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  He submitted that the Judge  embarked  on  an  unnecessary
    examination of the witnesses and in paragraph  [22]  stated,  "...  One
    cannot help but wonder why they decided to marry so  soon  after  their
    first meeting, given the possible difficulties and complications  which
    might arise from all these factors. That is why I say it  is  a  matter
    which can be taken into account when considering proportionality." This
    approach infected the proportionality assessment he later  carried  out
    and amounted to an error in law.

 9. The  second  limb  of  his  argument  concerned  the  Judge's  mistaken
    conclusion in paragraph [24] of his decision that the appellant and his
    wife met whilst the appellant was here unlawfully. This  was  factually
    incorrect and in making this finding he again approached the  issue  of
    proportionality incorrectly. The Judge  specifically  stated,  "Section
    117B(4)... clearly applies to this appeal..." and in doing so  he  made
    inappropriate findings against the appellant which  were  then  carried
    into his proportionality  consideration.  Whilst  it  is  accepted  the
    decision of Rajendran (s117B-family  life)  [2016]  UKUT  000138  (IAC)
    extends precariousness to family life but the Judge  did  not  consider
    his family life was precarious-merely unlawful.

10. The third limb of his submission centred on the  Judge's  statement  in
    paragraph [28] that the test to be met was "insurmountable  obstacles".
    This was not the test he should have applied and he again erred in  his
    assessment under article 8.

11. The Judge's in assessing  proportionality  failed  to  give  sufficient
    weight to the appellant's wife's illness and the fact the appellant was
    her carer.

12. Mr Bates relied on the Rule 24 letter and submitted  having  found  the
    Immigration Rules were not met this the Judge was entitled to take this
    into account when considering article 8  ECHR.  Whilst  the  Judge  did
    erroneously state the appellant had been here unlawfully and apply  the
    wrong test nevertheless when considering the whole of the  decision  he
    submitted there was no material error.

13. With regard to the first ground of appeal the  Judge  had  to  consider
    proportionality. At paragraph [19] he noted a lack  of  information  of
    how they met and he was entitled to ask questions to enable him to look
    at  the  bigger  picture.  The  appellant's  immigration   status   was
    precarious and following the decision in Rajendran (s117B-family  life)
    [2016] UKUT 000138 (IAC) the Judge needed to ascertain more information
    to enable him to  consider  whether  the  relationship  was  formed  in
    precarious circumstances. He also  needed  to  understand  her  medical
    condition and how she coped before they met and whether there  was  any
    social services involvement. These were factors that would form part of
    a  proportionality  assessment.  No  concerns  were   raised   by   the
    appellant's counsel at the hearing and the submission the  Judge  acted
    unfairly has no foundation.

14. With regard to the second ground of appeal the Judge erroneously stated
    the appellant had been here unlawfully  when  the  relationship  began.
    Whilst this was an error it was not material because  the  Tribunal  in
    Rajendran (s117B-family life) [2016] UKUT 000138 (IAC) made clear  that
    family life formed in precarious circumstances was  a  factor  to  have
    regard to. The Judge properly questioned them about the possibility  of
    returning and making an entry clearance application and he did not  err
    in his approach.

15. The final ground advanced has no merit because  in  paragraph  [32]  he
    applied the exceptionality test before  balancing  various  issues  and
    concluding it was proportionate to require the appellant to leave.

16. Although there were some errors they were not material.

17. Mr Muquit responded to these submissions and argued  that  the  Judge's
    approach to precariousness was also flawed  because  he  approached  it
    from the position the appellant was here unlawfully.

18. Having heard their submissions, I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING ON ERROR IN LAW

19. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on three  grounds.  Each
    ground is capable of showing an error in  law  and  must  therefore  be
    considered individually.


20. The first ground argued was that the Judge  adopted  an  approach  that
    went against the respondent's stated position. Mr Muquit argued that by
    embarking on his own fact finding enquiry the Judge  acted  impartially
    and erred. In granting permission to appeal  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Phillips accepted it was arguable that  the  Judge's  approach
    could indicate and unfair or prejudicial approach.

21. In assessing this ground, it is necessary to read  the  decision  as  a
    whole and not merely select individual paragraphs.  After  setting  out
    the history to the  appeal  the  Judge  turned  his  attention  to  the
    evidence and between paragraphs [11] and  [18]  he  set  out  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant and his wife. He noted at paragraph [16] that
    "... it is pertinent to acknowledge that the respondent has accepted in
    the reasons for refusal letter that the marriage between Mrs Ahmed  and
    the appellant is valid and subsisting. That is  an  express  concession
    which has not been withdrawn."

22. It is against this that the Judge then commented at paragraph [19] that
    "there was  virtually  nothing  in  the  witness  statements  or  other
    documents about the circumstances in which the appellant and  his  wife
    met or how their relationship developed and resulted in marriage only a
    short time after their first meeting".

23. The Judge makes it clear in his decision that  he  asked  questions  to
    "clarify this aspect of the background to the appeal".

24. Mr Muquit submits this was inappropriate and  by  doing  so  the  Judge
    erred. I disagree. The Judge was dealing with a claim  outside  of  the
    Rules under article  8  ECHR.  He  would  be  required  to  assess  the
    relationship, including how they met, how their relationship developed,
    the appellant's wife health and what the appellant knew of it  as  well
    as other general issues. It seems to  me  that  this  is  the  exercise
    undertaken by the Judge and when  the  appellant's  representative  was
    given the option to ask further questions it seems he  declined.  There
    is no evidence that the appellant's representative objected to  any  of
    the questions posed by the Judge.

25. Despite Mr Muquit  arguing  the  Judge  went  behind  the  respondent's
    concession I note that in paragraph [22] the Judge states  "As  I  have
    already acknowledged the respondent has accepted that the marriage  ...
    is valid and subsisting. I do not seek to go behind that concession."

26. However, the Judge make clear  that  in  assessing  proportionality  he
    could take the circumstances into account. This did not  mean  he  went
    behind the respondent's concession. That concession  was  the  marriage
    was genuine and subsisting. The Judge's finding did not undermine  that
    concession but concentrated on possible reasons for  the  marriage.  He
    concluded that paragraph by saying the information could be taken  into
    account when considering proportionality.

27. Having considered the relevant part of the decision I am satisfied that
    the Judge's approach did not demonstrate  impartiality,  unfairness  or
    prejudicial.

28. The second ground of appeal concerned the Judge's finding  that  family
    life was created when he was in here unlawfully. The evidence  is  that
    the appellant entered the United Kingdom as a working  holidaymaker  on
    September 17, 2008. He had  leave  to  remain  in  this  country  until
    September 4, 2010. It is agreed that:


      a. The appellant and his wife met in March 2010 and in June 2010  they
         submitted an application for approval to marry.
      b.  They went through an Islamic wedding on July 21, 2010.
      c. The married on April 9, 2011.
      d. The appellant became an overstayer and only applied to  extend  his
         stay on April 20, 2011.


29. The Judge wrongly stated that the appellant's wife became  aware  at  a
    very early stage that the appellant had no immigration  status.  It  is
    unclear what "very early stage" was meant to represent but perhaps  the
    Judge's finding in paragraph [30] explains what the Judge was  thinking
    because he wrote, "She knew from the outset that he had  no  permission
    to be in the United Kingdom and that he was an overstayer".


30. The Judge was wrong and Mr Bates recognised this  in  his  submissions.
    However, the argument presented by Mr  Bates  was  that  this  was  not
    material.

31. The fact remains that the appellant  has  been  here  unlawfully  since
    September 2010. He did nothing about his status  until  April  2011  by
    which time he and his wife had lawfully married. His application  based
    on his family life was lodged eleven days after they married.

32. Mr Muquit's point is that  in  considering  proportionality  the  Judge
    approached that assessment from the stance that little weight should be
    attached to his family life because he had been here unlawfully.

33. Mr Bates submits that although the Judge was wrong on that point it  is
    immaterial because little weight should  be  attached  to  family  life
    created in "precarious circumstances". The foundation of  his  argument
    is the Tribunal decision of Rajendran (s117B-family life)  [2016]  UKUT
    000138 (IAC).

34. The Tribunal stated -

         "39. It follows that when answering the "public interest  question"
         posed by s117A(2)-(3) a court  of  tribunal  should  not  disregard
         "precarious family life" criteria set out in established Article  8
         jurisprudence.  Indeed  in  certain  cases,  given  that  ss.117A-D
         considerations are not exhaustive, it may be an error of law for  a
         court or tribunal to disregard such criteria.  The  proportionality
         assessment involved is capable of cutting two ways. It  may  be  in
         certain cases that relevant extraneous "family life" considerations
         will strengthen an applicant's  Article  8  claim  as  regards  the
         question of proportionality... In other cases, however,  extraneous
         "family life" considerations may weaken, at least in some respects,
         an applicant's Article 8 claim. One such example might be where the
         applicant's  family  life  has  been  established  or  altered   in
         character at a time when  the  applicant's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         40. That "precariousness" is a criterion  of  relevance  to  family
         life as well as private  life  cases  is  an  established  part  of
         Article 8 jurisprudence: see the observations by  Sales  J  (as  he
         then  was)  at  [38]-[43]  in  Nagre   on  what   he   called   (at
         [42])"precarious family life" cases.  At  [41]  he  summarised  the
         position as being that:
             "The approach explained in the Strasbourg  case-law  indicates
             that where family life is  established  when  the  immigration
             status  of  the  claimant  is  precarious,  removal  will   be
             disproportionate only in exceptional cases..."

         41. More recently the Grand Chamber  in  the  case  of  Jeunesse  v
         Netherlands, app.no.12738/10, 3  October  2014  has  reaffirmed  at
         [108] that:

             "108. Another important consideration is whether  family  life
             was created at a time when the  persons  involved  were  aware
             that the immigration status of one of them was such  that  the
             persistence of that family life within the  host  State  would
             from the  outset  be  precarious.  It  is  the  Court's  well-
             established case-law that, where  this  is  the  case,  it  is
             likely only  to  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of Article 8...


         45. As we have seen s.117B(4)(a) and (5) do not in  fact  "require"
         little [or to use the judge's term "less"] weight to  be  given  to
         family life in the UK. At least in a case such as  the  appellant's
         (which  was  not  one  concerned  with   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationships between partners or children), s11B(4)(a) and (5) are
         silent about "family life"


         46. However, we cannot see that this error was in any way material.
         The judge's assessment began at [25] with a self-reminder  that  he
         was only concerned with a claim on Article 8  grounds  outside  the
         Rules and earlier at [8] he had set out case law dealing with  such
         claims, including  Nagre.   Having  addressed  the  nature  of  the
         appellant's family life circumstances in [30]-[33], the judge  then
         said that he turned to the 5 stage Razgar test and stated  that  he
         accepted that the appellant's family life ties in  the  UK  engaged
         Article 8. In [35]-[37] the judge identified a  number  of  factors
         bearing on the assessment of  whether  the  interference  with  the
         appellant's private and family life ties would be proportionate  or
         not.   What  then  follows  in  [38]-40]  is  clearly  an   ongoing
         assessment of the  "public  interest"  question  having  regard  to
         private and family life."


35. The thrust of this specific ground of appeal is that  the  Judge  erred
    because he approached the appellant's family life from  the  stance  it
    was unlawful and reminded himself about section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act
    in paragraph [24] of his decision. However,  the  Tribunal  made  clear
    that such an approach will not always be an error because where  family
    life was approached in precarious circumstances then it would  only  be
    in exceptional circumstances that a claim would succeed under article 8
    ECHR.


36. I have therefore looked beyond the Judge's error in saying they  formed
    family life whilst he was unlawfully and considered his approach to the
    evidence generally. The Judge noted he was an overstayer-  a  situation
    accepted by the appellant. The Judge then  considered  the  appellant's
    wife's medical condition and noted she had the same problems before she
    met the appellant and that her condition was unlikely  to  improve.  He
    noted the time frame for the relationship and then the parties met  and
    he ultimately considered whether there were exceptional  circumstances.
    The  word  exceptional  of  course  features  widely   in   article   8
    jurisprudence and it was referred to in Rajendran.

37. The Judge made findings about the marriage and circumstances that  were
    clearly open to him and whilst he was wrong  to  say  the  relationship
    began whilst he was here unlawfully I am satisfied that error  was  not
    material because the same concerns he raised in  his  decision  equally
    applied to a relationship formed in  precarious  circumstances  and  as
    identified in the decision he then had to consider all of those factors
    as part of a proportionality assessment.

38. I am therefore satisfied that Ground Two is not made out.

39. The final ground of appeal  centres  again  on  language  used  in  the
    Judge's  decision.  Having  examined  the  appellant's  wife's  medical
    condition and the facilities available in  Bangladesh  the  Judge  then
    stated at paragraph [28]  "The  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles  is
    indeed a high one". It is this phraseology that  Mr  Muquit  argues  is
    incorrect and amounts to an error in law.

40. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" originates from  Section  EX.1(b)
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. When examining the appellant's
    wife's circumstances and whether she should go to Bangladesh the  Judge
    stated in paragraph  [30]  "I  have  little  doubt  that  it  would  be
    difficult for Mrs  Ahmed  to  relocate  to  Bangladesh  but  I  am  not
    persuaded  that  the  difficulties  she  would  face  would  be   truly
    insurmountable"

41. If the Judge had refused the appellant's appeal at that juncture then I
    would agree with Mr Muquit that the Judge made an error in law  but  in
    fact the Judge went further.

42. From paragraph [31] onwards he then starts to  consider  exceptionality
    and section 117B  factors.  He  correctly  reminded  himself  that  the
    appellant's task in showing  removal  amounted  to  a  disproportionate
    interference  was  all  the  more  difficult  where  family  life   was
    established at a time when his immigration status  was  precarious.  An
    appellant would have to show  exceptional  reasons  why  removal  would
    amount to disproportionate interference. He  then  went  onto  consider
    whether such circumstances applied in the appellant's case and he found
    none. He referred to a number of reasons including (1) The  appellant's
    wife knew  his  immigration  status  was  precarious;  (2)  he  was  an
    overstayer by the time they actually married;  (3)  the  appellant  had
    family members in Bangladesh;  (4)  the  appellant  could  re-integrate
    himself as he had spent his formative years there; (5) His  ability  to
    speak English would benefit him in Bangladesh; (6) The appellant's wife
    medical conditions were pre-existing (earlier finding).

43. He concluded at paragraph [34] that removal was proportionate.

44. So whilst he  wrongly  referred  in  his  decision  to  "insurmountable
    obstacles" I  am  satisfied  that  when  he  considered  the  issue  of
    proportionality he did apply the correct test.

45. Whilst there were errors I am satisfied they did not amount to material
    errors either on their own or collectively.


46. I therefore dismiss his appeal under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


47. There was no material error in respect of article 8 and  I  uphold  the
    Judge's decision.


Signed:                         Dated: September 13, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.

Signed                     Dated: September 13, 2016

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
