
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19022/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 November 2015                     |On 19 May 2016                       |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             ABDULLAHI ABDI ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence
                    Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Somalia who was born on  26
    August 1982.  He now appeals with leave against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moore, promulgated on 7 October  2014  following  a
    hearing at Kingston on 8 September 2014, in which  his  appeal  against
    the respondent's  decision  refusing  to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    against him, was dismissed.

 2. The background to this application is set out within the very  detailed
    determination of Judge Moore, and can be summarised as follows.

 3. The appellant arrived in this  country  on  2  October  2002,  claiming
    asylum a few days later. His application was  refused  on  27  November
    2002 but he was granted exceptional leave to remain for one year.   The
    appellant made an application for further leave  to  remain  which  was
    refused and his appeal dismissed.   Subsequently  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds succeeded but on the respondent's appeal reconsideration
    was ordered and eventually, in 2007 (after the events which will be set
    out  in  a  moment)  the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum   grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

 4. Very shortly after the respondent had been granted permission to appeal
    against the decision made by the adjudicator allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal on human rights grounds,  on  24  December  2004  the  appellant
    committed a serious offence of attempted robbery on a young woman at  a
    bus stop,  for  which  he  was  initially  sentenced  to  three  years'
    imprisonment  with  an  additional  eighteen  months  for  breaching  a
    community rehabilitation order  (relating  to  sexual  assault),  which
    sentence was reduced on appeal to three years and nine months in  total
    (three years for the attempted robbery plus nine months for the  breach
    of his community rehabilitation order).

 5. The respondent then made a decision that the applicant  was  liable  to
    deportation, and a signed deportation order was served  on  him  on  12
    March 2008 (the appellant not having appealed  against  the  notice  of
    intention to deport him).

 6. The appellant was bailed but failed to report as  instructed  while  on
    bail and was listed as an absconder in 2010.

 7. The following month, the appellant was  convicted  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to one year twelve days' imprisonment.

 8. On 12 June 2012 the appellant was convicted of using threatening  words
    and behaviour to a 15 year old girl  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to
    eighteen weeks imprisonment.

 9. Then, on  25  April  2013,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm with intent to commit a sexual  offence,
    for which he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on 2  July  2013.
    The judge's sentencing remarks included the following comments:

         "The jury by their verdict showed that on the  evidence  they  were
         sure that you intended to commit a sexual assault falling short  of
         rape, and it is clear from what you were saying at  the  time  that
         you had in mind licking her  anus.  Luckily  that  did  not  happen
         because of the  intervention  of  others,  but  it  has  profoundly
         affected her.  Her Victim Impact Statement shows that she now feels
         unable to go out anywhere in public on her own since  the  incident
         occurred.   She says that she used to be a strong person,  however,
         she now feels nervous and she gets  upset  every  time  she  thinks
         about the incident.  And she states that it  upsets  her  to  think
         about what may have happened had she not been able to get away from
         you.

         This is not the first  time  that  you  have  approached  a  female
         sexually and aggressively and it is likely,  indeed  certain,  that
         drink played a part on both  occasions.  In 2004 you were made  the
         subject of a community rehabilitation order  for  three  years  and
         shortly afterwards you were arrested for robbery.

         I had wished to recommend you for deportation, but you are  already
         the subject of a  signed deportation order and the sentence that  I
         pass is more than twelve months, so that is not necessary.

         This was an offence committed at night, upon a woman  on  her  own,
         and one that has affected her profoundly.

         You have previous convictions of violence  and  one  offence  of  a
         sexual nature.  And I have no doubt that if in your  drunken  state
         you could have carried out the sexual  part  of  the  assault,  you
         would have done so.   I  think  these  matters,  particularly  your
         record, take this matter outside the  guidelines  which  suggest  a
         range of up to two years' imprisonment  for  the  full  offence  of
         sexual assault, which you in fact did not carry out."

10. The appellant subsequently appealed against the respondent's refusal to
    revoke the deportation order which had been made against him and it  is
    that appeal which was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Moore  in
    his determination promulgated on 7 October 2014.  It is the appellant's
    appeal against that decision which is now before me.

11. The judge's findings are set out  from  paragraph  33  onwards  of  his
    determination.  At paragraph 35,  the judge noted the previous decision
    of Immigration Judge Aujla of April 2007 in which "the Tribunal did not
    accept the appellant's account that he was  unfamiliar  with  his  clan
    history and did not find the appellant  credible  with  regard  to  his
    claim that he had no family left in Somalia from  his  father's  side".
    The judge concurred with the findings and stated in terms  that  "I  do
    not accept the appellant's claim with regard to his clan membership and
    I do not accept that the  appellant  has  no  family  still  living  in
    Somalia".

12. In the second unnumbered paragraph within paragraph  35,  in  the  last
    sentence the judge found that "in all the circumstances, I am satisfied
    that there is a reasonable likelihood that  family  members  are  still
    living in Somalia".

13. Having noted that the criminal history of the appellant  since  he  had
    been in this country "has been prolific" (at paragraph 36)  the  judge,
    when  considering  the  appellant's  rights  under  Article   8,   gave
    appropriate consideration to what is set out within paragraphs 398  and
    399A of the  Immigration  Rules,  having  first  noted  correctly  that
    (having regard to paragraph 396) "Where the  Secretary  of  State  must
    make a deportation order in  accordance  with  Section  32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 [as in this case], it is in  the  public  interest  to
    deport".

14. Having had regard to what he found to be the appellant's  private  life
    in this country and his relationship with his parents here,  the  judge
    did "not accept that the appellant's right to  private  life  outweighs
    the public interest in seeing him  deported"  and  accordingly  he  was
    "satisfied that deportation was  not in breach of Article 8".

15. The judge had regard  to  the  country  situation  in  Somalia  and  in
    particular the decision of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
    K.A.B.v Sweden in which the court  had  found  "that  the  most  recent
    information suggested that the 'security  situation  in  Mogadishu  has
    improved since 2011 or the beginning of 2012'" (at paragraph 43 of  his
    determination).  He noted (also at paragraph 43) that:

         "The court continued that it was aware  of  the  human  rights  and
         security  situation  in  Mogadishu  being  serious,   fragile   and
         unpredictable, but the fact was that Al-Shabaab was  no  longer  in
         power in the city, and 'that the available country information does
         not indicate that the situation is, at present, of such a nature as
         to place everyone who is present in the city  at  a  real  risk  of
         treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention'."

16. Having had regard to the Country Information and Guidance Report  dated
    4 April 2014, which the judge  considered  showed  that  there  was  an
    improvement in the security situation in Mogadishu  and  an  increasing
    number of areas in Somalia, he stated that "I do not accept  that  this
    appellant will be a real risk on return to Mogadishu, and  even  if  he
    was, which I do not accept, there will be no reason why [he] could  not
    relocate to Gedo or Puntland".

17.  The  judge  considered  (at  paragraph  44)  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances (such as might justify the grant of leave  to
    remain under Article 8 outside the Rules)  but  considered  that  there
    were not.  He found that the appellant could   return  to  Somalia  and
    maintain contact with his parents in this country if he wished to do so
    and that it was "more likely than not that  family  members  are  still
    living in Somalia and the appellant could make  contact  with  them  if
    that was his desire".   He did not consider that there were  compelling
    reasons or exceptional circumstances why it would not be  proportionate
    to deport this appellant, and accordingly, found at paragraph 45 that

         "Having considered all the factors in this  case,  ...  the  public
         interest  in  having  this   appellant   deported   outweighs   the
         appellant's right to private life and to family life in the  United
         Kingdom, and therefore deportation would not infringe Article 8  of
         the ECHR."

18. The judge also noted at paragraph 46 that the Immigration Act 2014  had
    introduced new provisions into the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002, in  particular  Section  117B  (Article  8:  public  interest
    considerations) and Section 117C (Article 8:  Additional  Consideration
    in cases involving foreign criminals).  He concluded his  determination
    as follows:

         "The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest and
         the more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal. This
         appellant has been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at
         least  two  years,  and  therefore  the  public  interest  requires
         deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in the  exceptions  in  this  section.   This
         appellant has not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for
         most of his life and whilst to a degree has integrated into society
         in the United Kingdom, that integration  had  involved  substantial
         periods of imprisonment for serious offences.  I do not  find  that
         there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
         integration into Somalia to  where  it  is  proposed  he  would  be
         deported."

19. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal
    are in substance the same as the grounds which had  been  submitted  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission,  save  that  some   further
    arguments were made with regard to the reasons which had been given  by
    Designed  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J.  M.   Holmes   for   refusing
    permission, which reiterate the arguments already made.  There are five
    grounds, which can be summarised as follows:

20. Ground 1 complains that the judge failed  to  engage  with  the  latest
    country guidance on Somalia, which was that given  in  MOJ  and  Others
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT  442,  which  had  been
    promulgated some five days before Judge Moore's decision in  this  case
    had been promulgated (although Judge Moore's decision had been dated 15
    September 2014, which is some three weeks before  it  was  promulgated,
    and over two weeks before the decision in MOJ was  promulgated).   This
    is said to be relevant to the appellant's Article 3 claim.

21. Ground 2, also said to be relevant to the appellant's Article 3  claim,
    asserts that the judge failed to consider evidence "that even  MOJ  may
    be out of date on the question of risk from Al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu".
    It is said that there was evidence before the judge that the  situation
    in Mogadishu  had  deteriorated,  which  the  judge  had  not  properly
    considered.

22. Ground 3, which is said to  bear  on  the  appellant's  Article  3  and
    Article 8 claims, asserts that the judge had failed to give reasons (or
    as asserted at paragraph 31 of the renewed  grounds,  failed  to  given
    "clear reasons") for rejecting the evidence of the appellant's  parents
    that he had no family members left in  Somalia  at  all.   The  grounds
    themselves, while  noting  that  the  appellant's  parents  "were  both
    nervous and unconfident witnesses" assert that  they  nonetheless  were
    consistent in their evidence that the appellant had no  family  members
    in Somalia and that there was no positive evidence that he did.

23. Ground 4, which again is said to bear on both the Article 3 and Article
    8 claims of the  appellant,  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate consideration to the previous diagnosis  of  Mr  Cauldwell,  a
    forensic psychologist, that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  post
    traumatic stress disorder when considering his likely circumstances  on
    return to Mogadishu.

24. Ground 5 asserts  that  the  judge  made  "errors"  when  conducting  a
    proportionality assessment.

25. On behalf of the appellant, Ms McCarthy expanded on the grounds in oral
    argument.  With regard to Ground 1, clearly the judge had not  had  MOJ
    before him when making his decision, which he should have done, because
    it was promulgated earlier than this decision.  Particular reliance was
    placed upon the guidance set out in the head note at (vii) as follows:


         "(vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence
             will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the
             city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance from
             his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as
             minority clans may have little to offer."

26. Ms McCarthy asserted that the Tribunal had not considered  whether  the
    appellant would have assistance from family members.   At  its  highest
    the judge's finding was that he was likely to have some family  members
    in Somalia but not that he would have such family members.  Although at
    paragraph 35 the judge had not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  no
    family still living in Somalia, he had not stated who this family  was,
    and the finding that there  would  have  been   "some"  family  members
    present was not sufficient.

27. With regard to the suggestion that as the appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    member of a minority clan had been rejected, he should be  regarded  as
    having majority clan support available, it was  a  huge  leap  for  the
    Tribunal to make from not being certain as to what family members still
    exist to the finding that there are family members in Mogadishu or that
    majority clan support would be  available.  The  whole  case  had  been
    decided on the basis of out of date country guidance.

28. In answer to an observation from the  Tribunal  that  the  new  country
    guidance given in MOJ would appear to make  it harder for applicants to
    prove they would be at risk  on  return  to  Mogadishu  than  had  been
    previously believed to be the case, Ms McCarthy  appreciated  that  her
    submission with regard to this ground would  be  difficult  to  sustain
    unless the Tribunal accepted her submission also  that  the  conclusion
    that there would be family or clan support available to  the  appellant
    on return was unsustainable.  The appellant's own evidence was that  he
    did not have family there and had no contact with his  siblings.    The
    question marks surrounding this  evidence  arose  because  of  apparent
    inconsistencies between what the appellant's father and mother had said
    when questioned about the mother's travel to Kenya.  The  Tribunal  had
    concluded on that basis that the evidence  that  there  was  no  family
    remaining in Somalia was inconsistent and  therefore  unreliable.  This
    was the source of the disbelief, but nobody at any point had said  that
    anyone could  travel to Somalia.  The mother's evidence  had been  that
    she had gone to Kenya and the father said he could not remember whether
    he had ever been to Somalia.  It was unreasonable on the basis  of  the
    evidence for the Tribunal to have come to a  positive  conclusion  that
    the appellant had family support available to him within Somalia.

29. Accordingly, although Ms McCarthy appreciated that if the Tribunal  did
    not accept her submission that there would be no support available from
    the appellant's nuclear family or clan then the decision in  MOJ  would
    not add to his claim, her primary  submission  was  that  the  Tribunal
    should not have found that  there  was  a  nuclear  family  there  just
    because of some inconsistencies as to precisely what  travel  had  been
    made in East Africa by the  appellant's  mother,  when  all  the  other
    evidence was that he had had no contact with his siblings.

30. The judge  had  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the  appellant's
    consistent evidence that he had no siblings in Somalia. His mother  had
    named all her children when she came to the UK, and the  only  one  who
    had ever come to the UK was this appellant.  There was no evidence that
    the appellant's mother had been  able  to  contact  any  of  her  other
    children.

31. With regard to Ground 2, which asserted  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered properly the evidence of a deterioration  of  conditions  in
    Mogadishu in that there had been further Al-Shabaab attacks there which
    had not been taken into account in MOJ, Ms McCarthy accepted she was in
    difficulty pursuing this ground "with any force" (and in the event  did
    not pursue it at all).

32. With regard to Ground 3, this overlapped with  Ground  1,  because  the
    reasons for rejecting entirely the evidence of the appellant's  parents
    had not been fully set out.  As with Ground 1, this appeared to  be  on
    the basis of "confusion" with regard to where  the  appellant's  mother
    went during her trip to Kenya, and no allowance had been made  for  the
    difficulties she had when giving evidence.  The Tribunal observed  that
    Judge Moore had appeared to find (at paragraph 35)  that  the  evidence
    was shifting on this point, to which  Ms  McCarthy  accepted  that  the
    evidence was "at times unclear", but submitted that this was not enough
    to demonstrate dishonesty.  The judge should have had in mind that  the
    appellant's father was being asked about his wife's travel  some  years
    before and that it was plausible  that  anyone  giving  evidence  under
    these conditions "might find their evidence shifted".

33. It was also putting the position too high when the judge had found that
    the appellant's father had "changed" his response, especially in  light
    of the appellant's explanation.  The rejection of the family's evidence
    was based entirely on the inconsistency in connection with  the  travel
    to Kenya, but the other evidence was consistent  with  there  being  no
    contact with any other sibling.  On this basis, it was  submitted  that
    the conclusion that the entire family was lying about what family there
    was in Mogadishu, based on one momentary inconsistency in the  father's
    evidence was perverse.

34. With regard to Ground 4, which was the judge's failure to consider  the
    medical needs of the appellant, the forensic psychiatrist's  report  in
    November 2013 had concluded that he  suffered  from  PTSD,  the  likely
    cause of which was his childhood experiences in Somalia.  The  forensic
    psychologist had also pointed to the appellant's use of drink and drugs
    as "emotional coping strategies".  Even if the judge had accepted  that
    the appellant had family in Mogadishu, the fact that he  had  PTSD  and
    had been  misusing drink and  drugs  to  cope  with  his  psychological
    difficulties was highly relevant  to  whether  he  could  integrate  on
    return and how he would be perceived on return.

35. This overlapped with the submissions set out  within  Ground  5  as  to
    errors in the proportionality assessment.

36. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis relied on the skeleton  argument
    which he had prepared before the hearing,  on  which  he  too  expanded
    orally.  Notwithstanding the arguments which had been advanced  on  the
    appellant's behalf, the determination was sound.  As far as  the  first
    Ground was  concerned,  if  the  appellant  had   considered  that  MOJ
    (promulgated after the hearing but just before the promulgation of  the
    decision in this appeal) was important and helpful, there was no reason
    why his  solicitors  could  not  have  alerted  the  Tribunal  to  that
    judgment.  Further, and in any event, the guidance given in  that  case
    could not have assisted the appellant, because the judge had considered
    the relevant questions in any  event,  which  were  first,  as  to  the
    appellant's clan membership, secondly, whether he had nuclear family in
    Mogadishu and, thirdly, whether he had any close relatives there.

37. The respondent also relied on MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, in which the
    Supreme Court had upheld the Tribunal in its finding in that case  that
    an appellant who had not discharged the burden of showing that  he  had
    no connections in Mogadishu and had not told the truth, should  not  be
    taken as having established that he had no  connections  in  Mogadishu.
    This decision was consistent with the approach taken in NM  and  Others
    (Lone women, Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076, where the  Tribunal
    had stated that it was a lawful  approach  for  a  judge  to  treat  an
    applicant who had not been believed in his or her claim to be  from  an
    ethnic minority clan, as being from a majority clan.

38. Accordingly, in this case, as this appellant  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon  him  to  show  that  he  had  no  connections  in
    Mogadishu, and whose credibility had been rejected  both  in  his  2007
    application and also  before  Judge  Moore,  there  was  no  evidential
    platform on which Judge Moore was required to find that he was  from  a
    minority clan or had no family or other connections  within  Mogadishu.
    The appellant had failed to show, whether or  not  he  had  any  family
    connections, that there was some reason why  he  could  not  find  work
    himself.

39. With regard to Ground 2, that MOJ was out  of  date,  this  ground  was
    answered in the skeleton argument but Mr Jarvis did not expand on  what
    was said there in oral argument, as the appellant  had  not  relied  on
    this ground in the course of this hearing.

40. With regard to the third and fourth Grounds, the judge had given  clear
    reasons for rejecting the parents' evidence, and insofar as  the  judge
    had relied on the previous finding of  lack  of  credibility,  made  in
    2007, the judge had not treated this as binding but properly used  this
    judgment as his starting point.  With regard to  the  report  from  the
    forensic psychologist, not only was this report nearly a  year  old  at
    the time of the hearing, but in any event, for the appellant's  medical
    condition and historic abuse of drink and drugs to be material  to  the
    consideration of risk on return, the appellant had first  to  establish
    that there would be no support available to him on return, either  from
    his clan and his family, which for reasons already given,  he  had  not
    done. In these circumstances, the judge was entitled to find as he did.

41. With  regard  to  proportionality,  the  judge  had  proper  regard  to
    paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Rules, and was entitled to find that the
    appellant's circumstances were not so compelling  as  to  outweigh  the
    very great public interest in his deportation.

Discussion

42. So far as the first Ground is concerned, that the judge failed to  have
    regard to the guidance given in MOJ, as Ms McCarthy  recognised  during
    the  hearing,  if  anything  the  new  guidance  would  had  made  this
    appellant's argument more difficult to sustain.  It is clear  that  the
    judge's finding that this appellant would not be at risk on return  was
    founded upon the appellant's failure to satisfy him that  he  would  be
    without any support on return.  As  Ms  McCarthy  conceded  during  the
    hearing, she could see that the applicant would be "in difficulties" if
    this  Tribunal  did   not  accept  her  submission  that  the   judge's
    conclusion that there would be support  from  the  appellant's  nuclear
    family or clan support was wrong. The only basis upon which this ground
    could succeed was that the judge should not  have  found  that  support
    would be available to him but should have accepted his evidence that he
    had had no contact with his siblings and there was no support available
    in Mogadishu.

43. However, the judge gave his reasons for rejecting the evidence  of  the
    appellant's parents in the second unnumbered paragraph within paragraph
    35, which was that his mother's evidence had been contradicted  by  the
    evidence given by his father, and  that  his  father  had  subsequently
    changed that evidence.   As the judge stated, "I find the  evidence  in
    relation to any  family  living  in  Somalia  to  be  inconsistent  and
    unreliable" and for this  reason,  "in  all  the  circumstances,  I  am
    satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that family members are
    still living in Somalia".

44. In my judgement, the judge was entitled to reach this finding,  and  in
    light  of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  which  were  made,  the
    appellant simply had not established  either  that  he  had  no  family
    support available to him or that he would not have clan support either.
     For the same reasons, the submissions contained within Ground  3  also
    fall away.

45. Ground 2 is unarguable, and was not pursued during  the  hearing.  With
    regard  to  the  fourth  Ground,  again,  any  argument  based  on  the
    appellant's post traumatic stress disorder, coupled with  his  reliance
    historically on drink and drugs could  only  succeed  in  circumstances
    where he had also established that  he  would  be  without  support  on
    return, which he had not done.

46. In light of the huge public interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals
    such as this appellant, in the absence of any compelling reason why the
    appellant should not be deported, his Article  8  claim  was  bound  to
    fail.  Certainly, the judge's findings with regard  to  proportionality
    are entirely adequately reasoned, and the judge has had  proper  regard
    to the relevant Rules - see especially from paragraphs 36 to 42, and 44
    to 46 (in which reference was also made to the new Section 117C of  the
    2002 Act, introduced by Section 14 of the 2014 Act (as already noted at
    paragraph 18 above).

47. Accordingly, there being no arguable material error  in  Judge  Moore's
    determination, this appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

48. There being no material error of law in the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:    13 May 2016

