

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19551/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 20 January 2015                            |on 21 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 SADIA ASIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:  present, not represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ferguson, dated 3 and issued on 4 September 2014, dismissing  her
    appeal against refusal of leave to remain on the basis of  her  private
    and family life in the UK.

 2. In her grounds of appeal to the FtT the appellant said that her husband
    had an appeal pending against refusal of leave on the basis of 10 years
    lawful residence.  On 18 June 2014 the FtT  issued  directions  to  the
    appellant and to her  solicitors,  advising  that  the  case  would  be
    decided "on the papers"  (as  requested)  and  requiring  "any  further
    written evidence or submissions" to be received by 16 July 2014.

 3. The determination finds that the appellant has not made out her Article
    8 grounds.  At paragraph 9 the judge says that she  might  have  had  a
    case if her husband had been granted leave, but  no  evidence  to  that
    effect was submitted.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  say  that  evidence  was
    submitted to the FtT by letter dated 15 and received on 17  July  2014,
    showing that the appeal by the appellant's husband was to have an  oral
    hearing on 16 July 2014.  This communication is on the file now  before
    the UT.  It appears that the FtT did receive it on 17 July 2014 but  it
    was not linked to the file until after Judge  Ferguson's  decision  had
    been issued.

 5. There is also on file a letter from the appellant's solicitors dated 31
    July and received by fax on 5 September 2014  enclosing  a  copy  of  a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith in the  case  of
    the appellant's husband, IA/18859/2014, promulgated on  22  July  2014.
    His appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The determination does not  make  any  mistake  on  the  basis  of  the
    information which was before the judge.  The FtT was asked in the first
    place to deal with the two appeals  separately.   No  reason  has  been
    given for deciding to proceed in that way.  The same solicitors  appear
    to have been instructed by husband and wife throughout.   The  date  of
    the hearing of the husband's appeal  was  advised  one  day  late.  The
    outcome was advised only after the determination now under  appeal  had
    been promulgated.  The unfortunate situation which has come  about  was
    contributed to by the appellant's side.

 7. However, the communication dated 15  and  received  on  17  July  2014,
    although late, should have been  placed  before  the  Judge,  and  that
    should have had the result that  this  appeal  was  not  determined  in
    isolation from the husband's  appeal.   I  find  that  there  has  been
    inadvertent  procedural  error  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as
    constructively to be held as error of law.  The  determination  is  set
    aside.

 8. Mrs O'Brien advised  me  that  the  appellant's  husband  has  not  yet
    received a grant of leave, but that the respondent has taken no  appeal
    against the outcome in his case.

 9. In all  the  circumstances  the  most  apt  course  would  be  for  the
    respondent to make a fresh decision, based on the up-to-date  position.
    The determination which I substitute is that the appeal, as brought  to
    the FtT, is allowed to the extent that the  respondent's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.



             [pic]


             20 January 2015
             Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
