
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/19453/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 August 2013                              |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                            ebele cynthia okafor

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi (acting pro bono)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the re-hearing of the appellant's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 20 August 2012  to  remove  her  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  At an earlier hearing on 21 January  2013  I  found  material
    errors of law in the earlier determination  of  the  First-tier  judge,
    such that the matter required to be re-heard.

2.   Mr Pipi had thought that the  appellant  was  still  represented  by  A
    Vincent Solicitors, but a letter received from them dated 6 August 2013
    said that they were no longer on the record as instructed and/or acting
    for the appellant.  In the circumstances Mr Pipi proposed  to  act  for
    the appellant pro bono.  I am extremely grateful to him for  acting  in
    this way and had derived  considerable  assistance  from  his  skeleton
    argument and submissions.

3.   The appeal had had to be adjourned on 31 May 2013 because there  was  a
    court order from the family court  which  the  Home  Office  wished  to
    consider and also a question of whether the  forthcoming  determination
    of the Tribunal in the case of JF would be of  significance.   Mr  Pipi
    was in favour of proceeding today.   He  was  not  going  to  be  in  a
    position to act pro bono on a future occasion and it  was  unclear  how
    relevant JF was to the case and it would be open  to  the  Tribunal  to
    decide what to make of the law as it stood at present.  He asked me  to
    proceed today and Ms Horsley had no objection to that.

4.   The appellant identified her signature on her  statement  of  8  August
    2013 and said that it was truthful and that it should form part of  her
    evidence today.

5.   With regard to her sister Vivian,  she  cooked  for  her  of  necessity
    because her sister had fallen asleep  once  when  cooking.   The  court
    order had been made because Vivian had been insisting that she was  all
    right and could look after her daughter Louise so  sometimes  when  the
    appellant was cooking her sister liked to go out with her daughter when
    the appellant did not know and the authorities had said that her sister
    was not all right.  She visited her sister four or five  times  a  week
    and while there she cooked for her and made sure  that  everything  was
    all right.

6.   As regards the "joint carer responsibilities" referred to at  paragraph
    4 of her statement, she said that  she  looked  after  her  sister  and
    stayed with her and she brought Louise  to  stay  with  her  (i.e.  the
    witness) at the weekends.  She was asked  why  Vivian's  husband  Moses
    could not do that and she said it was as he was always away and he  and
    Ms Wilson, Louise's special guardian, did not get on well.

7.   When cross-examined by Ms Horsley the appellant  said  that  she  lived
    with her brother-in-law, Moses Akudu, having moved in there last April.
     This had been because they wanted  to  evict  her  sister.   The  Home
    Office had said that the appellant should move to the address with  her
    brother-in-law and his two sons.  She had been living with  her  sister
    before that and her sister now lived in Edmonton,  in  a  double  room.
    She was asked whether there was any evidence from her sister about  the
    witness coming to the United  Kingdom  and  staying  here  and  contact
    between her and Vivian and the children and she said  no,  she  thought
    the evidence from CAFCASS was about the witness living with her  sister
    Vivian and helping her.  She was asked why her sister had not written a
    letter and she said it was as she was not well.  Her sister worked as a
    care assistant and she agreed that she was not so ill  that  she  could
    not work.  She was asked why, if her sister could work full-time  could
    she not write a letter and she said  her  sister  would  appear  to  be
    normal but then  changed  and  sometimes  when  you  asked  her  to  do
    something she said she could not. Her sister supported her  being  here
    in the United Kingdom and looking after the children.  She  lived  with
    her sister at Wightman Road since she had  first  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She had not lived anywhere else.

8.   She was referred to an address at Maltby Drive,  Enfield,  referred  to
    in Dr Haas's letter of 6 October 2011, and said that she used to  visit
    there and her brother-in-law Moses had been living there at  the  time.
    She had put his address down as he  was  her  sponsor.   Moses  was  in
    Nigeria today, having gone last month and had said  he  would  be  back
    some time next month.  While he was away she cared  for  his  children.
    He travelled to Nigeria a  lot  having  previously  been  between  last
    December and April.  He did business there.  She denied the real reason
    she was here was to  look  after  his  children  and  let  him  do  his
    business.  She said she was here to look after her nephews and niece as
    her sister was unwell.

9.   Her sister had been made homeless in June  2013,  from  Whiteman  Road.
    She agreed that she herself had moved out in April 2012  and  this  was
    because the Home Office had instructed her to stay at the address  that
    she had stated in the letters.  She was asked  whether  if  her  sister
    needed her help to look after her could she not  have  asked  the  Home
    Office to let her live with her at Whiteman Road and she said  she  had
    not known she could.  She did not have the Home  Office  letter  saying
    she must stay with the sponsor with her today.

10.  She had come to the United Kingdom on a visit visa with the support  of
    Social Services.  This had  been  when  Louise  was  4  and  the  local
    authority had supported the application.   It  was  true  that  in  his
    letter Mr Dowell had not said that  she  had  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

11.  The appellant was asked on what day her sister had contact with  Louise
    and said that it was sometimes Mondays and  it  depended  on  what  she
    wanted and it could be Thursdays.  She had to call in advance  to  make
    arrangements.  The contact  took  place  at  Ms  Wilson's  house.   The
    contact was arranged by her sister Ms Wilson.  Louise saw her father on
    Sundays every two weeks at their house.  She was asked whether, when as
    now her father was away, did Louise see her brothers on Sundays and she
    said that she saw them every weekend between Saturday and Monday.  They
    did not have a different contact arrangement.  It was put to  her  that
    this seemed to conflict with the terms  of  the  court  order  and  the
    appellant said that she brought Louise every Saturday to  Monday.   Her
    sister had wanted to do that herself but the court had ordered that the
    appellant should do the contact.  Her  sister  had  wanted  to  collect
    Louise herself.  She had last seen Louise last Sunday, having collected
    her from Ms Wilson's between Saturday and Monday.  She agreed that this
    was a different arrangement with Ms Wilson from the terms of the  court
    order.  Ms Wilson was not here today to support her application.

12.  With regard to what she said at paragraph 16  of  her  statement  about
    the difficulties she would experience on return to Nigeria she said she
    would not be able to get a job there.  It was difficult to  get  a  job
    there and she had had a job before she came here but would not be  able
    to get a job at all on return.  She had her mother in  Nigeria  but  no
    uncles or aunts.  She had cousins but they lived in the USA.

13.  There was no re-examination.

14.  In her submissions Ms  Horsley  relied  on  the  refusal  letter.   She
    accepted that there was family life with the children but  argued  that
    this had been established when the appellant had no immigration  status
    in the United Kingdom.  She was living with the two elder children,  as
    her brother-in-law travelled a lot, and it was  argued  that  this  was
    done to provide childcare for them.  He could provide that care himself
    or employ someone with status to do it.

15.  The appellant had been in the United Kingdom  since  January  2010  and
    had been living with her brother-in-law and his two  sons  since  April
    2012.  Previously she had lived with her sister.  The best interests of
    Louise were to remain in the United Kingdom with her  special  guardian
    who had an order to look after her.  The appellant had never lived with
    the child and was not her primary carer.  The Tribunal was referred  to
    the CAFCASS Report concerning Louise's best interests.  Ms Wilson had a
    special guardianship order in respect of Louise which included  contact
    with the birth family.  This was supervised by the appellant.  She  had
    provided mediation between Ms Wilson and her  brother-in-law.   It  was
    quite clear that social services envisaged that the appellant might not
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The report did not  recommend  that  the
    appellant stay in the United Kingdom in Louise's best interests.

16.  With regard to the special guardianship order of 26 September 2012,  it
    said that Ms  Wilson  was  to  facilitate  and  agree  contact  between
    Louise's mother and father.  The appellant  had  given  an  account  of
    contact which was not as set out in the order.  There was  no  evidence
    from  Ms  Wilson  to  confirm  that  there  was  a   separate   contact
    arrangement.   It  was  argued  that  the  appellant  was  seeking   to
    exaggerate the contact she had with Louise in  order  to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The contact terms between Louise's  parents  were  set
    out and that did not include the appellant.

17.  The appellant was providing childcare for  the  two  boys  while  their
    father was away.  Their status in the United  Kingdom  did  not  depend
    upon her being here.  Their father was their primary carer and  he  was
    responsible for arranging their childcare or obtaining someone else who
    could do it.  They were teenagers so not in the same position as a very
    young, more dependent child.  If the Tribunal found that it was in  the
    best interests of the children for the appellant to be here then  there
    was a wider proportionality  assessment  to  be  made.   Other  factors
    outweighed it.  The appellant was in the United Kingdom on a visit visa
    and had overstayed and relationships had been formed and secured whilst
    her immigration status was precarious.   There  were  people  here  who
    could look after the children.  Her sister was not in court  today  and
    had not provided a statement in support.  The appellant  had  said  her
    sister was unwell and would not write a letter, but  she  was  able  to
    work full-time.  The absence of evidence undermined the claim of a very
    strong bond between the two.  The appellant's presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom had not prevented her sister from losing her home and they  had
    not lived together for over a year.  The appellant  had  made  the  odd
    claim that the Home Office insisted that she live with her  brother-in-
    law.  Any  interference  in  her  private  and  family  life  would  be
    proportionate.  As regards returning to Nigeria, she had had a good job
    previously and was educated and had her mother there and was capable of
    looking after herself.  There was no reason to suppose that  she  would
    experience problems on return.

18.  In his submissions  Mr  Pipi  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.   As
    regards the argument that  the  appellant  had  developed  family  life
    without immigration status, this was wrong.  The Tribunal was  referred
    to the letters from Social Services.  They had encouraged the appellant
    to come to the United Kingdom and family life had begun from then  when
    she had status as a visitor.  It was not possible for  her  to  act  as
    carer for all the children because of the structure of the family life.
     It would be very difficult for someone else to bring  Louise  from  Ms
    Wilson's to her parents as it would be very hard for  someone  else  to
    maintain the family life as currently structured and as it had been  in
    existence for a long time.  The  children  were  used  to  the  current
    structure and putting in a new  person  could  not  be  in  their  best
    interests.  They were attached to the appellant.  She was  involved  in
    the facilitation of visits, bearing in  mind  the  tension  between  Ms
    Wilson and her brother-in-law  who  did  not  get  on.   There  was  no
    evidence that they had reconciled.

19.  With regard to the court  order  and  the  current  arrangements  which
    referred to Louise's stepfather taking her every two weeks,  there  was
    nothing to say that the position with the two boys was  the  same.   At
    most it was a breach of the court order.  Louise went to her  siblings'
    home whether her stepfather was there or not so he saw her  more  often
    than the order provided for.  It  happened  all  too  often  in  family
    circumstances and was done in the best interests of the  children.   It
    would be best to go  back  to  the  court  and  amend  the  order.   No
    application to amend had been made but it did not mean  that  what  was
    said to be happening was not happening.  It  was  a  concern,  but  the
    Tribunal had to consider the immigration  aspects  of  the  matter  and
    whether it undermined the quality of the relationships and family  life
    between the appellant and others.  It did  not  affect  the  Tribunal's
    decision.

20.  It was accepted that the contact arrangements did not  say  that  there
    was a need for the appellant, but it was necessary to look who made  it
    possible for her sister to function as she did.  The extra  handwritten
    medical report should be noted.  Louise's mother was able  to  maintain
    family life with Louise because of help from the appellant.   It  could
    not continue without her.  The absence of the appellant's sister  today
    was not an undermining factor.  It was not helpful to ask such a person
    with a mental health problem to come to court as their  evidence  could
    change at any minute.  Someone with mental health  problems  might  not
    give evidence before mental health Tribunals.  The fact  that  she  was
    working full-time was down to the support she got  from  the  appellant
    and in this regard it was necessary to refer to Dr Haas's letter.   The
    appellant was needed.

21.  As regards her ability to work in Nigeria, she had left her job as  she
    was encouraged to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.   She  could  not  be
    required to come.  A letter of protest had been sent  from  the  social
    worker when the application was refused for her to  come.   They  could
    not say any more than that.   That  could  be  taken  into  account  in
    considering the proportionality of return.

22.  I reserved my determination.

23.   I  have  summarised  in  some  detail  in  the  earlier  decision  and
    directions the evidence in this case as it was before the judge.  There
    is a further short bundle in which in a letter of 30 May 2013 Mr  Akudu
    repeats his support for the appellant and says that she is  doing  what
    she does best, facilitating the biological bond between Louise and  her
    two siblings and doing  what  the  Social  Services  expected  of  her,
    bringing the children together socially and otherwise.  There is also a
    letter of 30 May 2013 from Chima Akudu, and  also  a  letter  from  his
    brother, Jideofor, of the  same  date,  both  speaking  fondly  of  the
    appellant and the care that she provides them, in particular when their
    father is away on business.  There is also a letter from Ms  Wilson  of
    30 May 2013 confirming  the  contents  of  her  earlier  letter  of  29
    September 2012 concerning the role of the appellant  in  Louise's  life
    and expressing her wish that these contacts are  maintained  as  it  is
    beneficial to her.

24.  There is  also  a  contact  order  from  the  family  court,  dated  26
    September 2012, making a special guardianship order to  Ms  Wilson  for
    Louise.  The terms of  this  are  that  Ms  Wilson  shall  make  Louise
    available for supervised contact with her mother Vivian at Ms  Wilson's
    house once a week for an hour, to be pre-arranged by a  telephone  call
    made by Mrs Akudu, and also Ms Wilson shall make Louise  available  for
    contact with Mr Akudu fortnightly on Sundays  between  10:00am  in  the
    morning and 3:00pm in the afternoon, again to be arranged  in  advance.
    It goes on to say that there shall be further or other contact  as  may
    be arranged  between  the  applicant  and  the  parties.   That  latter
    provision  can  perhaps  be  said  to  explain   the   more   expansive
    arrangements that were described by  the  appellant  in  evidence.   It
    seems that though the arrangement vis-�-vis Louise's mother is  as  set
    out in the order, Louise in fact spends the weekends with her  brothers
    and stepfather (when he is in the United Kingdom) and the appellant.

25.  There is also a copy of a medical report written by Dr Joanna  Haas  on
    6 October 2011 in respect of the appellant who at that time was  living
    with her sister, Louise's mother, at Wightman Road.  Dr Haas  expresses
    the view that Vivian needs regular support and  encouragement  and  her
    understanding was that the appellant was living with  her  and  looking
    after Louise every weekend and her brothers at  alternate  weekends  at
    her brother-in-law's house as he sometimes had to work abroad.  He said
    that with Vivian working but also having a history  of  neglecting  her
    children and of erratic behaviour when unwell, it is desirable for  the
    current arrangement with the  appellant  here  to  support  her  to  be
    continued for several years, chiefly in Louise's  interest.   She  said
    that if the appellant were to be asked to return to Nigeria there would
    be a greater risk of her sister's mental  health  relapsing  and  of  a
    breakdown in the relationship between Vivian and Louse.  She  does  not
    feel that Vivian is fit in the long-term to look after  Louise  without
    close supervision.

26.  There is also a handwritten  note  of  19  July  2013  on  this  report
    confirming that the appellant gives Vivian a lot of ongoing support  in
    managing her life and her children and moral support in respect of  her
    financial difficulties.  Dr Haas says that were  the  appellant  to  be
    returned to Nigeria there is a greater  risk  of  her  sister's  mental
    health  relapsing  and  of  a  breakdown   in   Vivian   and   Louise's
    relationship.  She asked that the present  arrangement  be  allowed  to
    continue for some years.

27.  It is also relevant to note that the appellant  has  been  living  with
    her brother-in-law and the two boys since April 2012, having previously
    lived with her sister.  Her evidence was that she sees her sister  four
    or five times a week  and  she  cooks  for  her  and  makes  sure  that
    everything is all right.  It is the case that Vivian  is  in  full-time
    employment as a care assistant.

28.  The appellant is, therefore, involved in  Louise's  life  in  that  she
    collects her from Ms Wilson's house and takes her to spend the weekends
    with her half-brothers and stepfather, when he is there.  It is unclear
    to what extent she is involved in facilitating the  supervised  contact
    that her sister Vivian has with Louise on the one hour a week when  she
    sees her.  Louise's contact with her mother occurs at Ms Wilson's house
    and the contact is arranged by Vivian and Ms Wilson. It is  clear  that
    the relationship between Ms Wilson and Mr Okafor is not good and  hence
    the appellant has a role to play in effectively avoiding the  need  for
    them to come into contact with each  other  by  collecting  Louise  and
    bringing her to Mr Okafor's house to see him and the boys at  weekends.
    It is relevant to note that the boys are respectively 17 and  15  years
    old.  Jideofor was born on 23 September 1995 and Chima  on  23  October
    1997.  It is also relevant to  note  that  Vivian  although  she  still
    suffers from schizophrenia, appears to be able to hold  down  full-time
    employment as a care assistant, and that she is now living on her  own,
    though the appellant visits her four or five times a week and cooks for
    her and sees that everything is all right.

29.  I have set out above what is said by the respective parties  concerning
    the role that the appellant plays in Louise's life.  I remind myself of
    what is said in the CAFCASS Report, in particular at paragraph 13, (the
    date of the report is 25 May 2012) about the important  role  that  the
    appellant has played in Louise's  life,  particularly  in  relation  to
    facilitating contact between Louise and her birth family.  That was  at
    a time when the appellant was living with Louise's mother Vivian,  when
    Louise would stay with Vivian and the appellant  at  weekends.   It  is
    also relevant to note at paragraph 35 of that report that  Vivian  said
    to the author of the report, Jane Biggs, the guardian  ad  litem,  that
    she believed she would be able to care for Louise  alone  although  she
    acknowledged that the appellant's support would be  helpful,  this  was
    not essential.  At paragraph 43 Ms Biggs refers to the appellant having
    been an important figure in Louise's life.  At paragraph  62  she  says
    that sadly  the  appellant's  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  remains
    insecure and it is uncertain whether this will change.  She  says  that
    it is evident from the history of the case that the appellant has  been
    pivotal in facilitating Louise's contact with her birth family as  well
    as supporting Ms Akudu and helping her  maintain  good  mental  health.
    She said that the appellant cannot be deemed to offer a  viable  option
    as a long-term carer for  Louisa  given  that  her  status  remains  so
    uncertain.  Subsequently, of course a special  guardianship  order  was
    granted to Ms  Wilson  in  respect  of  Louise  and  that  remains  the
    situation.  Ms Biggs recommended that contact between  Louise  and  the
    birth family continue at the current level and frequency, supervised by
    the appellant.

30.  The evidence as it stands  now  is  somewhat  different  however.   The
    appellant lives with Mr Okafor and the boys  and  facilitates  Louise's
    visits to them at weekends.  It is unclear to what extent, if  at  all,
    she is involved in the contact that Louise has with her mother.  If the
    appellant left the United Kingdom, then  someone  else  would  have  to
    collect Louise from Ms Wilson's and take her to her  half-brothers  and
    stepfather.  Mr Okafor would have to make arrangements for someone else
    to look after the boys, although if they are now respectively in  their
    18th and 16th years, that need  is  clearly  diminishing  and  will  go
    entirely before  too  long.   Clearly  the  appellant's  sister  Vivian
    remains vulnerable, though she is able to hold down a job, and it is  a
    little  surprising  that  no  evidence  has  been  provided  from   her
    concerning the support that the appellant gives her.

31.  The main relationships required to  be  considered  in  this  case  are
    those between the appellant and the children.  Considering for a moment
    the position of the two boys separately, it is on balance in their best
    interests for the appellant to continue to provide the support to  them
    that she is able to do, although that support could  to  a  significant
    extent be replaced by support from another person were the appellant to
    leave the country.   Balanced  against  the  interests  of  immigration
    control in assessing proportionality of removal, I  consider  that  the
    balance in respect of them comes down in favour of the  proportionality
    of removal.

32.  As regards Louise, it is in Louise's best interests for  the  appellant
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  She is not her mother or her  special
    guardian, but she is a relative who has played a  significant  role  in
    her life for the last few years.  The question of  whether  despite  it
    being in Louise's best interests for the appellant  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, that is outbalanced by the needs of immigration control
    is a matter that is quite finely balanced.  The main role played by the
    appellant in the United Kingdom is that of support for the two boys and
    to an extent her sister.  As regards the latter, this has to be seen in
    the context of the fact as set out above she is able  to  hold  down  a
    full-time job.  The appellant said in her statement of  8  August  2013
    that the reason that her sister is able to visit Louise at Ms  Wilson's
    house is because of the support system provided by the  appellant,  who
    ensures that she attends hospital and/or GP appointments for injections
    once a month and cooks for her.  She said that without the support  she
    receives from her that she will relapse as she has done in the past and
    will not be able to visit Louise any more or for some  time.   In  this
    regard I bear in mind also what is said by Dr Haas in  the  handwritten
    endorsement to the earlier medical report.  As regards  Vivian,  though
    it would be disadvantageous to her if the appellant were  removed,  the
    appellant does not live with her, and she (Vivian) is able to hold down
    a full-time job.  The support the appellant  provides  to  her  is  not
    support that only the appellant can provide.  With  regard  to  Louise,
    clearly the appellant plays a role in her life, but the appellant  does
    not live with Louise, is not  her  guardian,  and  someone  else  could
    accompany Louise to see the boys and their father at  weekends.   As  a
    final point, I do not consider it has been  shown  that  the  appellant
    would be unable to find work on return to Nigeria, given her employment
    history there.  On balance I consider that it has been shown  that  the
    appellant's removal would not be disproportionate, and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed under Article 8 of the ECHR.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

