
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19329/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 7 January 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              MITUN CHANDRA DAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Ahammed
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   There is before me an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herbert OBE who decided to
    allow the appellant's appeal to the extent that he purported  to  remit
    it back to the respondent  for  reconsideration.   The  respondent  had
    decided to reject the appellant's application  under  the  points-based
    system as a Tier 4 (General) Student  and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit on the grounds that the relevant points had  not  been  achieved
    because the bank statement submitted did not cover the correct  period.
    The application was submitted on-line on 21 March 2013 and the basis of
    such an application was that hard copy documents were  subsequently  to
    be submitted and considered by the Secretary of State before  making  a
    decision.

The hearing

2.   Miss Ahammed, who appeared for the  appellant  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing and appeared at the First-tier  Tribunal,  points  out  that  a
    number of aspects of the application process are  confusing,  difficult
    and even potentially unfair. She does point out the guidance  which  is
    contained within the respondent's bundle on the application form.  This
    includes (at page 2 of the application form)  guidance  to  the  effect
    that documents are to be submitted within fifteen  days  of  submitting
    the application form.

3.   It was also  pointed  out  that  the  application  was  confusing.  The
    appellant said that under paragraph 245AA it was open to the  Secretary
    of State to request documents which had not  been  submitted  in  their
    entirety so as to compete the sequence, e.g.  of  bank  statements,  if
    there were a missing page or pages. It might be appropriate in  certain
    circumstances for the Secretary of State to  take  those  steps  rather
    than simply rejecting the application, as had occurred.

Discussion and conclusions

4.   The grounds of appeal are very succinct.  They  state  simply  that  at
    paragraph 12 of the determination the  Immigration  Judge  applied  the
    posting rule which is contained within 34G (i) of the Immigration Rules
    when he should have applied the  on-line  application  Rule,  which  is
    contained in subparagraph (iv) of the same Rule.

5.   The Secretary of State makes  the  point  that  Immigration  Judge  was
    plainly wrong to apply the posting rule. He should have considered only
    the evidence submitted in support of the application regardless of  the
    fact that he was also required to  provide  hard  copies  of  documents
    supporting his  application.   As  Mr  Whitwell   pointed  out  at  the
    hearing, Section 85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 states that, where the  application  is  under  the   points-based
    system, the Tribunal may only consider evidence if it was sent  at  the
    time of the making of the application.

6.   In this case the appellant was  required  to  produce  bank  statements
    showing that he had the required level of  funds  to  cover  a  28  day
    period from 22 February 2014 to 21 March 2014, not the period specified
    by the Immigration Judge in his determination which covers the period 4
    March 2014 to 4 April 2014.  The  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have
    stated the correct period in paragraph 4 of his determination but  then
    become confused by the "14 days" allowed to submit original documents.

7.   It is  regrettable  that  this  error  crept  into  his  determination,
    particularly since both parties were represented before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and had a duty to  correctly  state  the  law.  It  is  hardly
    surprising  that  the  appellant  was  confused   if   an   experienced
    Immigration Judge was confused and the legal representatives  for  both
    parties were potentially confused by these Rules. However, I  can  find
    nothing in the guidance on the form which could have led him to believe
    that a different period than the 28 day  period  referred  to  was  the
    relevant one and  clearly  a  failure  to  provide  the  required  bank
    statement would not fall within any evidential flexibility policy.

8.   This  appears  to  be  an  error  of  law  which  is  material  to  the
    determination and the fact that the appellant  would  now  satisfy  the
    requirements if he were to make a fresh application  is  not  a  matter
    which I can take into account. It is a matter  for  the  respondent  to
    consider whether to allow the appellant to remain outside the rules  or
    require the appellant to make a fresh application.

9.   Whereas I sympathise with the appellant's predicament, I consider  that
    there is no alternative to finding that a material  error  of  law  has
    been established. In particular, the Immigration Judge failed to  apply
    the correct 28 day period for  consideration  of  the  bank  statements
    supplied and those should have gone from the period of 22 February 2014
    to 21 March 2014, not the dates stated above.

10.  I substitute the decision of this Tribunal, which is  that  the  appeal
    against  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  of  the  application  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed. A material error of law  is
found. The decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  substituted  which  is  to
dismiss the appeal against the  Secretary  of  state's  decision  to  refuse
further leave to remain.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 5 January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the Secretary of State's s appeal and therefore there can  be
no fee award.





Signed                                  Date 5 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
