

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19876/2014
     IA/20145/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th December 2014                          |On 10th December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr francis obeng asamoah
                         mrs georgina asamoah obeng
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison ( Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer)
For the Respondent:  Mr S Singh (Greater Manchester Immigration Aid unit)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State,
         with permission, against a determination of the First-tier Tribunal
         (Judge Crawford) who in a determination promulgated on 13th  August
         2014 allowed the  Appellants'  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision to refuse them leave to remain in the  UK  on  the
         basis of their private and family life.


    2.   For the sake of  continuity  and  clarity  and  I  will,  in  this
         determination, continue to refer to Mr Asamoah and his wife as  the
         Appellants and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


    3.   The grounds upon which permission was granted note that the  Judge
         allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  Article  8  outside   the
         Immigration Rules. The grounds assert that they could  not  satisfy
         the requirements of the applicable Immigration Rules in relation to
         family and private life, namely appendix FM and  paragraph   276ADE
         and that in allowing the appeal the Judge  had not  considered  the
         guidance of Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
         [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC),  namely  that  the  Judge  ought  o  have
         considered whether there were arguably good grounds  to  justify  a
         grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules and  whether
         there were compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under the Rules. The grounds assert that the Judge erred in  making
         no  case  specific  findings  as  to  arguably  good  grounds   and
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules but simply undertook a freestanding Article 8 assessment. The
         grounds submit that without making any case specific findings as to
         be  arguably  good  grounds   or   compelling   circumstances   not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules a Judge cannot undertake an
         Article 8 assessment. That was the basis on  which  permission  was
         granted.


    4.   The Appellants are husband and wife and they have  three  children
         all born in the United Kingdom.


    5.   The Appellants' immigration history is nothing to be proud  of  in
         that both entered the UK in  2001  as  visitors,  clearly  with  no
         intention of returning to Ghana and the first Appellant has  served
         a term of imprisonment for a criminal offence. The first  Appellant
         made an unfounded asylum claim only after he came to the  attention
         of the authorities in 2009. Their three children are a son born  on
         16th June 2005, a daughter born 30th December 2006 and a  son  born
         24th March 2010.


    6.   In his determination the  judge  recites  the  Letter  of  Refusal
         noting that in  that  letter  the  Secretary  of  State  refers  to
         Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and concludes that the  Appellants
         do not meet any of those requirements. So far as the  children  are
         concerned the Secretary of State referred to section  55  but  said
         that the family could return together and it was  not  unreasonable
         to expect them to do so. The secretary state  also  took  the  view
         that none of the children met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE
         because at the  date  of  the  original  application  none  of  the
         children had resided in the UK for 7 years.


    7.   Thereafter the Judge set  out  the  applicable  law  in  terms  of
         Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. He also referred to section  117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (inserted  by
         s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014). He set out the evidence he heard
         from both the Appellants and then his findings and conclusions.


    8.   What is at the heart of  this  case  is  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's finding that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  two
         oldest  children  to  go  to  Ghana.  That  finding  has  not  been
         challenged by the Secretary of State. The question then  is  having
         made that finding, did the Judge err in allowing the appeal.


    9.    While  it  was  the  case  that  at  the  time  of  the  original
         application, long before the eventual appealable decision was made,
         none of the children had been in the UK for  seven  years,  by  the
         time the case came before Judge Crawford the  two  eldest  children
         had both passed that milestone and indeed the eldest had  been  her
         almost 10 years.


    10.  Section 117A obliged the Judge to take into  account  the  matters
         contained in s.117B. S.117B(6) puts into statute that where a child
         has been in the UK for seven years and  it  is  not  reasonable  to
         expect him to  return to his home  country,  the   public  interest
         does not require the removal of  his  parents.  In  conducting  the
         balancing exercise therefore, when the public interest  is  removed
         from the Secretary of State's side of the balance there is  nothing
         left. Accordingly, which ever way the Judge approached this appeal,
         whether he had decided the case purely under  the  Rules  and  then
         gone on to consider ECHR; given his finding that the children could
         not be expected to go to Ghana, statute required him to  allow  the
         appeal.  In  short  his  unchallenged  finding  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect the children to return to  Ghana  inevitably
         led  to  his  allowing  the  appeal.   That  finding  as   to   the
         reasonableness of removing the children may not have been one  that
         all Judges would have reached but he did reach that conclusion  and
         it has not been challenged. Accordingly the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal is not tainted by error of law and the appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





    Signed                 Dated 9th December 2014

          Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
