
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 24 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                          MR STEPHAN LEE PAGE DAIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Ofori-Koree, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the United States.  He came here under  a
    residence card between 2000 and 2009.  During that period the appellant
    was  in  the  UK  under  various  EEA  permits  but  in  2009  began  a
    relationship with Mr Kamil Andrezj, a Polish national.  They  began  to
    cohabit in 2010 and in 2011 the appellant began to divorce his previous
    wife, a Spanish national.   At  some  point,  the  appellant  does  not
    specify when on his chronology, he applied for an  EEA  residence  card
    but this was refused on 25 October 2011.  The appellant applied  for  a
    residence card on the basis of a durable relationship with  Mr  Andrezj
    on 4 May 2012 but the application was refused on  12  June  2012.   The
    relationship subsequently broke down  and  the  appellant  met  William
    Quesnel, a dual American and Italian national.  The appellant submitted
    an EEA residence card application on the basis of his relationship with
    Mr Quesnel on 18 September 2012 but this application was  refused  also
    on 11 April 2013.  He met Mr  Kostrz  on  8  February  2012  and  again
    applied for a residence card on the basis of  that  relationship  on  5
    March 2014.  That application was refused on 14 April 2014,  which  was
    resulted in the appeal before the Immigration Judge.

2.   The appellant appealed the Immigration Judge's decision to dismiss  the
    appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.   On  20  January  2015  he  sought
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal following an initial refusal
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein thought the
    grounds at least arguable given that the Immigration Judge appeared  to
    make contradictory findings: that the appellant and his partner enjoyed
    a genuine and subsisting relationship but that the  appellant  did  not
    satisfy the "durable relationship" test for Regulation 8(5) of the 2006
    EEA Regulations.

3.   Directions were sent out in advance of the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal indicating that no new  evidence  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would be considered unless the requirements of Rule 15(2A)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 were met.   No  such
    application has been made here.

4.   The respondent issued a response under Rule 24 of those  Rules  stating
    that the decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge  was  appropriate.   The
    appellant had made a "string of applications" to different partners and
    on  the  balance  of  probabilities  was  unable  to  show   that   his
    relationship was a durable one so as to be an "extended family  member"
    within the meaning of regulation 8 (5) of the EEA Regulations.

The Hearing

5.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.  Mr  Ofori-
    Koree submitted that the current application was made on 4 October 2013
    but re-submitted on 22 March 2014.  It was refused on  14  April  2014.
    It was on the basis that the appellant had not  provided  documentation
    confirming the durable relationship on the basis  of  his  relationship
    with Maseij  Mateuz  Kostrz.   Mr  Ofori-Koree  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant and his partner gave evidence at the hearing  on  3  December
    2014 and the appellant produced a bundle of  documentation  running  to
    273 pages.  The appellant had said  that  he  had  cohabited  with  his
    partner from March 2013 onwards (see paragraph 18 of the decision).  Mr
    Ofori-Koree pointed out the judge had  found  it  "credible"  that  the
    parties had been living together as a couple until  January  2014  when
    the appellant had fallen ill.  Nevertheless, the Immigration Judge went
    on to conclude that the parties  were  in  a  durable  relationship  at
    paragraph 62 of his decision.  It was submitted that they had been in a
    relationship for 22 months, although it is not clear  how  this  period
    has been calculated given the findings  of  the  Immigration  Judge  at
    paragraph 3.  I was invited  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  is  an
    extended family member of his partner but that  the  Immigration  Judge
    reached contradictory findings.  In particular, my attention was  drawn
    to paragraphs 61 - 63 of  the  decision  where  the  Immigration  Judge
    reached the conclusions that:

    (i)  the appellant and his partner were "broadly"  credible  witnesses;
         but,

    (ii)  it  was  impossible  to  find  that  there  were  in  a  "durable
         relationship" within the meaning of Regulation 8(5); and

    (iii)    the minimum period of cohabitation that  should  be  satisfied
         was "...  three  years  rather  than  two"  given  the  appellant's
         immigration history including "misuse of the five-year  visa"  that
         he had been given.

6.   The reference to a "three-year relationship"  was,  I  was  invited  to
    accept,  a  "frolic  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  own".   Given   the
    acceptance of the relationship and that the parties were still together
    the correct course was to allow the appeal.  I pointed out to Mr Ofori-
    Koree the Secretary of State had a discretion to exercise but Mr Ofori-
    Koree invited me to conclude that she  had  exercised  that  discretion
    already.

7.   In response Mr Tufan submitted that the relationship was less than  two
    years and that this was a "reasonable rule of thumb".  He relied on the
    case of YB (Ivory Coast) [2008]  UKAIT  00062.   It  was  open  to  the
    respondent to refuse the application here.  It was  accepted  that  the
    Immigration Judge had made favourable findings of fact and  that  there
    was no basis for concluding that there was a  "three-year"  requirement
    for cohabitation to exist before an application  could  be  made  under
    Regulation  8(5)  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   However,  overall,   the
    Immigration Judge had been entitled to come to the conclusion  he  came
    to. In any event, even if I was satisfied as to the grounds  of  appeal
    were made out, the Secretary of State had a discretion to exercise  and
    the Upper Tribunal ought to  direct  the  respondent  to  exercise  her
    discretion in the light of the  findings  of  fact  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

8.    Mr  Ofori-Koree  conceded  there  was  no  definition  of  a  "durable
    relationship" and that the case of YB created a "rule  of  thumb"  only
    but this would not supersede any requirement of the Directive that  the
    Regulations were giving effect to  (the  Citizens'  Directive  (2004  -
    38/EC)).

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was any material error of law and, if there was  what  should  be
    done to rectify this.

Discussion

10.  The appellant claims to be in a durable relationship  with  Mr  Kostrz,
    claiming that the relationship began in February 2013.  The parties had
    cohabited from then on until December 2014 when the hearing took place,
    which was a period  of  one  year  ten  months.   It  was  claimed  the
    relationship had become a "durable" one.

11.  The respondent maintained that the appellant was unable to  show  on  a
    balance of probabilities that he was a family member of an EEA national
    within Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations.  The Immigration Judge's
    conclusion that the appellant had "not yet established" such a  durable
    relationship was one that he was entitled to come to,  albeit  that  he
    had been wrong to refer to a "three-year period" of cohabitation.  That
    assertion did not have any foundation.

12.  I find that the law is helpfully summarised in the case  of  YB  (Ivory
    Coast).  The above case states  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  a
    discretion to exclude relationships  with  "other  family  members"  or
    "extended family members" provided she adopts a three-stage approach.

    (i)  First, the Secretary of  State  has  to  ask  whether  the  person
         qualifies  as  an  extended  family  member  within  Regulation   8
         ("durable relationship").

    (ii) Secondly, the Secretary of  State  is  entitled  to  consider  the
         "comparable provisions" in the  Immigration  Rules.   The  rule  in
         question is Rule 295D(vi) which provides for a two-year  period  of
         cohabitation in order to satisfy the criteria set out in that rule.
         They include: that the parties  have  been  living  together  in  a
         relationship "akin to marriage which has lasted for  two  years  or
         more".  The EEA Regulations define those who are family members and
         those who are not but the Immigration Rules did provide  a  helpful
         rule of thumb in the same situation covered by EEA Regulations.

    (iii)     Thirdly,  the  respondent  had  to  look  at   the   personal
         circumstances of the  appellant,  balancing  the  relevant  factors
         counting for and against the grant of a residence card.

13.  Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  was  only
    part of the extensive examination that ought to be carried out in  each
    case.

14.  I have to ask myself whether the Immigration Judge made a  fatal  error
    by referring a "minimum period of cohabitation ... of three  years"  in
    paragraph 63 of his determination and whether this undermines the whole
    decision.

15.  The Immigration  Judge  considered  the  appellant's  long  immigration
    history including his multiple relationships with different partners of
    different sexes.  He also considered the requirements of the Rules  and
    the need to establish a durable relationship with an EEA national.   He
    looked in particular at what the word "durable" really meant, which  is
    that the relationship had to have endured.  The Secretary of State does
    not appear to have referred the Immigration Judge to the case of YB but
    that case does lend force to the rule of thumb that,  in  reaching  her
    decision, the Secretary of State was  entitled  to  take  into  account
    whether the relationship had endured for a sufficiently long time to be
    called "durable".  Those rules of thumb were incorporated into the  EEA
    Regulations.  Although the EEA Regulations could  not  define  "durable
    relationship" because it emanated from European Community law, but  the
    approach adopted by the Secretary of State was endorsed in the case  of
    YB.  An extensive examination of  the  personal  circumstances  of  the
    person applying under the Regulations was required.  In YB  the  period
    of  twelve  months'  cohabitation  was  insufficient  to  satisfy   the
    requirements of the Rules.

16.  I find that the Immigration  Judge  made  clear  findings  on  the  key
    issues:

    (1)  He found that the parties had cohabited and continued  to  cohabit
         at the date of the hearing.

    (2)  He found the appellant had a large number of failed  relationships
         with different sexes.

    (3)  He noted that there were a large number of documents although they
         tended to confirm the residence of the appellant  rather  than  the
         cohabitation of the partner with the appellant.

    (4)  The Immigration Judge noted in paragraph 53 of his  decision  that
         the appellant had largely been in the UK as a result of the derived
         rights  of  residence  from  his  various  relationships   and   in
         particular his marriage to a Spanish lady which had now come to  an
         end.

    (5)  The appellant's EEA application history was  described  as  "truly
         extraordinary" in paragraph 58.  Clearly, the Immigration Judge was
         sceptical that such a  short  period  of  relationship,  given  the
         appellant's past, was on the balance of  probabilities,  likely  to
         endure.  It seems to have impacted on his assessment of the current
         relationship.   It  had  been  suggested  by  Mr  Pandit  that  the
         appellant had been "manipulating" "the  EEA  Regulations"  but  the
         Immigration Judge fell short of accepting that submission.

    (6)  The Immigration Judge found that the  appellant  and  his  partner
         lived together and, indeed, they had begun to cohabit within only a
         few days of knowing one another.  He found their evidence  "broadly
         credible" but found that it was insufficient to support a  "durable
         relationship".

Conclusion

17.  The Immigration Judge was plainly wrong to suggest  that  a  period  of
    cohabitation of three years was required before Regulation 8 (5) of the
    EEA Regulations  could  be  satisfied.  However,  since  the  appellant
    clearly did not satisfy the two-year rule  of  thumb  this  was  not  a
    finding that affected the overall outcome.  I  considered  whether  the
    erroneous suggestion  that  a  three-year  period  of  cohabitation  is
    required undermines the whole decision but concluded that it does  not.
    The Immigration Judge might  have  expressed  himself  better,  but  he
    looked  at  the  length  of  the  relationship,  the  nature  of   that
    relationship and the  appellant's  immigration  history  but  concluded
    overall that he was not in a durable relationship with the partner (see
    paragraph 64 - 65).

18.  Overall, the Immigration Judge was entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion
    that he did. I find that he applied the EEA Regulations to the facts as
    he found them to be.  Therefore the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  a
    residence card was one he was entitled to come to.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
contain a material error of law.  Accordingly, the respondent's decision  to
reject the appellant's application for a residence card stands.

The court below made no anonymity direction and there  is  no  challenge  to
that decision.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

