
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19475/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2014                             |On 17 February 2015           |
|Oral judgment given                           |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                AWAIS KHALIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Heybrook, Counsel, instructed by Eden
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against a  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on 6 October  2014  following  a
    hearing on 29 September 2014  at  Sheldon  Court  in  Birmingham.   The
    Appellant at that hearing  was  represented  by  Mr  C  A  Mahmood  the
    Respondent by Ms Anwar.

2.   The appeal is against a refusal by the Secretary of State,  dated  14th
    April 2014, to issue a Residence Card to Mr Khaliq on the basis he  had
    not established he was entitled to have such a document issued  to  him
    as an extended family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.   The reasons for the refusal  are  set  out  in  the
    comprehensive refusal letter dated 14 April 2014.

3.   The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal raise two issues.  The
    first of which is that the decision was wrong.  In paragraph 5  of  the
    grounds the Appellant asserts he provided  all  relevant  documents  to
    confirm the relationship with sponsor qualifies under Regulation  8  of
    the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  as  a  dependent  of  an  EEA
    national.

4.   The original grounds of appeal do not  raise  Article  8  ECHR  but  it
    appears that when the matter came before the Judge  further  discussion
    occurred and submissions were made regarding the scope of the  hearing.
    Paragraph 1 of the determination is in the following terms:

         "The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 1 May 1991.
         He appeals against the decision of the respondent on 14 April  2014
         to refuse to grant him a residence card as a  confirmation  of  his
         right to reside in the United Kingdom. At the commencement  of  the
         hearing the  appellant's  representative  confirmed  the  appellant
         could not meet the provisions of  the EEA Regulations   as  he  was
         neither accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom nor did
         he wish to  join him here.  The appellant would, however,  rely  on
         Article 8."

5.    The  Judge  sets  out  the  conduct  of  the  proceedings,  her  legal
    direction, and findings from paragraph 5 of the determination.

6.    The  issue  of  the  EEA  Regulations  is  also   mentioned   in   the
    determination where the Judge makes her findings.  At paragraph  6  she
    refers to 14 March when the Appellant applied for a residence card. The
    wording indicates there had been a previous refusal.  In paragraph 7 is
    confirmation of the concession at the hearing that the Appellant cannot
    meet the EEA Regulations and that he thus relies on Article 8.

7.   The Judge proceeded to dismiss the appeal by  reference  to  Article  8
    and made no findings in relation to the EEA Regulation other  than  the
    reference in paragraph 7.  It is clear, however, from the  decision  at
    the end of the determination that Judge Andrew dismissed the appeal.

8.   Permission to appeal was sought on two  grounds,  the  first  of  which
    relates to the EEA Regulations, the 2006 Regulation point.   The  first
    paragraphs of the Grounds set out the wording  of  the  Regulation  and
    maintain there were two issues before the Judge.

9.   Paragraph 13  refers  to  the  quote  from  the  initial  part  of  the
    determination that I have referred too above and in paragraph 14 it  is
    submitted  that  the  First-tier  judge  erred  when  making   such   a
    conclusion.

10.  The grounds state the Appellant's representative confirmed that it  was
    common ground that the Appellant entered the UK as a  student.  However
    he maintained that this is not relevant to the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant is an EEA extended family member  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations.  On the contrary, the  Appellant's  representative  argued
    that the only issue that arises is whether there was  prior  dependency
    before arrival in the UK and dependency in the UK.

11.  In accordance with the guidance recently confirmed by the President  of
    the Upper Tribunal Mr Justice McCloskey,  regarding  the  situation  in
    which an Appellant has a representative  and  where  an  allegation  of
    procedural irregularity against a Judge arises, the  representative  Mr
    Mahmood has provided a statement dated 5  December  2014.  In  this  he
    confirms that the appeal was heard by Judge Andrew and  refers  to  the
    findings at paragraph 7 of the determination that it was common ground,
    as confirmed by the representative, that the Appellant cannot meet  the
    EEA Regulations.

12.  Mr Mahmood states that he confirmed at  the  hearing  that  it  was  an
    indisputable fact that the Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
    student. However the issue before the Judge remained  that  of  whether
    the Appellant is an EEA extended family member for the purposes of  the
    Regulations.  It is stated that the only issue that  arose  is  whether
    there was prior dependency on the sponsor before his arrival in the  UK
    and present dependency in the UK.  The above  is  said  to  be  further
    evident from the skeleton argument submitted on behalf of the Appellant
    which at paragraph 2 states  that  the  Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 October 2010 as a student and that he has been  dependent
    on his brother-in-law, a Spanish national, with whom  he  is  currently
    residing.

13.  Further, paragraph 3 gives details of  the  Appellant's  dependency  on
    his brother-in-law prior to the Appellant's arrival in the  UK,  namely
    the Appellant's brother-in-law sending money to him in  Pakistan  on  a
    regular basis via money transfer services.  Paragraph 4 of the skeleton
    argument submits that the primary issue which stands to  be  determined
    in this appeal is a  dispute  of  fact  whether  the  Appellant  is  an
    extended family member of the EEA national  and  had  been  continually
    dependent upon the EEA national prior to entering the United Kingdom.

14.  At paragraph 5 is a declaration of truth.

15.  It is an interesting statement because Judge Andrew  maintains  that  a
    specific statement was made by the  representative  that  reliance  was
    being placed solely upon Article 8 family and/or private  life  as  the
    only issue she was being asked to determine.  If so, the  statement  in
    the skeleton argument that there may have been pleadings to a different
    effect or in different terms is arguably irrelevant.  Whilst a skeleton
    argument may have been produced  prior  to  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Andrew and may have informed the representative's view of  the  matters
    that were considered relevant at that time, they can be  superseded  by
    events that occurred during the course of the hearing. A statement that
    an issue is not being pursued and in relation to which  no  submissions
    are made entitled the Judge to treat it as abandoned.

16.  The representative's statement does not say "I did not say reliance  is
    solely being placed on Article 8".  It states he confirmed that it  was
    an undisputed fact the  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student. However the issue before the First-tier Judge remained that of
    whether the appellant is an EEA extended family member for the purposes
    of the Regulations.  That statement is factually inaccurate if what the
    Judge recorded is correct, namely that it did not remain a  live  issue
    before the Judge because the Appellant's representative  had  told  the
    Judge he was not seeking to rely upon  it  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing.

17.  In addition to the wording of the  determination  I  have  the  Judge's
    Record of Proceedings which has been shown to both representatives  and
    which is commendably  clear.   The  first  line  of  that  note  reads:
    "reliance is solely on Article 8".  It is clearly a  recording  by  the
    Judge of a statement that was made to her regarding the  scope  of  the
    hearing which is not likely to have been made by the Presenting Officer
    in relation to whom the notes  of  questions  and  submissions  appears
    later on.  It is also interesting to note that  in  the  Judge's  notes
    regarding the Appellant's submissions, the  Appellant's  representative
    refers to "providing documents; that the Appellant has a sister in  the
    UK; he has close ties with the sponsor living with them in the UK;  the
    children are attached; which fulfils all the requirements of Article 8.
     The appeal should be allowed under Article 8".   The  Judge  does  not
    record any submissions having  been  made  by  the  representatives  in
    relation to the EEA point, or a point under the EEA Regulations.

18.  The Judge's record is also supported by  the  note  made  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer  handed  up  by  the  representative  of  the
    Secretary of State this afternoon.  The representative's note under the
    heading  "Preliminary  Issue"  states  "Reps  agree  don't   meet   EEA
    Regulations and only Article 8 to consider".

19.  I therefore have a Judge, an experienced Salaried Judge of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  at  Birmingham,  recording  at  two   places   in   her
    determination where she states in paragraph 1 the point  regarding  the
    preliminary issue reflected in the Presenting  Officer's  note  and  at
    paragraph 7 repeating what she describes as being  common  ground  i.e.
    conceded that the Appellant could not meet the EEA Regulations. This is
    supported by a legible Record of Proceedings where the Judge has  noted
    that she was told reliance is solely on Article 8 and submissions which
    appear to relate solely to the appeal under Article 8.

20.  On the other side of the scales is a statement from Mr Mahmood of  Eden
    Solicitors which I have referred to earlier which is not cast  in  such
    direct terms. The fact  he  may  have  confirmed  at  the  hearing  the
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student is irrelevant to this
    issue. He refers to the  issue  before  the  Judge  remaining  that  of
    whether the Appellant is an EEA family member but it does not appear in
    direct terms.  He denies having made the statement that was recorded by
    the Judge and by the Presenting Officer.  It has been  submitted  today
    that the Appellant's case is no such concession was  made  and  I  have
    considered the matter on the basis that what I am being asked  to  find
    is that Mr Mahmood's evidence should be given  greater  weight  to  the
    effect it should be found that no such concession was made even  though
    such a finding flies in the face of the weight of the evidence recorded
    by the Judge and  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that  in  fact  such  a
    statement was made by Mr Mahmood.

21.  This is my first finding in  relation  to  assessing  whether  a  legal
    error has been made.

22.  I prefer the  version  of  events  recorded  by  Judge  Andrew  in  the
    determination and supported by the Record of  Proceeding  of  both  the
    Judge and the Presenting Officer as being the most reliable  record  of
    events. I find Mr Mahmood's recollect is inaccurate  and  disingenuous.
    Although the grounds of appeal refer to the EEA Regulations, as do  the
    skeleton argument, the question is whether it an error  for  the  Judge
    not to go on and deal with that matter when it was pleaded  before  her
    by way of a concession or statement that it was not being relied  upon.
    The answer is "no" it is not.

23.   Further  submissions  made  before  the  Upper  Tribunal   have   been
    considered.  Counsel did touch on matters which were  not  pleaded  and
    grounds for which permission to appeal had not been given. Even  taking
    all such matters into account I find no basis for  finding  that  Judge
    Andrew made any material legal error in her  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under Article 8. There is a forthcoming decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal which is to consider whether in a refusal of a residence  card
    appeal, which is an appeal  against  a  refusal  to  grant  a  document
    recognising a right that must already exist in EU law, Article  8  ECHR
    even arises, as it is said by some it does not; but  that  is  awaited.
    Judge Andrew set out clear and  legally  sustainable  findings  on  the
    basis this was a live issue before her which has not been shown  to  be
    infected by arguable material legal error.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision. The determination shall stand

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 15th February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

