
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19954/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th March 2015                    |On 25th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr ismail ali muhammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adedayo Aderonnu (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James promulgated on 4th December 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 26th November 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Ismail Ali Muhammed.  The Respondent subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 26th August 1982.
     He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  10th  April
    2014 refusing his application to remain in the UK as the partner  of  a
    British citizen, Miss Monique Malika Murray,  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant is also the father  of  a  newly  born  child,  a
    Master Malik Ayomide Muhammed, who was born on 9th September 2013,  and
    who is also a British citizen.  At the date of  the  decision  on  10th
    April 2014, he was aged 7 months.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The Judge found that the  Appellant  was  a  Nigerian  national,  in  a
    relationship with a British woman "and they have a British  child  born
    on 9th September 2013.  The couple married in the  UK  on  30th  August
    2013" (paragraph 12).  The judge also  held  that  the  Respondent  had
    failed to consider "the impact on the bonding of  the  father  and  the
    baby at this important  developmental  age"  and  that  "there  was  no
    assessment of the child's rights as a British national or those of  the
    partner, Miss Murray, who is also  British"  (paragraph  19).   On  the
    other hand, the judge  also  held  that  "Miss  Murray  has  failed  to
    disclose she is  residing  with  the  Appellant  and  has  fraudulently
    claimed single person discount for her  council  tax"  (paragraph  23).
    Since the Appellant was a "overstayer" (see paragraph  28),  the  judge
    held that she would give "less weight to the  Appellant's  relationship
    with his wife forged  when  his  immigration  status  was  that  of  an
    overstayer" (paragraph 30).   However,  the  public  interest  did  not
    require the Appellant's removal "where he has a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with the qualifying child" (paragraph  30).   The
    judge also went on to say that "it is not possible to weigh matters  in
    the favour of the Respondent when material matters regarding the  child
    have not been considered or analysed by the Respondent" (paragraph 31).

 4. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  decided  of  her
    volition, and without reference to the representatives, that the appeal
    be determined on the basis of submissions  only.   She  refused  cross-
    examination on matters raised in the refusal letter.

 6. On 23rd January 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Melvin,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, stated that  there  were  the  following
    errors in the determination.  First, the  judge  was  wrong  to  having
    opposed a requirement of hearing submissions only without allowing  for
    any cross-examination to take place.

 8. Second, the judge was wrong to conclude that the position of the  child
    had not been considered or analysed by the  Respondent  (see  paragraph
    31), when plainly it had been.

 9. Third, the judge appears to have been proceeding on the basis that  she
    had an incomplete refusal letter because she observes that,

         "it appears that there may be a large  segment  of  the  letter  of
         refusal accidentally  deleted,  as  although  there  is  a  passing
         mention to the British child of  the  Appellant,  the  law  is  not
         applied to the factual circumstances of the Appellant's  case  ..."
         (paragraph 16).

    Mr Melvin submitted that the full refusal letter ran into 46 paragraphs
    and was always available.  If the judge did not have sight of the  full
    refusal letter then her findings, in the absence of the  line  for  any
    cross-examination, could not be sustained.

10. For his part, Mr Adedayo Aderonnu  submitted  that  he  would  have  to
    accept that the judge presented as a fait accompli  the  position  that
    she would not allow for any cross-examination of the evidence, and  nor
    would she hear the evidence, and the representatives had "no choice but
    to accept it".

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that I should  set  aside
    the determination (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are  as
    follows.

12. First, it is clear that the judge did not  have  the  complete  refusal
    letter of 46 pages.  The effect of this was that the judge  erroneously
    held that the position of  the  child  had  not  been  considered  (see
    paragraphs 30 to 31).  The refusal letter shows that the  Secretary  of
    State is fully cognisant of the position of the  child  very  early  on
    (see paragraph 4) and then specifically deals with the child  in  terms
    of the Section 55 BCIA  obligation  subsequently  (see  paragraph  37).
    Such facts as there were, have been properly taken into account in this
    regard.  It was accordingly wrong for the judge to say that "it is  not
    possible to weigh matters in favour of  the  Respondent  when  material
    matters regarding the child have not been considered" (paragraph 31).

13. Second, and more importantly, the judge should  have  allowed  for  the
    evidence to be challenged in  cross-examination,  given  the  range  of
    issues which concerned the Secretary of State, including the fact  that
    the parties were not living together and that the Appellant's  partner,
    Miss Murray, had failed to disclose that  she  was  residing  with  the
    Appellant  and  fraudulently  claimed  single  person   discount   (see
    paragraph 23).  There is a procedural irregularity in the determination
    to this extent and one which can only be rectified  by  remitting  this
    matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement to enable all the matters to be reheard again  on  a
    de novo basis.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by the judge other
    than Judge James on a de novo basis under Practice Statement 7.2.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        23rd March 2015

