
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 23rd February 2015                     |On 9th April 2015                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                        Mr MD Athaur Rahman Chowdhury
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shamsuzzoha, legal representative of SEB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr MD Athaur Rahman Chowdhury  date  of  birth  3  March
    1985, is a citizen of Bangladesh.  I  have  considered  whether  it  is
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction in the present  proceedings.
    Taking all  the  circumstances  into  account  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colvin  promulgated on 25  November  2014,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent dated 10 April 2014. The decision by the respondent  was  to
    refuse the appellant further leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under paragraph 245 ZX  (d)  and  the  Points
    Based System of the Immigration  Rules  and  thereupon  to  remove  the
    appellant from the UK under section 47 of the 2006 Act. .

 3. By decision made on the 15th January 2015 leave to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appeared before me  to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there was a material error of  law
    in the original decision.

 4. In granting leave to appeal it was noted that Judge Colvin  had  failed
    to consider the appellant's Article 8 rights. It was being asserted  on
    behalf of the appellant that the appellant had a legitimate expectation
    that he would be allowed  to  complete  his  degree  in  which  he  had
    invested time, effort, energy and money. It was also asserted that  the
    judge had failed to take into account the common law duty of fairness.

 5. The grounds of appeal do not challenge the findings of fact made  under
    the Immigration Rules. It appears to be accepted that the appellant had
    a means under the immigration rules by which he  could  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom but that he failed to submit the required  documentation
    and did not have the required funds in his  account  for  the  required
    period of time or had not proved that he had the required funds for the
    required time. In essence the appellant wishes to remain in the  United
    Kingdom in order to complete his university degree but cannot meet  the
    requirements of the rules in order to obtain an extension of  stay  and
    therefore seeks to assert that it  would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8
    private life rights or it would be contrary to the, law  principles  of
    fairness not to allow him to complete his degree.

 6. I would draw attention to the cases CDS  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  305.  At
    paragraphs :-

     17. It is apparent from  these  principles  that  Article  8  does  not
         provide  a  general  discretion  in  the  IJ   to   dispense   with
         requirements of the Immigration Rules merely because the  way  that
         they impact in an individual case may appear to  be  unduly  harsh.
         The present context is not respect for  family  life  that  can  in
         certain circumstances require admission to  or  extension  of  stay
         within the United Kingdom of those  who  do  not  comply  with  the
         general Immigration Rules.  It is  difficult  to  imagine  how  the
         private life of someone with no prior nexus to the  United  Kingdom
         would require admission outside the rules for the purpose of study.
         There is no human right to come to the United Kingdom for education
         or other purposes of truly voluntary migration.

     18. However, the appellant has been admitted to the UK for the  purpose
         of higher education and has made  progress  enabling  extension  of
         stay in that capacity since her admission in 2007.  We  acknowledge
         that that gives no  right  or  expectation  of  extension  of  stay
         irrespective of the provisions of the Immigration Rules at the time
         of the relevant decision on extension.

     19. Nevertheless people who have been admitted on a course of study  at
         a recognised UK institution for higher  education,  are  likely  to
         build up a relevant connection with the course, the institution, an
         educational sequence for the  ultimate  professional  qualification
         sought, as  well  as  social  ties  during  the  period  of  study.
         Cumulatively this may amount to private life that deserves  respect
         because the person has been admitted for this purpose, the  purpose
         remains  unfilled,  and  discretionary   factors   such   as   mis-
         representation or criminal conduct have not  provided  grounds  for
         refusal of extension or curtailment of stay.

 7. The case of Patel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 makes the  same  point
    at paragraph 57:-

         57   It is important to remember that Article 8 is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8.

 8. The authorities indicate that,  whilst  an  individual  may  desire  to
    complete a course of study in the United Kingdom once they had  started
    that course, that of itself is not a right protected by Article 8.

 9. On behalf of the appellant reliance is placed upon  the  case  of  UKUS
    (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).  The  case  with
    respect of appears to relate to the exercise of a  discretion.  In  the
    present circumstances no  such  discretion  arose.  The  appellant  had
    submitted all the documents upon which he  relied  that  the  documents
    submitted disclosed that they did not provide the  required  detail  or
    show that he have the required funds for the period of time  necessary.
    This was not where a document in number of  documents  was  missing  or
    that a document was in the wrong format or  did  not  contain  all  the
    specified information. All the information on the documents showed that
    the appellant did not have the funds for the required period  of  time.
    In the light of that there was no discretion to be exercised.

10. The appellant's representative otherwise sought to rely upon  the  case
    of Thakur (PBS decision -- common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011]  UKUT
    00151.  The problem with regard to  that  position  is  that  there  is
    nothing unfair in the Secretary of State requiring  an  appellant  have
    sufficient funds to support himself whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    order to be able to study and  therefore  requiring  an  individual  to
    comply with the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

11. Whilst it is correct to say that the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-
    tier tribunal to raise the issue of Article 8  that  the  only  factors
    raised by the appellant relate to his  desire  and  his  commitment  to
    complete his degree course. However there is an available means to  him
    under the Immigration Rules by which he could complete that course.  He
    did not meet the requirements of the rules. Whilst it is correct to say
    that an individual may develop a private life  there  is  no  right  to
    education in the United Kingdom of itself that is protected by  Article
    8. The appellant has only advanced factors relating to  his  desire  to
    continue and complete his education. That of  itself  would  not  be  a
    right protected by Article 8. The appellant has not advanced any  other
    factors giving substance to claim under Article 8. There is  no  family
    life to be considered and it is only aspects of private  life  relating
    to education the appellant has put forward in support of his claim.

12. In the light of that and in the light of the case law there is  nothing
    unfair in the respondent requiring the appellant  to  comply  with  the
    requirements of the rules. There is no Article 8 right to education  in
    the United Kingdom. The factors advanced by the appellant relate to his
    education. In those circumstances even if the judge  were  required  to
    consider Article 8 there is nothing advanced by  the  appellant,  which
    constitutes a private life right engaging Article 8.

13. I did ask the parties if there was an error of law  whether  there  was
    any reason why I could not deal with the appeal on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence thus far lodged. It was indicated that  there  were  no  other
    factors that the appellant wished to advance in support of his claim in
    respect of Article 8.

14. Even if I am wrong with regard to the issue in respect of the existence
    of Article 8 private life rights and the decision materially interferes
    with such, the decision would be in accordance with the law and for the
    purposes of maintaining immigration control.

15. The final issue to be determined is whether  or  not  the  decision  is
    proportionately justified. The Immigration Rules are intended to ensure
    that individuals coming to study in the  United  Kingdom  can  come  to
    study provided they have the means  to  support  themselves.  It  is  a
    highly material factor that the  appellant  cannot  show  that  he  can
    support himself in accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  rules.
    Having regard to that even if the  judge  had  made  an  error  by  not
    considering the Article 8 rights of the appellant, if I were  to  carry
    out the Article 8 exercise on the basis of the evidence, I  would  have
    found that the decision was in any event proportionately justified.

16. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.



Signed        Date 26th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

