
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19423/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19th January 2017                       |On 20th January 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                GURJIT SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. C Charlton, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Baldwin promulgated on 12 August 2016, in which his appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds dated 29 April 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of India born  on  20  December  1967,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom illegally on 8 February 2000.   The
    Applicant claimed  asylum  after  arrival  which  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent and his appeal against  that  refusal  was  dismissed  on  1
    November 2001.  Further submissions were made by  the  Appellant  which
    were refused by the Respondent on 3 December 2013.  The application for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds which is the  subject  of  this
    appeal was made by the Appellant on 10 February 2015.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  on  the  following
    three grounds.  First, under paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Respondent found that although the Appellant had
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with a British  Citizen  partner,
    there are no insurmountable obstacles to that  relationship  continuing
    in India.  The Appellant's partner  had  visited  India  and  would  be
    relocating with the Appellant who would be able to help her to adapt to
    life there.  The Appellant's partner's children were  adults  who  were
    working and able to  lead  independent  lives  in  the  United  Kingdom
    maintaining a relationship with their mother in India.

 4. Secondly,  the  Respondent  refused  the  application  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules as the Appellant had spent 33 years
    of his life living in India and there  was  nothing  to  suggest  there
    would be any significant obstacles to his reintegration there.

 5. Finally, the Respondent considered whether there were  any  exceptional
    circumstances outside of the Immigration Rules but found none.

 6. Judge Baldwin dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all  grounds  on  the
    basis that there were no very significant or  insurmountable  obstacles
    to life continuing in India and reference was made to  the  Appellant's
    flagrant disregard for immigration law by overstaying since 2001.   The
    Appellant's removal was not found to be a disproportionate interference
    with his right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Grounds of Appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals the decision of Judge Baldwin on  three  grounds.
    First, that he failed to make findings in relation to paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules; secondly, that  he  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's partner and her children and thirdly, that he  came  to  an
    erroneous decision when conducting the proportionality  exercise  under
    Article 8 of the European Court of Human Rights.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Garratt
    on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  give
    consideration to the application of human rights under the  Immigration
    Rules   before   identifying    compelling    circumstances    enabling
    consideration of Article 8 issues outside of them on the basis set  out
    in the Court of Appeal decision in SS (Congo) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

 9. At the oral hearing, it was submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  that
    there was no proper assessment of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules and in particular there had been no consideration of the evidence
    that:

     - the Appellant's partner would not be able to pursue  her  career  in
       India (given the objective evidence of  the  difficulties  faced  by
       women in India and that although she spoke Punjabi,  she  could  not
       read or write it);

     - the Appellant left India in poor circumstances just before the birth
       of  his  second  child  which  his  ex-wife  and  her  family   were
       understandably upset by, such that he could not return to  his  home
       area but also could not relocate as he did not know any other area;

     - the Appellant and his partner would be destitute on return to India;

     - the outcome of any application for entry clearance is uncertain  and
       the application from abroad would itself be disproportionate;

     - the Applicant's partner's children would culturally continue to live
       in the family home until marriage;

     - the Respondent had  not  at  any  time  pursued  enforcement  action
       against the Appellant such that EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 applied.

10. It was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the oral  submissions
    amounted to no more than disagreement on the facts and a reiteration of
    the Appellant's claim rather than identification of any error  of  law.
    In any  event,  it  was  submitted  that  although  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules could have been set out more  specifically  by  Judge
    Baldwin, that all of the relevant findings of fact and conclusions were
    in fact made.  Judge Baldwin had properly directed himself  as  to  the
    relevant law and had clearly considered both paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules (shown by his reference to the Appellant  not  having
    been residence for 20 years and no very significant obstacles  to  life
    in India) and Appendix FM  (by  the  references  to  no  insurmountable
    obstacles in family life continuing in India).

11. Further, it was submitted that no Tribunal properly directing itself to
    the Immigration Rules, section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 or relevant case law, including Agyarko  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  440  could
    have reached the conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference with his  right
    to private and family life under Article 8.

Findings and Reasons

12. In  very  broad  terms,  Judge  Baldwin  sets  out  the  main  relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules, section 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and questions  for  the  assessment  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  (although  these
    are not the five questions  set  out  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27)  in
    paragraphs 16 to 22 of the decision.  To that extent, it is clear  that
    Judge Baldwin is aware that there are separate provisions  relevant  to
    this appeal to be considered.  However, when it comes to  the  findings
    in the decision, there  is  no  clear  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances  under  each  of  the  distinct  provisions   under   the
    Immigration Rules or any identification of compelling circumstances  to
    consider the claim outside of the Immigration Rules in accordance  with
    SS (Congo).  There is instead a global conclusion in paragraph 27  that
    there are no very significant obstacles or insurmountable obstacles  to
    life continuing in India and that it would not be  disproportionate  or
    unreasonable for the Appellant to be removed to India.


13. The decision of Judge Baldwin contains errors of law in that  it  fails
    to  make  distinct  findings  with  reference  the  separate   relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules or outside of them, on each of  the
    following three issues in this appeal.  First,  whether  the  Appellant
    meets the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM,  specifically
    whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
    outside of the United Kingdom.  Secondly, whether the  Appellant  meets
    the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    specifically whether  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration  in  India.   Thirdly,  whether  there   are   compelling
    circumstances to consider the claim outside of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and if so, following the five stage approach  set  out  in  Razgar  and
    taking into account the factors in section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  when  conducting  the  proportionality
    assessment, to assess whether  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  in
    breach of Article 8.


14. For the following reasons, the errors of law identified are not however
    material in this case.  Within paragraphs 24 to 27 of the decision  are
    sufficient findings of fact on the evidence before him to show that the
    conclusions reached overall in dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  were
    correct.  Taking the Appellant's claim at its highest, on no legitimate
    view could his appeal succeed under the Immigration Rules or outside of
    them.  Judge Baldwin found in paragraph 26 that the Appellant's partner
    would be able to join him in India and that  she  has  travelled  there
    twice without the Appellant and has a year-long multi-visa  for  India.
    The Appellant's partner speaks Punjabi and would  be  assisted  by  the
    Appellant in India.  The Appellant's partner's children are adults  and
    are able to live independently,  together  if  needed,  in  the  United
    Kingdom without their mother.  On these findings and in accordance with
    Agyarko, the Appellant can not meet the requirements of paragraph  EX.1
    of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules as there are no  insurmountable
    obstacles to continuation of family life in India.


15. Judge Baldwin found in paragraph 26 that  even  if  the  Appellant  was
    anxious about returning to his home area given the  circumstances  with
    his ex-wife's family, there is no reason  why  he  could  not  relocate
    elsewhere.  The Appellant lived in India for the first 34 years of  his
    life.  On these findings and in the absence  of  any  evidence  of  the
    claim that he would be destitute on return, the Appellant can not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


16.  In  paragraph  27,  Judge  Baldwin  does  not  find  any  exceptional,
    compelling or compassionate circumstances.  However,  findings  are  in
    any event made as to the factors in section 117B,  that  the  Appellant
    has never been granted  leave  to  remain  and  has  shown  a  flagrant
    disregard for immigration law by remaining here unlawfully  since  2000
    (paragraphs 24 and 27).  The public interest in immigration control  is
    set out, as is the knowledge of the Appellant and his partner about his
    precarious  immigration  status  (and  in  fact  deliberate  choice  to
    continue that way rather than  taking  the  legal  advice  obtained  to
    return to India to make an  entry  clearance  application).   In  these
    circumstances, the Appellant could not on any legitimate  view  succeed
    in his appeal on human rights grounds outside of the Immigration Rules.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  8  August
2016 did not involve the making of a material error  of  law  in  dismissing
the appeal that requires the decision to  be  set  aside  and  remade.   The
decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                Date     20th January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson



