
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19912/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                   |On 12th December 2016                |
|and 1st December 2016                  |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                    MISS RASHEEDAT ADEJUMOKE ABDULRASHEED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Adewisi (4th November) & Mr Bayo (1st December)
                  (Crown and Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    appellant.

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 28 April 1988. She entered
    the United Kingdom on 12 October 2013 as a student. On 17 February 2015
    she made an application for leave to remain on the basis  that  she  is
    the parent of a British citizen child in the UK.

 3. The child, her  son,  was  born  on  3  October  2014.  His  birth  was
    registered on 7 November 2014 with his father  named  as  Akeem  Abiola
    Ayodele Ojo-Oniyun. The father is  a  British  citizen.  The  appellant
    procured for her son a British passport on the basis that he is the son
    of a British citizen.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application for leave to  remain  by
    the mother stating that she had  failed  to  provide  DNA  evidence  to
    confirm the child's paternity and she had failed  to  provide  evidence
    that she held sole parental responsibility.

 5. The appellant appealed and in the first-tier Tribunal her  appeal  came
    before Judge Ransley. Following a hearing  on  14  January  2016  Judge
    Ransley dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 20 January.

 6. Judge Ransley considered the appellant's immigration history which  she
    found to be poor and found that the appellant's motive in coming to the
    UK was to undertake paid  employment  and  not  to  study,  noting  the
    complete lack  of  documentary  evidence  to  show  the  appellant  had
    undertaken any studies since arriving.

 7. The Judge then noted that the central issue to the  appeal  related  to
    the paternity of the appellant's child and she  noted  the  appellant's
    failure to  provide  any  evidence  as  to  that.  She  considered  the
    appellant's evidence as to her relationship with the child's father and
    found that lacking credibility. She found  there  was  no  evidence  to
    indicate what had been produced to the UK passport authorities in order
    to obtain the child's passport and dismissed  the  appeal  finding  the
    appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof.

 8. When the matter first came before me on 4 November  I  set  aside  that
    decision in its entirety. I did so because the simple fact in this case
    is that the child is a British citizen. What checks the UK  authorities
    undertake when a birth is registered  or  when  a  child  is  issued  a
    British citizen passport is a matter for the UK  authorities.  However,
    holding a passport is evidence of British citizenship and  indeed  Home
    Office guidance  indicates  that  a  child  will  not  be  subsequently
    deprived of a British passport, howsoever it was obtained.

 9. The fact that the child  is  a  British  citizen  renders  any  further
    evidence as to his paternity irrelevant. This appeal should  have  been
    approached solely on the basis that given the appellant's child  is  in
    fact a British citizen then in order to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules the appellant simply need to show that she  has  sole
    responsibility for the child or that the child lives with her  and  not
    with its father. (Appendix FM E-LTRPT.2.3. (a).

10. Mr Harrison agreed with my analysis.

11. I indicated my decision to the representatives on 4 November and I also
    indicated that there was no appellant's bundle contained in the file

12. Mr Adewusi thus agreed that the appropriate course was  me  for  me  to
    adjourn for a resumed hearing which  would  give  him  time  to  adduce
    additional evidence. I gave permission for additional  evidence  to  be
    adduced.

13. When the matter came before me on 1 December I had been provided with a
    short bundle. The only document in that bundle relevant to the issue of
    sole responsibility was a council tax letter dated May 2015 including a
    25% discount because the appellant was said to be a single occupier.  I
    indicated that I found I could not place a great deal of reliance  upon
    that letter because on innumerable occasions I have been provided  with
    such letters when appellants are in actual  fact  living  with  someone
    else. I was then handed a letter from an Islamic Association  in  which
    the author says he knows the appellant and has done for three years and
    to the best of his knowledge she lives alone with her son.

14. There was no other evidence whatsoever, despite the time I had given to
    adduce it.  Indeed, despite attending the hearing centre I was told the
    appellant did not intend to come into the court.  I thus heard no  oral
    evidence. Accordingly given the dearth of evidence the Appellant failed
    to discharge the burden of proof, which rested with her, to satisfy  me
    on a balance of probabilities that she has sole responsibility for  her
    British national child.

15. I would also add my concerns  that  it  does  seem  probable  that  the
    passport was fraudulently obtained.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal containing material  errors  of
    law, I set it aside in its entirety.  In redeciding the  appeal  it  is
    dismissed.

    No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.


Signed                              Date 9th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
