
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/19286/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 7 April 2016                          |On 14 April 2016          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                          Mr MUHAMMAD LUTFUR RAHMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel
      (instructed by Hunter Stone Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
           granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  on  18  January  2016
           against the decision and reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Ian Howard who had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
           refusal on 13 May 2013 of his application for settlement in  the
           United Kingdom under the now  repealed  14  year  provisions  of
           paragraph 276D of the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
           (Article  8  ECHR)  grounds.   The  decision  and  reasons   was
           promulgated on 25 August 2015.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh,  born  on  5  January
           1975.  The Appellant claimed that  he  had  entered  the  United
           Kingdom and had since been continuously resident since 15 August
           1997.  The Appellant had  given  evidence  and  had  called  two
           witnesses.   The  Appellant  had  produced  various   items   of
           documentary evidence, which had included a pay slip for a United
           Kingdom employer purporting  to  show  that  the  Appellant  was
           employed in May 1997, i.e., before his claimed date of  arrival.
           The judge not surprisingly dismissed the appeal and  found  that
           the Appellant's documents were unreliable.   In  reaching  those
           findings the judge had accepted that  the  Appellant's  date  of
           entry to the United Kingdom was 15 August 1997, not in  2004  as
           the Home Office had contended.


      3.    Permission to appeal in the First-tier Tribunal was refused  but
           was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman   because   he
           considered that it was arguable that there might be  an  obvious
           explanation of the discrepant payslip.  The Appellant needed  to
           explain how he had worked out the date of his arrival.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal.




      Submissions


      5.    Mr Sowerby for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  The Appellant had
           provided a further witness statement dated 8 March 2016 in which
           he reiterated that he had arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  15
           August 1997.  He had been unable to establish contact  with  his
           former employer and so could not add to his  previous  evidence.
           His payslips had been provided to him at  his  specific  request
           (see [14] of his witness statement) and he  had  not  looked  at
           them.  The Home Office had not raised any issue about them.  The
           judge had found the error.


      6.    Mr Sowerby reminded the tribunal that the Home Office  had  gone
           as far as requesting an adjournment to  verify  the  Appellant's
           documents.  In the event it appeared that the  Home  Office  had
           not done so.  There had not even been a Home  Office  Presenting
           Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.


      7.    There was a fundamental issue of procedural fairness.  The judge
           had asked no questions of the Appellant.  He  could  and  should
           have done so, either at the  hearing  or  by  reconvening.   The
           decision was further inadequate because of the  failure  of  the
           judge to engage properly with the  evidence  of  the  witnesses.
           Hence the decision was unsafe and  should  be  set  aside.   The
           appeal should be reheard by another judge.


      8.    Mr Sowerby raised  a  subsidiary  question  as  to  whether  the
           original Home Office decision had been in  accordance  with  the
           law, with reference to Singh v the  Secretary  of  State  [2015]
           EWCA Civ 74.  Had the  application  been  considered  under  the
           correct Immigration Rules?  The tribunal took the view that  the
           correct, pre 9 July 2012  Immigration  Rules  had  been  applied
           because  the  Home  Office  had  acknowledged   that   a   valid
           application had been submitted by the Appellant on 2 June  2012.
           As the Article 8 ECHR element of the Home  Office  decision  had
           been made after what might be  termed  "the  Singh  window"  had
           closed on 6 September 2012 (see  Singh  [56(2)],  there  was  no
           error of law.


      9.    Mr Tufan for the Respondent relied on the rule  24  notice.   He
           submitted that there was no error of law and  the  determination
           should stand.  The Appellant had put the documents  forward  and
           the judge was entitled to draw conclusions from those documents.
            In the event it had  been  shown  that  no  further  supporting
           evidence existed, even if the judge had requested it.  There was
           no possibility  of  procedural  unfairness  even  when  examined
           retrospectively.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.


      10.   There was no reply. The  tribunal  reserved  its  determination,
           which now follows.


      No error of law finding


      11.   The grant of permission to appeal  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
           based on a subtle point, which in effect tested  the  procedural
           fairness allegation against any further relevant evidence  which
           the Appellant was given the opportunity of providing.  It  might
           well be thought a generous approach.


      12.    Nevertheless,  despite  this  unusual  further  opportunity  of
           putting his case, the Appellant was not only unable to show that
           further questions from the First-tier Tribunal Judge (at  either
           the hearing or by reconvening) could have changed anything,  but
           he further damaged his own case.  The Appellant stated that  the
           payslips were not handed to him during his employment  and  that
           he had never checked them.  That in itself might well be thought
           strange, as most people would be interested to know whether they
           had in fact received the wages  they  had  earned  and  also  to
           confirm  that  no  improper  deductions  had  been  made.   That
           checking would be all the more important to a person who acutely
           aware that he had to  provide  proof  of  14  years'  continuous
           residence and that the Immigration Rules were about to change to
           his potential disadvantage.


      13.   In the tribunal's view, Mr Tufan's submission as  to  procedural
           fairness was correct.  The judge was not obliged to question the
           Appellant about his payslips and their discrepancies.   In  fact
           the discrepancy needed no judicial detective work: it could  not
           have been flagged up more plainly, as the payslip in question is
           identified on the first page of the  index  to  the  Appellant's
           bundle of documents.  The judge must thus have inferred that  it
           had properly been brought to his attention and that  no  further
           enquiry  on  his  part  was  necessary.    The   Appellant   was
           represented by  solicitors  and  counsel  by  the  time  of  the
           hearing, although the Appellant had submitted his  documents  to
           the  Home  Office  himself  and   so   his   advisors   had   no
           responsibility for their production.   The Appellant stated that
           he relied on the documents and so  the  judge  was  entitled  to
           consider them against the evidence as a whole which  is  exactly
           what the judge did.  It is well established that the Home Office
           have no  responsibility  to  verify  documents  produced  by  an
           appellant, although the Home Office may elect  to  do  so  where
           resources permit.  That election was not, of course, made in the
           present appeal.


      14.   As Mr Tufan accepted at the Upper Tribunal hearing, probably the
           Home Office ought to have challenged Judge Howard's  finding  in
           the Appellant's favour over the  2004  visit  visa  application,
           which positive  finding  sat  somewhat  uncomfortably  with  his
           finding  about  the  reliability  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
           generally.  It also seems to the tribunal that the  Home  Office
           ought to have examined the "15 August 1997" entry stamp  in  the
           Appellant's passport, which appears from the photocopy  to  have
           been applied with unusual care, but neither of those matters can
           be considered by the tribunal now.


      15.   It is thus clear that  Judge  Howard  assessed  the  Appellant's
           evidence in as favourable a light as possible.  He did  not  ask
           how the Appellant had managed to produce so many documents  such
           as old payslips from 1997 which  are  ephemeral  in  nature  and
           which the Appellant was under no obligation to retain  for  more
           than three years as a taxpayer.  Yet perhaps there was  no  need
           to ask that question, since the judge  found  that  all  of  the
           Appellant's generic documents  were  untrustworthy.   The  judge
           gave   secure   reasons   for   that   conclusion.    In   those
           circumstances, there was little point in discussing the evidence
           of the witnesses, whose witness statements on the tribunal  file
           were notably brief and which had also  been  adjusted  downwards
           for the claimed length of acquaintance.  Any failure to  discuss
           such evidence could not amount to a material error of law.


      16.   There was no challenge to Judge Howard's decision to dismiss the
           Article 8 ECHR appeal.   The  tribunal  accordingly  holds  that
           there was no procedural unfairness, no material error of law  in
           the decision  and  reasons  and  that  there  is  no  basis  for
           interfering with the judge's decision.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
