
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19938/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th September 2016               |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                Valentine [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Cantor (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a judgment of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Holt)
    promulgated on 8th January 2016 in which she dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to
    remain on the basis of his family life with his daughter.

 2. As pointed out by the Upper Tribunal Judge who  granted  permission  to
    appeal, the First-tier Tribunal based its findings solely on the  basis
    of documents, including Cafcass documents in  family  proceedings  then
    ongoing.  The Appellant had no  authority  from  the  Family  Court  to
    disclose those documents and to do so is a contempt of court.   He  was
    of course unrepresented and may not have appreciated that.  However the
    Judge was not entitled to take them into  account  without  the  Family
    Court's consent and  in  placing  reliance  on  them  she  committed  a
    procedural error.  As those documents were the  basis  upon  which  she
    reached her decision it follows that the decision must be set aside  in
    its entirety.

 3. It is right in these circumstances that the Appellant should  have  his
    case reheard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I note that he has made efforts, as yet  unsuccessful,  to  obtain  the
    consent of the Family Court.  It  would  probably  be  quicker  if  the
    Resident Judge at the appropriate First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  centre
    were to make a request under the Family Court Protocol Procedure. As  I
    am in fact the relevant Resident Judge I indicated that I  would  apply
    under the Protocol



Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted for hearing  de
    novo in the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester.

    No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.


Signed                              Date 22nd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
