
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19380/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  13th June 2014                            |On 17th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                             MR MD NAZRUL ISLAM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: None
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 18th October  1976.
       He arrived in the UK on 11th March 2004 as a student, and his  leave
       was extended in this capacity and  then  as  a  Tier  1  post  study
       migrant until 12th January 2013. On 5th December 2012 he applied  to
       extend  his  leave  as  a  Tier  1  (entrepreneur)   migrant.   This
       application was refused on 13th May 2013. His  appeal  against  this
       decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  RJNB  Morris
       after a hearing on 18th February 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Nicholson in a decision dated 23rd April 2014 on the basis  that  it
       was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  hearing
       the appeal in the appellant's absence. Whilst there was no fault  on
       Judge Morris's part in proceeding there  was  now  medical  evidence
       from the appellant's GP that he was unfit to attend the hearing.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    4.  Mr  Wilding  did  not  have  the   medical   evidence   and   other
       communications which had been sent to the Tribunal. I showed him the
       relevant correspondent on the Tribunal file which consisted  of  the
       following. An urgent fax sent by the appellant's  friend,  Mr  Iqbal
       Hossain, sent on the day of the hearing  which  said  the  appellant
       could not attend because he was seeking emergency medical  treatment
       and which requested an adjournment  of  the  hearing.  A  GP  letter
       stating  that  the  appellant  had  attended  the  GP  surgery  with
       gastroenteritis on the day of the hearing and been  given  hydration
       salts, and that  he  was  not  fit  to  attend,  together  with  his
       prescription  for  anti-depressant  medication.  An  email  to   the
       customer service for the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  the  appellant
       following up his friend's request for an adjournment and asking what
       the outcome of his friend's request had  been.  On  sight  of  these
       documents Mr Wilding agreed that there was  a  procedural  error  of
       law; and it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing of the appeal.

    5. I explained to the appellant that it would be  appropriate  for  his
       case to be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  reasons
       set out below, and a date of 27th  November  2014  at  Hatton  Cross
       Hearing Centre was arranged in conjunction with  the  appellant.  He
       confirmed that he was happy with these arrangements.

Conclusions

    6. The appellant was too unwell to attend the Tribunal on 18th February
       2014 as he was suffering from gastro-enteritis. He did his  best  to
       alert the Tribunal to this fact by asking a friend to send a fax  to
       the Tribunal requesting an adjournment of his case. He attended  his
       GP and was given medication, and has  since  provided  the  Tribunal
       with evidence of  his  ill-health  which  also  gives  the  doctor's
       opinion that he was not fit to attend the Tribunal on the day of his
       hearing. In the light of this evidence it was clearly  a  procedural
       error of law for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  proceeded  to
       determine the appeal. The  right  to  be  heard  is  of  fundamental
       importance, and as such it is appropriate that the determination  of
       Judge Morris be set aside and the case is remitted to the First-tier
       Tribunal for hearing de novo in accordance with  FP  (Iran)  v  SSHD
       2007 EWCA Civ 13.

Decision

    7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

    9. It is appropriate to remit this matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       for hearing de  novo  in  accordance  with  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement on Remittals at paragraph 7.2 as  the  effect  of
       the error has been to deprive the appellant of  the  opportunity  to
       put his case to the First-tier Tribunal.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
16th June 2014

