
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19636/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 September 2016               |On 22 September 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YASIN SALEEM
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M O'Brien, senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Devlin (counsel) instructed by Maguire
solicitors


                            DECISION and REASONS

1.   I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox,  promulgated  on  7  March  2016,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.   The Appellant was born on 22 June 1988 and is a national of Pakistan.

4.   On 17 April  2015  the  Appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
confirmation of a right to reside in  the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  [FM],  a
Portuguese national.

5.   On  19  May  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application.

The Judge's Decision

6.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cox ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

7.   Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 2 August 2016  Judge  Saffer  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

         "I am satisfied that it is arguable that the judge materially erred
         in law regarding the evidential burden of establishing  whether  it
         was a marriage of convenience. Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  14  and
         Papajorgii (EEA spouse -marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT
         00038(IAC) state that if the Respondent produced  evidence  capable
         of suggesting that the marriage was  not  genuine,  the  evidential
         burden shifted  to  the  applicant,  not  the  burden  was  on  the
         respondent."

The Hearing

8.(a)    For the respondent, Ms O'Brien move  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
told me that throughout the determination the Judge had  failed  to  resolve
conflicts of evidence. She took me to [25], [36]  &  [39]  of  the  decision
where, she told me, the  Judge  made  inadequate  findings  in  relation  to
cohabitation and failed to resolve conflicts which  were  evident  when  the
chronology of claimed events was considered

(b)  Ms O'Brien told me that the  Judge  placed  undue  weight  on  guidance
issued by the EU commission for the conduct  of  interviews,  and  does  not
adequately considered the clear discrepancies between what was said  by  the
appellant at interview and what is contained in the appellant's  application
form. She told me  that  a  comparison  of  the  information  given  in  the
application form and the answers given in  an  interview  is  sufficient  to
establish a suspicion that the appellant had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
convenience; that is enough to establish a prima facie  case  and  to  shift
the burden of proof.

(c)  Ms O'Brien told me that because the Judge had not  properly  considered
the content of the interview, the decision is tainted by material errors  of
law. Those errors affect the primary findings of fact. She urged me  to  set
the decision  aside  and  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier  to  be
determined de novo.

9.(a)    Mr  Devlin,  counsel  for  the  appellant,  reminded  me  that  the
definitions provided in the case of Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038(IAC),  before  telling  me  that  the
decision does not contain any errors material or otherwise. He  reminded  me
that the burden of establishing reasonable  suspicion  that  a  marriage  of
convenience has been entered into rests with the respondent and took  me  to
[27] of the decision  where,  he  told  me,  the  Judge  correctly  directed
himself in law before making his findings of fact.

(b)  Mr Devlin took me through the  Judge's  findings  of  fact,  explaining
that between [28] and [35] the Judge clearly considers factors  which  weigh
against the appellant before considering the  factors  which  weigh  in  his
favour. He told me that the Judge attached little weight  to  the  interview
for reasons which are sustainable in both fact and law, and referred  me  to
both Oghonoghor v SSHD 1995 SLT 733 & Ki v SSHD  2000  SLT  249.  He  argued
that the starting point is the weakness of the  evidence  produced  to  give
rise to a suspicion that the appellant's marriage to an EEA national is  not
genuine.

(c)  Mr Devlin told me that the decision is a  carefully  reasoned  decision
which contains no errors of law. He urged me to dismiss the appeal  and  let
the decision stand.

Analysis

10.  In Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]
UKUT 00038(IAC) the Tribunal held that

         "Although neither the Directive nor the Regulations define it, as a
         matter of ordinary parlance and the past  experience  of  the  UK's
         Immigration Rules and case law, a marriage of convenience  in  this
         context is a marriage contracted for the sole or  decisive  purpose
         of gaining admission to the host state.  A  durable  marriage  with
         children and  co-habitation  is  quite  inconsistent  with  such  a
         definition."

11.  In Rosa v SSHD [2016] 1  WLR  1206  it  was  held  that  the  focus  in
relation to a marriage of convenience ought to be on the  intention  of  the
parties at the time the marriage was entered into, whereas the  question  of
whether  a  marriage  was  subsisting  looked   to   whether   the   marital
relationship was a continuing one. Nonetheless, the First-Tier Tribunal  was
correct to look at the evidence  concerning  the  relationship  between  the
Claimant and the Sponsor after the marriage itself, since that  was  capable
of casting light on their intention at the time of marriage.

12.  The European  Commission  has  produced  a  Handbook  which  defines  a
marriage of  convenience  as  a  marriage  contracted  for  the  predominant
purpose of conferring a right of free movement and residence  under  EU  law
to a person who would otherwise not have such a right and explains  that  as
'sole purpose' is an autonomous EU law concept it is not to  be  interpreted
literally as being the unique or exclusive purpose. There is  no  definition
of' predominant' but the handbook indicates that the phrase is used  because
someone may have more than one abusive purpose (such as  a  tax  advantage).
The key is whether there is abuse.

13.  Although not specific to EU law, section  55  of  the  Immigration  Act
2014 states that there is a  sham  marriage  if  either,  or  both,  of  the
parties is not a British citizen, a Swiss national or a national  of  an  EU
state;  there  is  no  genuine  relationship  between  the  parties  to  the
marriage; and either or both of them enter in to the  marriage  for  one  or
more of the following purposes (a)  avoiding  the  effect  of  one  or  more
provisions of the UK immigration law or rules (b) enabling a  party  to  the
marriage to obtain a right conferred by that law or rules to reside  in  the
UK .

14.  The grounds of appeal are set out in 13 numbered paragraphs.  Paragraph
1 is a statement of the background to this appeal. Paragraphs  2  to  8  and
really little more than an attempt to re-litigate what was before the First-
tier. Rather than raising a point of law,  those  paragraphs  are  really  a
strident objection to the findings of facts of the Judge, and a  declaration
of an inability to accept that the Judge made those findings  on  the  basis
of the evidence placed before him.

15.  Between [17]  and  [26]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  sets  out  the
background to the case and the appellant's immigration history. At  [26]  he
records that the appellant and the EEA  national  have  separated,  but  the
appellant still hopes for reconciliation. The Judge's findings of  fact  are
between [28], & [49] of the decision

16.  The  Judge  does  not  unquestioningly  accept  what  is  said  by  the
appellant. Instead, between [28] and [35] of the decision he  discusses  the
aspects of the evidence which weigh against the appellant, before  declaring
at [35]

         "I have treated the appellant's account of  the  relationship  with
         caution."

17.  It is then (with caution) that the  Judge  continues  to  consider  the
evidence placed before him, and for carefully  considered  reasons,  decides
that the interview record is  not  reliable  evidence.  Without  a  reliable
record of interview, the Judge finds that the appellant cannot  establish  a
reasonable  suspicion  that  the  appellant's  marriage  is  not  a  genuine
marriage.

18.  Before embarking on that  exercise,  at  [27]  the  Judge  sets  out  a
flawless self-direction taking guidance from the cases of Rosa  V  SSHD  and
Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece.

19.  There is no error of law. The Judge  has  directed  himself  correctly.
His fact-finding exercise cannot  be  criticized,  notwithstanding  what  is
said by the respondent in the grounds of appeal. In reality, the grounds  of
appeal are just a refusal to accept  the  conclusions  to  which  the  Judge
came. Perhaps the author of the grounds of appeal would like  the  Judge  to
reach different conclusions on the same evidence, but that does  not  amount
to a material error of law.

20.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

21.  There is nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the grounds of appeal amount to  little  more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result of the correctly applied legal  equation.  The
decision does not contain a material error of law.

22.  The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out findings that  are
sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23.  No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

24.  The appeal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed   Date 20 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


