
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 March 2015                              |On 22 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ms Tolulope Olukayode Odubonojo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr D Akin-Samuels of JDS Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of the First-tier Judge Hodgkinson,  who
    sitting at Hatton Cross  on  26  November  2014  and  in  a  subsequent
    determination promulgated on 11 December 2014 allowed the appeal of the
    Respondent (hereinafter called the claimant), a citizen of Nigeria born
    on 20 August 1985, against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    24 April 2014 to issue directions  for  her  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom to  Nigeria  having  refused  the  claimant's  Article  8  ECHR
    application.

2.    In  that  regard  ground  1  contends  that  the  First-tier   Judge's
    conclusion that the provisions of Appendix FM were  not  applicable  as
    the application was made on 2 April 2012 was wrong in  law  and  it  is
    accepted by the parties that the Judge was clearly in error of  law  in
    reaching that conclusion.  It was thus contended by  the  Secretary  of
    State in her grounds that "the entire premise of the  determination  is
    fundamentally flawed as the Judge has failed to  consider  at  all  the
    Secretary of State's view as to the public interest".   It  is  further
    contended  that  the  First-tier  Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    findings relating to family life and reoffending.

3.   In his determination the Judge  succinctly  summarised  the  claimant's
    immigration history as follows:

         "2.  The Appellant claims to have entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
             September 2000 as a visitor although the Respondent has  noted
             that no documentary evidence of the date  of  entry  has  been
             produced y the Appellant.  In any event on 19 August 2002  the
             Appellant submitted an application for a 'no time limit' stamp
             to be placed  in  her  passport.   On  30  October  2002  that
             application was considered to be void.

         3.   On 4 April 2011 the Appellant  submitted  an  application  for
             indefinite leave to remain (ILR) on human rights  grounds  but
             that application was refused on 21 June 2011, with no right of
             appeal.  On  28  June  2011  the  Appellant  was  arrested  on
             suspicion of fraud and immigration offences.  She  was  served
             with a notice of liability to removal.

         4.   On 1 September 2011 the Appellant was convicted of  possessing
             and controlling identity documents with intent of making false
             representations to make gain for self  or  another.   She  was
             sentenced to six  months'  imprisonment.   It  appears  to  be
             common ground that this offence  or  offences  relates  to  an
             attempt by the Appellant to use false identity  documents  for
             the purpose of obtaining employment in the United Kingdom.

         5.   On 2 April 2012 the Appellant made her application  for  leave
             to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  which  application  was
             refused on 4 July 2013 with no right of appeal.   On  17  July
             2013  a  pre-action  Protocol  letter  was  submitted  on  the
             Appellant's behalf and, on 4 September 2013, a judicial review
             application was lodged on her behalf.  On  4  October  2013  a
             consent order was signed whereby the  Appellant  withdrew  the
             judicial review proceedings on condition that  the  Respondent
             reconsidered the decision to refuse her application for  leave
             to remain.

         6.   On 9 December 2013  another  pre-action  Protocol  letter  was
             submitted on behalf of the Appellant.  On 3 January  2014  the
             Respondent responded  to  that  letter,  confirming  that  the
             reconsideration of the leave to remain application would  take
             place.   That  reconsideration  ultimately  resulted  in   the
             decision presently under appeal."

4.   The Judge then referred to the detailed reasons for  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision as set out in her refusal letter dated 24  April  2014
    that were, as he recorded, amplified by the Presenting  Officer's  oral
    submissions before him.

5.   The Judge proceeded to set out the Secretary  of  State's  position  as
    follows:

         "8.  In effect the Respondent:

             1)   indicated  that  the  Appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the
                  relevant  suitability  requirements  under  Appendix   FM,
                  bearing in mind that she  was  sentenced  to  six  months'
                  imprisonment on 1 September 2011 following the  conviction
                  referred to, it being concluded the  Appellant's  presence
                  in the United Kingdom was  not  conducive  to  the  public
                  good;

             2)   in any event, noted that the Appellant  did  not  have  a
                  partner  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  also  having  been
                  confirmed that the Appellant did not have contact with the
                  father of her child [I will leave the child's name  blank]
                  born on 21 March 2014;

             3)   did not accept that the  [the  child]  was  British,  she
                  having no father listed on her birth  certificate  and  no
                  evidence having been produced to show that her father  was
                  British or had any contact with her;

             4)   noted that [the child] had not been in the United Kingdom
                  for seven years, bearing in mind her age and that  neither
                  the Appellant nor her daughter was entitled to leave  with
                  reference to the various requirements of Appendix  FM,  it
                  being considered reasonable for  the  Appellant  and  [the
                  child] both to leave the United Kingdom  and  to  live  in
                  Nigeria;

             5)   noted that the Appellant claimed to enjoy family life  in
                  the United Kingdom  with  her  parents  and  siblings  but
                  concluded  that  such  relationships  did  not  constitute
                  family life under Appendix FM and that the Appellant  had,
                  in any event, failed to establish that her dependency upon
                  her relatives went beyond normal emotional ties;

             6)   indicated that due consideration had been  given  to  the
                  interests of [the child] under Section 55 of the  Borders,
                  Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ('the 2009 Act');

             7)   indicated that the Appellant and [the  child]  could  not
                  meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  with  reference
                  to their private lives in the United Kingdom;

             8)   concluded that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances
                  which warranted the grant of leave to  the  Appellant  and
                  her daughter outside the Immigration Rules  and  that  her
                  decision was a proportionate one."

6.   I pause there because  clearly  in  setting  out  in  such  detail  the
    Secretary of State's position under the  Rules,  it  follows  that  the
    Judge had the relevant Immigration Rules in mind  before  he  proceeded
    with his further consideration of this appeal.

7.   The Judge noted inter alia that the claimant was 15 years old when  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom and was at the date of hearing  29  years
    old.  She had lived with her parents since her arrival  in  the  UK  in
    2000 and continued to do so.   The  claimant,  her  parents  and  three
    siblings still lived together in the same  household.   They  were  all
    British citizens, the claimant being the only child of her parents born
    in Nigeria.  With reference to the claimant's criminal  conviction  the
    Judge noted that:

         "She sincerely apologises for such foolish  behaviour  and  has  no
         intention of committing any further offences.  The  offence  itself
         was  committed  by  her  in  order  to  obtain  relevant   identity
         documentation to enable her to work in the United Kingdom."

8.   It was further noted that on 21 March 2014 the claimant gave  birth  to
    her daughter as a result of a relationship that no longer continued and
    her daughter lived with the claimant  in  the  same  family  household,
    there being no contact with the child's father.

9.   The claimant was now dependent on her parents to provide  for  her  and
    her daughter "emotionally and financially and with regard  to  evidence
    on how  to  bring  up  her  daughter,  her  parents  clearly  were  her
    daughter's grandparents and they and the claimant's siblings all formed
    a close family unit."

10.  The Judge recorded that the claimant, who  gave  oral  evidence  before
    him, was scared of the prospect of having to return to Nigeria with her
    daughter where she had no accommodation or means of settling down.   It
    would be impossible for all of  the  claimant's  family  to  visit  her
    daughter in  Nigeria.   Further  she  enjoyed  a  close  interdependent
    relationship with her parents  and  siblings.   The  claimant's  mother
    worked as a project manager and was also a minister of religion being a
    pastor in her church.  She was  on  lifetime  medication  for  a  heart
    condition.  The claimant's father was a career guidance consultant.

11.  The Judge heard oral evidence from  the  claimant  but  also  from  her
    parents and three siblings and  took  further  account  of  documentary
    evidence in support.  He then proceeded to make detailed  findings  and
    at paragraphs 24 and 25 of his determination he had this to say:

         "24. The Respondent's RFRL focuses upon the  Appellant's  inability
             to satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
             276ADE of HC 395, reference  being  made  to  the  Appellant's
             inability to set aside the suitability  criteria  due  to  her
             criminal conviction.  [Her daughter] is not directly  a  party
             to the present appeal but it is clear that were the  Appellant
             to be removed from the United Kingdom [her daughter] would  be
             removed with her.

         25.  During the hearing before me I indicated that it was  my  view
             that  the  new  Immigration  Rules,  namely  Appendix  FM  and
             paragraph 276ADE, did not apply to the present appeal  as  the
             Appellant's relevant application  was  submitted  on  2  April
             2012, prior to the  coming  into  effect  of  the  new  Rules.
             Consequently, and as acknowledged by both representatives, the
             Appellant's appeal falls to be determined in  accordance  with
             relevant case law" (my emphasis).

12.  The  Judge  proceeded  to  consider  relevant  case  law  guidance,  in
    particular that in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC
    4, Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11.

13.  Further and for the avoidance of doubt the Judge was clear that he  had
    borne in mind the provisions of Section 117B  of  the  Immigration  Act
    2014

         "whereby little weight should be given to an  individual's  private
         life established in the United Kingdom when  they  were  unlawfully
         here and this clearly  applies  to  both  the  Appellant  and  [her
         daughter].  I bear this fact fully in mind and I have given  little
         weight to  the  establishment  of  their  private  lives  in  these
         circumstances."

14.  I  pause  there  because  this  yet  further  exemplifies  the  Judge's
    awareness of the provisions of the new Rules that he had borne in  mind
    in reaching his findings.  The Judge continued:

         "I bear this fact fully in mind and have given little weight to the
         establishment of their private lives in these circumstances.   That
         said, as I have indicated above, I conclude that the Appellant  has
         not only established a  significant  private  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom but that she has also established and continues to enjoy  a
         longstanding and close family life with her  parents  and  siblings
         and I take that fact into account in addition."

15.  The Judge continued with further reference to the  2014  Act  that  the
    claimant clearly spoke fluent English; that  she  was  not  financially
    independent; that there was no suggestion that she  had  at  any  stage
    been a burden on taxpayers; that it was in  the  public  interest  that
    persons seeking to remain in the UK were financially independent.

16.  He continued at paragraph 39 of his determination to point out that  he
    had taken into account the fact that the claimant was only 15 when  she
    arrived in the UK with her grandmother and then lived in  the  UK  with
    her parents and therefore "no blame could realistically be laid at  her
    feet in terms of her overstaying".

17.  At paragraph  40  the  Judge  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had not been in Nigeria for over fourteen years and that  the
    evidence before him that was materially unchallenged satisfied him that
    the claimant had no-one in Nigeria  to  whom  she  could  turn  and  no
    accommodation.  The Judge continued:

         "Whilst I do not find this factor in itself to be determinative  or
         insurmountable, it is  nevertheless  a  factor  of  relevance  when
         viewed cumulatively, the Appellant having spent  her  entire  adult
         life to date and the latter part of  her  minority  living  in  her
         immediate family unit in the United Kingdom.  Also of  relevance  I
         find is the fact that both her parents but  more  particularly  all
         three of her siblings are British citizens."

18.  The Judge continued that he also found it to be "highly relevant in  my
    consideration  of  proportionality"  that   the   claimant's   criminal
    conviction was serious in that it resulted in a sentence of six months'
    imprisonment but that did not disclose on the evidence nor  indeed  was
    there any suggestion that  the  claimant  was  likely  to  repeat  that
    offence or any other criminal offence and he accepted that she did  not
    intend to do so.  Nevertheless, the Judge pointed out, it was a  factor
    "which I find weighs materially against her in terms of proportionality
    although I recognise and acknowledge that this  is  not  a  deportation
    appeal."

19.  The Judge thus concluded "on the particular facts of this appeal"  that
    the  Secretary  of  State's  decision   involved   a   disproportionate
    interference with the claimant's rights under  Article  8(2)  and  thus
    succeeded on human rights grounds.

20.  The Secretary of  State's  challenge  at  ground  2  is  based  on  the
    contention that the Judge failed to give any or any adequate reasons as
    to how the test in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 was met.

21.  At ground 3 it is contended that the  Judge  failed  to  refer  to  any
    evidence before him that suggested that the claimant would not reoffend
    other than her live evidence.

22.  Finally it was contended that the Judge should have had regard  to  the
    provisions of Section 117C of the 2002 Act.  Whilst accepting that this
    was not directly  applicable  it  was  contended  that  Parliament  had
    expressed its clear view on the treatment of Article 8 appeals in cases
    involving foreign national offenders.

23.  Thus the appeal came before me on 17 March 2015 when my first task  was
    to decide whether the determination of the First-tier  Judge  disclosed
    an error on a point of law such as may  have  materially  affected  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The question for me was not whether the  appeal
    against the decision under challenge by the Appellant should be allowed
    or dismissed.  The  appeal  before  me  was  concerned  only  with  the
    question of whether the First-tier Judge made an  error  of  law  of  a
    nature such as to require his decision to be set aside.  It is only  if
    that question returned a positive answer, that it was open to the Upper
    Tribunal to disturb the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

24.  At the outset of the hearing,  I  received  from  Dr  Akin-Samuels  his
    skeleton  argument  which,  as  he  most   fairly   acknowledged,   was
    essentially a repeat of the claimant's position as it  was  before  the
    First-tier Judge.  I also received from Mr Avery for the  Secretary  of
    State a transcript of the decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  Further (and I  must  admit
    at my request but I think Mr Avery  appreciated  that  it  was  a  case
    relevant to the outcome of my consideration) Mr  Avery  most  helpfully
    provided me with his copy of the decision in R (on the  application  of
    Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) (IJR) [2014] UKUT 539 (IAC).

25.  With regard to the case of Gulshan Mr Avery relied on paragraph  27  in
    which it was inter alia stated:

          "Only if there were arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
         remain outside the Rules was  it  necessary  for  [the  Judge]  for
         Article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules."

26.   I  have  to  say  that  on  my  reading  of  the  First-tier   Judge's
    determination it was apparent to him  that  there  were  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain  to  this  Appellant  outside  the
    Rules thus necessitating the need to consider her position for  Article
    8 purposes and in determining for the reasons that he gave  that  there
    were compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules.

27.  That of course is not to say that the Judge was not in error.

28.  It was Mr Avery's submission  that  the  Rules  could  not  be  ignored
    because they demonstrated where the public interest  lay  in  terms  of
    Article  8.   Such  an  observation  was   entirely   appropriate   but
    nonetheless does not take into account the observations made in Gulshan
    to which I have above referred.  Mr Avery further submitted that whilst
    there were matters in the Appellant's favour there were factors against
    him.  So, he submitted, it therefore did not follow that the Judge  but
    for his error, would have reached the same conclusion  if  he  had  not
    applied the new Rules.  Mr Avery further submitted that the  Judge  did
    not say why removal would be disproportionate  and  in  consequence  he
    maintained that it was not a safe determination "because one  does  not
    know what conclusion the Judge would have reached had  he  applied  the
    Rules".

29.  This of course took me to drawing to the parties'  attention  the  head
    note of Oludoyi (above) and to refer to paragraph 20 of  Oludoyi  where
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gill had this to say:

         "There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or Shahzad that suggests that a
         threshold test was being suggested as opposed to  making  it  clear
         that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if  there  was
         anything which has not already been adequately  considered  in  the
         context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which  could  lead  to  a
         successful Article 8 claim.  If, for example, there is some feature
         which has not been  adequately  considered  under  the  Immigration
         Rules but which cannot on any view lead  to  the  Article  8  claim
         succeeding there is no need to go any further.  This does not  mean
         that a threshold or intermediate test is being applied."

Assessment

30.  I shall deal first with ground 1 where, as I have earlier said, it  was
    common ground that the First-tier Judge erred in law.  In  so  doing  I
    have reminded myself that in the recent case of Singh [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    74 it was held that applications for leave to enter or remain in the UK
    on the basis of family or private life made  before  9  July  2012  and
    determined between that date and 5 September 2012 were governed by  the
    Immigration Rules as they stood before the changes introduced by HC 194
    and HC 565.  However, applications made before 9 July but determined on
    or after 6 September 2012 were governed by the Rules as amended  by  HC
    194 and HC 565.

31.  It follows that the Judge did err in law in his understanding that  the
    new Immigration Rules, namely Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE, did not
    apply to the present  appeal  notwithstanding  the  fact  that,  as  he
    recorded and despite the Secretary of State's  present  challenge,  his
    view that they did not apply was "acknowledged by both  representatives
    at the Appellant's appeal".

32.  I have, however, had to ask myself  given  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    allowed the appeal outside the Rules (as he appears  to  have  done  in
    applying relevant case law guidance against the backdrop of  the  facts
    as found) on what basis does  the  Secretary  of  State  say  that  the
    present appeal does not succeed outside of the new Rules?

33.  This is a Judge who concluded that upon  a  consideration  of  relevant
    case law (i.e. outside of the Rules) he found in the claimant's favour.
     It follows therefore that the Secretary of State  has  to  demonstrate
    that in so doing, the Judge materially erred in law in  that  he  would
    not have allowed the appeal outside the Immigration Rules,  if  he  had
    found, as appears to be suggested, that the claimant could not  succeed
    under the new Rules.

34.  In that regard it is apparent to me that the Judge in  considering  the
    proportionality of the claimant's removal together with  her  child  to
    Nigeria did consider the relevant case law guidance  to  which  I  have
    above referred. In the light of his treatment of the authorities, I  do
    not think it can reasonably be said that he did not  have  the  correct
    principles in mind.

35.  The contention in ground 2 that the Judge  failed  to  give  very  good
    reasons for finding the test in Kugathas was met is not reflected in my
    consideration of  the  Judge's  findings.   In  terms  of  whether  the
    claimant had established elements of dependency going beyond the normal
    emotional ties, the Judge took account of the fact  that  the  claimant
    had lived with her  parents  and  siblings  in  the  same  family  home
    continuously for over fourteen years having arrived here at the age  of
    15 and that she now had a young child born as recently as March 2014.

36.  At paragraph 30 of his determination the Judge  was  clear  as  to  his
    conclusion that the claimant had

         "established  a  significant  family  life  with  her  parents  and
         siblings and also with her daughter, bearing in mind that  she  has
         lived in the same household as the parents and her  siblings  since
         2000 and continues to do so, it also being clear, and I  would  add
         unchallenged, that she has throughout been financially dependent on
         her parents and continues to do so."  (Emphasis added).

37.  More particularly, the Judge continued:

         "Whilst I entirely acknowledge that the normal ties between parents
         and adult children does not generally constitute family life in the
         context of Article 8,  in  the  circumstances  as  found  by  me  I
         conclude that  it  does  demonstrate  that  the  ties  between  the
         Appellant and her parents going beyond the  normal  emotional  ties
         which might exist."

38.  I am thus satisfied that the challenge to that finding on the  part  of
    the Secretary of State amounts to no more than a  factual  disagreement
    and I find that it discloses no error of law.

39.  As to ground 3, the Secretary of State's challenge fails to place  into
    its proper context what the Judge  had  to  say  about  the  claimant's
    criminal conviction in that he was clear that he was satisfied  on  the
    evidence that the Appellant was not

         "likely to repeat that or any other criminal offence and  I  accept
         that she does not intend to do so, she appearing to recognise  that
         was a serious mistake on her part for which she has  completed  her
         criminal sentence."

40.  I bear in mind in that regard, that the Judge had  the  opportunity  of
    seeing and hearing and evaluating the quality of the oral evidence that
    the claimant gave before him.  He will also have been mindful that  his
    decision was reinforced by the fact that the Appellant's conviction was
    some seven years ago since which time she had not reoffended.

41.  The Judge was clear that it nonetheless  remained  a  factor  which  he
    found  "weighed  materially  against  the   Appellant   in   terms   of
    proportionality".

42.  As the grounds acknowledge, Section 117C had  no  application  in  this
    case as apart from the fact that as the Judge rightly noted: 'this  was
    not a deportation appeal',  s.117C does not apply to a person  who  has
    not been sentenced to a period  of  twelve  months  or  more  and  this
    claimant was  sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment.   Further  the
    Section points out that whilst the deportation of foreign criminals  is
    in the public interest the  more  serious  the  offence  committed  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.  In this
    particular case and indeed as the Judge properly recognised  "this  was
    not a deportation appeal".

43.  It is apparent to me that the Judge found that there  were  exceptional
    circumstances outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  here  that  in  turn
    fortifies me in the view that had the Judge applied the proper test  he
    would have reached the same conclusion.  Therefore, although there  was
    an error of law in this case, and I make the point that  the  Secretary
    of State was perfectly entitled to bring the appeal as she  did,  I  am
    equally satisfied that the decision was not affected by that  error  of
    law and therefore I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Decision

44.  The making of the previous decision did not disclose the making  of  an
    error on a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

45.  It follows that the appeal of the Secretary of State to  that  decision
    is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 9 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

