
[pic]




Upper Tribunal
Appeal No: IA/19033/2013

Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House
On: 2 June 2014
                                             Decision Promulgated:
                       On: 18 July 2014

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Gregory Dwight Fletcher
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr P Thoree, Thoree & Co Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



For the purposes of this determination I refer to the Secretary of State  as
the respondent and Mr Fletcher as the claimant, reflecting  their  positions
before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of Jamaica and was born on 22 November 1973.

This is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the  determination
promulgated on 11 March  2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  which
allowed the claimant's Article 8 appeal.

The respondent's challenge is that the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed  to
identify factors that could properly  be  characterised  as  exceptional  or
compelling  such  that  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment   could
succeed.

The First-tier Tribunal judge referred to the principles in MF  (Nigeria)  v
SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at [10]. She goes on at  [12]  to  find  that  the
claimant has a family life with his  partner  and  her  daughter  who  is  a
British citizen. That finding is not challenged.  Nor  was  the  finding  at
[13] that the claimant had a significant relationship with  his  grandmother
and this added to the substance of his private  life.  The  judge  correctly
assessed the public interest at [14].

The proportionality assessment begins at [15] and continues to [20].  It  is
not suggested that in that consideration  the  First-tier  Tribunal  omitted
any material evidence or included immaterial evidence. It was  clearly  open
to her to find at [19] that the best interests of the partner's  child  were
in the claimant remaining in the UK and, again, there  is  no  challenge  to
that best interests assessment.  As set out at [15], this was not a case  of
someone with a poor immigration history or who had  deliberately  sought  to
avoid or manipulate immigration control.

The discussion of the various factors in play does not  refer  in  terms  to
"compelling" or "exceptional" circumstances but, as above, the judge had  in
mind  the  ratio  of  MF.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  identified   in
particular that the child's "considerable emotional distress"  and  hardship
faced by the partner if the claimant  made  the  decision  disproportionate.
That appeared to me, in substance, to amount to her finding that  compelling
circumstances pertained.  That was a decision  for  her  and  it  cannot  be
characterised as perverse or otherwise in error.

It was therefore my view that the respondent's challenge was,  really,  only
a disagreement with  the  conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
Article 8 appeal. I remind myself that it is only open to  me  to  interfere
with a FtT decision if it contains a material error of law; my task  is  not
to consider whether the decision was  necessarily  one  that  another  judge
would  have  come  to.   The  judge's   decision   evinces   a   substantive
consideration of relevant factors weighing for and against the claimant  and
for the above reasons is not vitiated by legal error.

Where they refer to the claimant's partner and the  children  relocating  to
Jamaica, the grounds are misconceived as the child  is  a  British  national
and the partner her primary carer; C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano and C-256/11  Murat
Dereci applied.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 30 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




