
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19220/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 15 May 2015                         |                On 9 June 2015       |
|Prepared 15 May 2015                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       Mr Mohamed Ahmed Mohamed Nasar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed by Mondair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Egypt, date  of  birth  13  October  1980,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated  15  April  2015,  to
    revoke a residence card on the basis that the Appellant  did  not  meet
    the  requirements  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations) with  particular  reference  to
    Regulation 2 of those Regulations.

2.   An appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Stott,  dated  8  October  2014,  who  dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

3.   In advance of the hearing and in the light of the Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter,  which  had  highlighted  material  discrepancies  between  the
    information provided by the Appellant and Sponsor, was  addressed  both
    as a basis for refusal, by the Appellant's  evidence  contained  within
    his statement and in part the evidence of the Sponsor and a  friend  of
    the Appellant and Sponsor, Mr Hosny.

4.    The  Respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  cogently   set   out
    significant discrepancies that simply cannot  be  ignored.   The  judge
    evidently took into account in reaching his  decision  the  differences
    between the answers given by the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.   It  is
    clear from the judge's notation of the papers that he did a  scrupulous
    exercise  in  identifying  the  different  answers  to  the  respective
    questions  by  reference  to  the  matters  highlighted  as  the  "main
    discrepancies" contained within those two interviews.

5.   It is common ground that the Appellant's  representative  made  several
    requests for sight of the full interviews which  were  not  forthcoming
    prior to the date of hearing on 1 October 2014.  It  was  only  at  the
    hearing for the first time that the full interviews  of  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor were produced.  I do not understand that there was ever any
    adequate explanation for the lateness of their production and certainly
    the Respondent does not assert that that material was  provided  before
    the date of the hearing.

6.    The  Appellant  was  represented  at  the  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Stott by Counsel Mr I Ali of Chambers in Northampton.

7.   There is no statement from Mr Ali concerning matters  arising  at  that
    hearing.  Bearing in mind  there  are  criticisms  being  made  in  the
    grounds of appeal as to the conduct of the judge in  dealing  with  the
    late arising copies  of  the  interviews:  These  collectively  run  to
    approximately 500 questions per Appellant  and  per  Sponsor.   In  the
    normal  course  of  events  where  it  is  said  there  was  procedural
    unfairness is raised there  is  an  expectation  that  Counsel  or  the
    representative who appeared should make a witness statement and provide
    the same or notes  in  support  of  the  grounds  of   application  for
    permission to the First-tier Tribunal or to address any remarks made by
    the judge granting permission.

8.   The grounds assert at paragraph 3 that with the  late  receipt  of  the
    Respondent's records of interview Counsel applied  for  an  adjournment
    which was refused by the judge.  Instead the judge put the matter  back
    for hearing later in the day for "a short while  so  that  instructions
    could be taken on the voluminous interview records."

9.   I assume for the purposes of  the  matters  before  me  today  that  an
    adjournment request was made to the judge rather than simply more  time
    for the matter to be considered by Counsel for the  Appellant.   It  is
    plain that the relevant consideration was the issue of fairness to  the
    Appellant.   No   interpreter   was   provided   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives, and the Sponsor was not particularly, as I  understand
    it,  articulate  in  English.   Counsel  was  faced  with  considerable
    difficulties or potentially considerable difficulties in obtaining,  in
    what is said to be a one hour,  instructions  on  the  records  of  the
    interviews provided.

10.  It seems clear from the Record of Proceedings and from the decision  of
    the judge that having had an opportunity to look at the interviews  the
    Appellant's representative Mr Ali did not apply  for  the  case  to  be
    adjourned nor for more time to prepare the case and nor does it seem on
    the  face  of  it  he  raised  the  issues  of  an  inability  to  take
    instructions given the absence of an available interpreter.

11.  Had there been a statement from Mr Ali  provided  it  would  have  been
    possible to achieve some  greater  measure  of  certainty  as  to  what
    happened on the day.  It is clear that  from  the  way  the  matter  is
    written in paragraph 6 of the determination that  the  judge  does  not
    record  there having been an adjournment request at all and nor does he
    address  the  requirements   under   the   Rules   and   the   relevant
    considerations relating to an adjournment request made on the basis  of
    the late provision of material.

12.  Again the judge's Record of Proceedings in manuscript does not set  out
    a request for an adjournment  so  much  as  what  transpired  once  the
    hearing had been commenced.

13.  The Appellant's representatives plainly had had  time  to  prepare  the
    Appellant's response to the deficiencies  or  discrepancies  identified
    within the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The Appellant in his  statement
    made extensive remarks about the interview and its length and  comments
    in relation to discrepancies raised by the Secretary of State.  As  the
    Appellant's witness statement self-evidently perhaps point out:

         "Our interviews lasted about four hours approximately in total  and
         we were asked a lot of questions.  I cannot tell how  many  exactly
         as I have no access to my interview record at present but as far as
         I recall I was asked approximately 180 to 190 questions."

    It is sufficient to say that his guess as to the  number  of  questions
    asked was significantly adrift from those that were in fact posed.

14.  The Appellant then, on the various items identified  as  discrepancies,
    made a number of comments upon the nature of his relationship with  the
    Sponsor, their lives together, their child  and  the  implications  for
    them of removal.

15.  The witness statement of the Sponsor is  essentially  confirmatory  but
    identified, with reference to the Appellant's statement, matters  which
    she agreed with and she argued that removal of him would be unfair.  In
    the statement of Mr Hosny there was  reference  to  his  knowledge  and
    contact with the Sponsor as well as the Appellant.

16.  It is again unfortunate that if Mr  Ali,  representing  the  Appellant,
    found that he simply could not address the issues raised by having full
    copies of the interviews that he did not seek the adjournment  or  more
    time to prepare the matter.  So far as I can  tell,  once  the  hearing
    started the matter of the late provision of the  records  of  interview
    was not pursued either in submissions at the  end  of  the  hearing  or
    before further evidence was called.  I do not find the  evidence  truly
    sustains any criticism of the judge in his conduct of the  hearing.   I
    have grave concerns whether through inexperience or otherwise that  the
    Appellant was not best served by those instructing Mr Ali  or  possibly
    by him in terms of the conduct of the hearing on the day.

17.  It seemed to me that it is extremely difficult to criticise  the  judge
    as making a procedural error of law. Given the truly  extensive  length
    of the interviews which are much longer than usually seen, if the delay
    to the start of the hearing was only for  one  hour  there  was  little
    opportunity for proper preparation.   However, what has not happened in
    the intervening time is that no one has apparently gone through the two
    interviews and identified material matters which had they  been  picked
    out and brought to the attention of the judge  might  make  a  material
    difference  to the outcome of the appeal.

18.  I cannot understand why this has not been  done  because  it  is  self-
    evidently pertinent to the question as to whether any error of  law  is
    material to the outcome. The answer is not simply to say that if  there
    has been procedural unfairness it follows that as a matter of law there
    must be a  remaking  of  the  notice  of  decision  with  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision set aside.

19.  I am therefore left with the  consideration  of  the  case  of  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418, a decision of  the  President,
    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey.  The case pointed out,  admittedly
    in a slightly different context, the true test is fairness and  whether
    there has been the deprivation of the Appellant of the opportunity  and
    right to a fair hearing.   The  deficiencies  in  the  representative's
    presentation  of  the  Appellant's  case  some  of  which  was  plainly
    inadvertent due to the absence of the interview records. The conduct of
    the Appellant's representative before the judge  is  no  fault  of  the
    Appellant. The real cause of the problem was the very late provision on
    the hearing date of the interview records by the Respondent.

20.    I find that this  is  a  marginal  case  but  fairness  requires  the
    Appellant to have an opportunity to deal with the matter.  Since no-one
    has yet done the exercise of comparing the interviews and  ascertaining
    relevant congruence or lack  of  discrepancies  in  key  areas  of  the
    evidence at this stage it is really impossible to take  a  view  as  to
    whether a decision is likely to be different.

20.   However,  I  am  satisfied  on  the  basis  of  fairness  that  it  is
    appropriate for the Original Tribunal's decision to be  set  aside  and
    the matter remade.

MATTER TO BE REMADE IN THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

(1)  Not before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stott  nor  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen.

(2)  Time estimate two hours.

(3)  Lithuanian interpreter required.

(4)  Please list for hearing at Sheldon Court on 23 September 2015.

(5)  Any further statements or evidence relied upon by either  party  to  be
    served not later than five working  days  before  the  further  hearing
    date.

(6)  If the Appellant intends to rely upon particular questions and  answers
    contained within the interviews of the Appellant and Sponsor then those
    should be identified by reference  to  the  Q/A  numbers  used  in  the
    respective interviews together with  any  particular  response  to  the
    issues raised.




Signed                                  Date 1 June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

