
 [pic]



The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19733/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th April 2017                     |On 10th May 2017                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                               Mr.NIMA RAHBAR.
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Chadhery, Counsel, instructed by Verax Solicitors,
Stockport.
For the Respondent:  Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Iran.


    2. On the 18 December 2008 he married Michaela Novotna, a European
       national.

    3. On the basis he was the family member of European national
       exercising Treaty rights he was issued with a residence card on 20
       November 2009.

    4. In June 2010 he returned to Iran. He returned to the United Kingdom
       in June 2012.

    5. The appellant and his wife are divorced, the decree nisi being
       issued on 31 October 2014 and becoming absolute on 16 December 2014.

    6. On 22 December 2014 application was made on his behalf for
       confirmation of his right to reside permanently under Treaty
       provisions. These are incorporated domestically by the Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations). This was refused on
       the basis he had not produced the divorce decree or demonstrated
       that his spouse was exercising Treaty rights. Consequently, his
       application was refused.

    7. To have a  retained right of residence  following his divorce then
       by regulation 10(5) he needed to provide evidence that his former
       spouse was exercising Treaty rights at the time of divorce. He also
       needed to show that the marriage had lasted for at least three years
       with at least one year being spent in the United Kingdom. Finally,
       the appellant needed to show he was in employment or self-employment
       or self-sufficient as if he where an EEA national.

    8. Under regulation15(1)(f) it was necessary to show that his former
       spouse had continuously exercised free movement right up to the
       point of divorce and that he himself had been exercising the
       equivalent of Treaty rights since then, collectively to cover a
       continuous five-year period

    The First tier Tribunal

    9. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Lloyd and was dismissed.
       The judge found that the appellant could not shown he had resided in
       the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years as he had
       been in Iran from June 2010 to June 2012. Furthermore, the evidence
       did not establish his wife had been exercising Treaty rights for a
       continuous period of five years.


   10. The judge went on to consider paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration
       rules which deals with private life and then proceeded to make a
       freestanding article 8 assessment.

    The Upper Tribunal


   11. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis failed to consider
       retained rights a residence provided for in regulation 10 .
       Furthermore, the judge was wrong to go on to consider human rights
       in light of the decision of Armremour and others (EEA appeals: human
       rights) [ 2015] UK UT 466 and TY(Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

   12. A judge of the First-tier Tribunal refused permission but on a
       renewed application permission was granted by an Upper Tribunal
       judge. This was on the basis the judge did not adequately reason the
       dismissal under regulation 10.

   13. The respondent lodged a rule 24 response opposing the appeal. The
       notice questioned how it could be argued that the judge was required
       to consider regulation 10 as a stand-alone matter when the
       application was made for a permanent right of residence. It was also
       not clear how he satisfied the evidential requirements of paragraph
       10 (5) or (6).

   14. At hearing Mrs Chadhery accepted that the appellant could not meet
       the requirements to obtain confirmation of a permanent right to
       reside under regulation 15. However, it was contended the judge did
       not deal with regulation 10.

    Consideration

   15. An issue arising under regulation 10 is the meaning of `termination
       of a marriage'. In this case, the decree nisi was made on 31 October
       2014 and became absolute on the 16th December 2014. The appellant
       had difficulties in obtaining information about his former wife's
       employment. In this regard the date of the termination marriage was
       crucial in relation to the evidence relating to employment.

   16. The presenting officer contended that it was the decree absolute
       which terminated the marriage and there were no wage slips covering
       this period. Consequently, although the judge did not consider
       regulation 10 the decision would be the same.

   17. I do find there is a material error of law in the decision in that
       the judge refers to regulation 15 but does not deal with regulation
       10. The judge also erred in carrying out a freestanding article 8
       assessment. However, as this was dismissed it makes no material
       difference. I do agree with the presenting officer that the marriage
       ends upon the decree absolute rather than nisi. This would be
       logical because the decree nisi allows a period when the grant of a
       divorce can be objected to. Aside from this, there is no evidence
       that the appellant is exercising Treaty rights.





Decision.

   18. The decision of First-tier Judge Lloyd dismissing the appellant's
       appeal materially erred in law. I have remade the decision but the
       outcome remains the same, namely the appeal is dismissed.



 Deputy Judge Farrelly

6th May 2017

