
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th April 2014                              |On 1 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                 Miss S-AMT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 8th September  1988,  the
    Appellant arrived in the UK in March 2002 on a six  month  visit  visa.
    The Appellant was joining her mother who  had  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student.  On 2nd March 2009  the  Appellant  applied  on  compassionate
    grounds to remain which was refused on 18th August 2009.  The  decision
    was reconsidered later in the year and on 29th  January  2010  she  was
    granted discretionary leave as a dependant  of  her  mother.   On  26th
    November 2010 the Appellant's own  dependent  daughter  S  was  granted
    discretionary leave in line with her  and  on  28th  January  2013  the
    Appellant  submitted  an  application   for   a   further   period   of
    discretionary leave for  herself  and  her  dependent  daughter.   That
    application was refused on both their respective behalves on 26th April
    2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Eldridge  sitting  at  Richmond  on  24th  January   2014.    In
    considering the application Judge Eldridge noted that the Secretary  of
    State considered that the Appellant and her daughter did not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in respect of their  family  life
    under Appendix FM.  In respect of any private life it  was  noted  that
    the Appellant had not spent half her life in the United Kingdom and  it
    was considered she had not demonstrated a lack of ties to Jamaica.  She
    was considered not to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

 3. Judge Eldridge noted that the question posed was whether the  Appellant
    was entitled to the leave to remain  that  she  had  sought  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 30th January 2014 the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds and the judge made an anonymity  direction
    to protect the identity of the Appellant's child.

 4.  On  20th  February  2014  application  was  made  by  the  Appellant's
    instructed solicitor seeking leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed  to
    apply  the  policy  on  discretionary  leave  and  had  made  a  flawed
    assessment of the analysis under Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    of Human Rights.  On 13th March 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan
    granted permission to appeal.  In granting permission the  judge  noted
    that the Appellant had at one time had discretionary leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom and that that discretionary leave was granted  prior
    to 9th July  2012  and  that  therefore  her  application  fell  to  be
    considered under the transitional  arrangements  of  the  discretionary
    leave policy.  Judge Chohan noted that that appeared not to  have  been
    considered by the Respondent and certainly it was not  brought  to  the
    attention of the judge.  In granting  permission  on  that  ground  the
    judge did however note that whether  or  not  the  policy  relating  to
    discretionary leave ultimately had any effect on  any  future  decision
    was open to argument.

 5. The judge further noted that contrary to what was stated in the grounds
    Judge  Eldridge  had  duly  considered  Article  8  and  conducted  the
    proportionality exercise.  However he noted that  it  may  be  open  to
    argument that had the policy in relation to  discretionary  leave  been
    brought to the attention of the judge that his findings may  well  have
    been different.  He concluded that it still will be for  the  Appellant
    to establish on what basis the policy relating to  discretionary  leave
    undermines the judge's findings in respect of Article 8 and  considered
    that there was an arguable error of law and that all grounds  could  be
    argued.

 6. On 1st April 2014 the representative of the Secretary of State lodged a
    response to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  That response opposed
    the appeal stating that  the  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  had
    considered the evidence before him and made negative  findings  on  the
    credibility of the witnesses  and  the  strength  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and her partner.  The response contended that the
    judge had considered the best interests of  the  Appellant's  dependent
    child and the proportionality of the decision.

 7. It is pertinent to point out that by letter dated  9th  April  2014  an
    application was made by the Appellant's instructed solicitor to adjourn
    the appeal on the basis that further information was required as to the
    grounds or basis for the  original  grant  of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain.  That application was refused by the Tribunal pointing out that
    the hearing that comes before me was for error of law only and that the
    new evidence the Appellant wished to obtain could not  assist  in  that
    matter.  In any event in responding the  Tribunal  noted  that  it  was
    questionable although the information sought by  the  Appellant  namely
    the reasons for her previous grant of  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    were essential to any remaking  as  appears  to  be  suggested  in  the
    adjournment request.

 8. It is on that basis therefore that this appeal comes before  me  purely
    for the determination as to whether or not there is a material error of
    law.  The Appellant appears by her instructed solicitor  Mr  Bobb.   Mr
    Bobb is familiar with the matter.  He is the author of the  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  also  the  author  of  the  letter
    requesting an adjournment.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Deller.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Bobb submits that the  Appellant  having  been  granted  an  initial
    period of  discretionary  leave  to  remain  prior  to  9th  July  2012
    therefore fell into the transitional arrangements of the  discretionary
    leave policy.  He takes me to the policy and to the relevant paragraphs
    then sets them out.

         "Those who, before 9th July 2012, have been granted leave under the
         discretionary leave policy in  force  at  the  time  will  normally
         continue to be dealt with under that policy through  to  settlement
         if  they  qualify  for  it  (normally  after  accruing  six  years'
         continuous discretionary leave).  A further leave application  from
         those granted up to three years discretionary leave before 9th July
         2012 are subject to active review."

         "Decision makers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing
         at the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date  of
         the decision.   If  the  circumstances  remain  the  same  and  the
         criminality thresholds do not apply,  a  further  period  of  three
         years' discretionary leave should normally be granted ..."

10. He submits that the Secretary of  State  has  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's case under the discretionary leave policy and  applied  the
    transitional  arrangements  rendering  the  decision  not  to   be   in
    accordance with the law.  He submits that to disapply the policy  there
    has to be a significant change of circumstances  and  that  it  is  his
    submission there had been no change in  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    since the grant of leave and that this is evidenced by the  finding  of
    fact in the determination.  He further points out that  the  judge  has
    not mentioned discretionary leave  at  all  and  that  this  in  itself
    constitutes an error.

11. Secondly Mr Bobb turns to the assessment  under  Article  8  submitting
    that  the  determination  is  flawed  and  that  there  has   been   no
    consideration of the impact  on  the  Appellant's  daughter,  and  that
    whilst noting that at paragraphs 48 to 50 and 57 the  judge  has  dealt
    with the Appellant's daughter's best interests,  the  findings  he  has
    made are he submits at best confusing pointing out  that  there  is  no
    discussion as to how the separation from the Appellant's  father  might
    affect the child and whether that  would  be  in  her  best  interests.
    Further he makes reference to the ophthalmic treatment required by Miss
    S and the letters from Lewisham Healthcare NHS Trust  to  be  found  at
    pages 70 to 71 of the  bundle  and  submits  that  the  judge  has  not
    considered these and that he should have done so.  Further  he  submits
    that so far as the Appellant herself is concerned the  judge  ought  to
    have given more weight to the fact that she came here as  a  child  and
    had he done so  then  a  different  finding  may  have  been  made  and
    therefore there are material errors of law which make the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal unsafe.

12. Mr Deller responds  by  pointing  out  that  whilst  there  may  be  no
    reference to the discretionary policy  in  the  judgment  it  begs  the
    question as to whether it was ever raised before the  Tribunal  in  the
    first place.  It is not in the skeleton argument that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and whilst Mr Bobb may consider it to be an obvious
    point the question of whether it is obvious goes to the arguments as to
    whether there is an error of law and any impact on a fundamental right.
     Mr Deller submits there is no reason why the judge should be aware  of
    any discretionary policy in transition and submits that everything that
    needed to be said has in fact been said by the judge.  He submits it is
    not a correct analysis of case law to merely have a tacit acceptance of
    policy and that there is no error of law on this aspect.

13. So far as Article 8 is concerned he agrees with  Mr  Bobb  that  it  is
    quite right to say that it is unarguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has  not  given  consideration  of  Article  8  principles.   The
    question therefore  he  submits  remains  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    determination is flawed.  He acknowledges that the judge at  paragraphs
    43 and 44 of his determination did not look at paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules to see if they were met and  as  to  the  Appellant's
    apparent ties with Jamaica but points out that this does not matter  in
    that firstly the issue was not raised and secondly the manner in  which
    the judge has dealt with the issue of ties is cured by the way  he  has
    addressed Article 8 within his determination.  Thus even if there  were
    to have been an error of law in not  directly  referring  to  paragraph
    276ADE he submits that any such error  is  not  material.   Further  he
    points out that the fact that the Appellant entered as a child does not
    make it a good point and that so far as the phrase "best interests of a
    child" are concerned he acknowledges that the correct approach is  that
    they are a primary interest and it has to be considered how they impact
    on  other  factors  for  example  the  position  of   the   Appellant's
    grandmother was not given a great impact before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.  He points out that the judge has in the view of  the  Secretary
    of State carried out a detailed and proper analysis and that  there  is
    no material error of law and that the appeal should be dismissed.

14. In brief response Mr Bobb points out the policy  is  mentioned  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement if not in the skeleton and  therefore  it
    was raised before the Tribunal.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

17. The question that is before me is to determine whether or not there are
    material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    am satisfied that there are no material errors  of  law  and  that  the
    determination properly considers all the  relevant  factors  that  were
    before the Tribunal.  It is not the role of the Upper  Tribunal  to  go
    remaking the decisions unless there are material errors  of  law.   The
    judge  has  carried  out  a  very  detailed  analysis  of  the  factual
    information to be found at paragraphs 9 to 37 of his determination.  He
    has made findings of fact and  credibility  at  paragraphs  40  to  58.
    Those findings of fact are not specifically challenged  in  either  the
    Grounds of Appeal or Mr Bobb's submissions.  The  judge  may  well  not
    have specifically referred to the discretionary policy  but  the  judge
    has carried out a proper and detailed analysis.  He has considered  the
    family arrangements and bearing in mind the way in which  the  case  is
    put it cannot be said that the judge should  have  looked  at  all  the
    relationships with more distant family members as is put to  me  by  Mr
    Bobb and I find the submissions made on this point to  be  little  more
    than disagreement and argument rather than any  proper  challenge  that
    there is an error of law and indeed if there were such an error of  law
    that it is material to the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

18. So far as the judge's analysis on human rights is concerned it is  true
    that the judge has not gone into a detailed analysis by  following  the
    now perhaps accepted policy of looking  at  the  Immigration  Rule  and
    thereafter considering whether there are exceptional  circumstances  to
    allow the appeal.  Firstly Mr Bobb is wrong to raise the position  with
    regard to how the judge has or has not addressed the problem that  Miss
    S has with her eyes.  He has looked at this in considerable detail  and
    addressed it at paragraph 49 of  his  determination.   He  has  further
    found quite properly  that  if  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  are
    returned to Jamaica they would be returned as a family unit and he  has
    looked  at  the  implications  to  the  Appellant's  father   or   more
    importantly the importance to Miss S so far as  any  relationship  with
    her father is concerned at paragraph 52.   I  agree  with  Mr  Deller's
    submission that the judge has given full and  proper  consideration  to
    the best interests of Miss S albeit that I do acknowledge  he  has  not
    gone into any great analysis of the current case law.   The  judge  has
    made reference to ZH (Tanzania) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2011] 2 AC 166.  Those basic principles were re-established
    by the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v The Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 74.  At paragraph 10 of Zoumbas  the  principles
    to be applied were set out namely:

    (i)  The best interests  of  a  child  are  an  integral  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR.

    (ii) In making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be a
         primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only   primary
         consideration; and the child's best interests do not of  themselves
         have the status of the paramount consideration.

    (iii)    Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
         the  cumulative  effect   of   other   considerations,   no   other
         consideration can be treated as inherently more significant.

    (iv) While different judges might approach the  question  of  the  best
         interests of a child in different ways,  it  is  important  to  ask
         oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
         the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
         when other important considerations were in play.

    (v)  It is important to have a clear idea of  a  child's  circumstances
         and of what is in a child's best interests before one asks  oneself
         whether those interests  are  outweighed  by  the  force  of  other
         considerations.

    (vi) To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination  of
         all relevant factors when the interests of a child are involved  in
         an Article 8 assessment.

    (vii)    A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
         not responsible such as the conduct of a parent.

19. It cannot be said that that approach has not been adopted by the  judge
    in his analysis.  Miss S's welfare and safety is addressed at paragraph
    48 and the manner in which she would be returned  with  her  mother  to
    Jamaica.  Her problems with her eyes are addressed at paragraph 49  and
    her heritage and ties are addressed at paragraph  50  as  is  her  age.
    Paragraphs  52  to  56  carry  out  a  proper  effective  analysis   of
    proportionality and the legitimate aim of immigration control  applying
    the test in Razgar and the judge ties matters  up  by  considering  the
    principles in ZH (Tanzania) reiterated in Zoumbas in paragraph  57  and
    making findings at paragraph 58 that it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    family to relocate to Jamaica and that the  Appellant's  interests  and
    those of her child and other family members do not  outweigh  those  of
    the state.

20. The decision maker has assessed the proportionality of the interference
    with private and family life in the particular  circumstances  of  this
    case in which the decision is made.  Judge Eldridge has evaluated  Miss
    S's best interests, has evaluated the circumstances and considered  the
    interference proportionate even where as it would in this instant  case
    have very severe consequences upon Miss  S.   The  judge  has  in  fact
    followed the process and analysis that he is supposed to as set out  by
    the Supreme Court in more than one authority.   In  such  circumstances
    the judge's decision is safe and there is  no  material  error  of  law
    disclosed  and  the  appeal  for  all  these  reasons  is  consequently
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of
    law, the Appellant's appeal is consequently dismissed and the  decision
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention
    of Human Rights is maintained.

22. The First-tier Tribunal did make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of
    the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and I continue it.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


