
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 21st November 2016               |On: 22nd November 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Joycelyn Lazaro
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  the  Philippines  date  of  birth  25th
    November 1986.  She appeals with  permission[1]  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Owens)  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse a human rights claim.




    The Hearing

 2. There was no appearance at the hearing by the Appellant.    I  put  the
    matter back in the list and  efforts  were  made  to  contact  her.  No
    message was received from the Appellant and by 11.30 there was still no
    appearance. I was satisfied that notices of hearing had  been  sent  to
    the last known address (that is, incidentally, the  same  address  that
    the Respondent has on record). I had regard to the overriding objective
    of disposing of the appeal without delay.  There  being  no  reason  to
    suppose that an adjournment or further delay would result in attendance
    by the Appellant, I proceeded to hear the appeal in her absence.




    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2010 with leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  On the 17th  May  2012
    the Respondent decided to curtail  her  leave  because  her  sponsoring
    college had been removed from the list of approved sponsors. It is  now
    accepted that this decision was not communicated to the  Appellant  and
    was therefore not a valid curtailment. This meant  that  the  Appellant
    still had valid leave when on the  25th  September  2012  she  made  an
    application for further leave.  Before me Mr  Duffy  agreed  that  this
    application would have had the  effect  of  extending  the  Appellant's
    leave by virtue of  section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The
    Appellant was therefore in the United Kingdom lawfully between February
    2010 and the unspecified date when the latter application was refused.

 4. The basis of  the  appeal  before  Judge  Owens  was  however  entirely
    unrelated to the Appellant's past status as a student. The case put was
    that the Appellant was entitled  to  leave  on  human  rights  grounds.
    First, it was submitted that she  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) in that she could show "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    her integration in the Philippines.  Alternatively,  it  was  submitted
    that her removal would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
    Article 8(1) rights in the  United  Kingdom.  The  foundation  of  both
    arguments was her relationship  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  another
    Filipino woman.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the  Appellant  could  not  hope  to
    succeed under Appendix FM of the Rules, not least because  her  partner
    is neither British nor settled.   The  Tribunal  begins  by  addressing
    paragraph  276ADE.  It  found  that  the  Appellant's  family  in   the
    Philippines includes her parents and two  brothers.   They  are  middle
    class and comfortable.  They sponsored the Appellant  in  her  studies.
    Although the Appellant has not been back home  since  2010  she  is  in
    contact with her family by telephone.  The Tribunal accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been subjected to homophobic abuse  which  was  offensive
    and upsetting, but  found  that  she  had  received  support  from  her
    parents.  The Appellant had no  known  health  concerns  apart  from  a
    thyroid  disorder  which  was  under  control.   As  to  her  partner's
    circumstances, the Tribunal accepted that the woman's father was  upset
    that his daughter was gay, but rejected the suggestion  that  he  posed
    any kind of threat to either of them.  The Appellant lived for 24 years
    in the Philippines before coming to the United Kingdom. She is educated
    to degree level. She has managed  to  support  herself  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom, including periods when she had no leave. Although  some
    people in the Philippines were intolerant of homosexuality the  country
    background material showed that there  are  hundreds  of  organisations
    supporting gay people and that homosexuality is permitted by law.   The
    Judge specifically rejected the contention that  the  two  women  would
    have to live separately if returned there. Having taken  all  of  those
    factors into account the Tribunal found  there  to  be  no  significant
    obstacles to her integration. The appeal was therefore  dismissed  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 6. As to Article 8 'outside of the rules' the Tribunal directed itself  to
    a plethora of leading cases including Razgar [2004] UKHL  27,  Huang  v
    Secretary of State [2007] UKHL 11 and SS (Congo) v Secretary  of  State
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.   It found as fact that Article 8 was engaged,  in
    respect of family and private life. Having regard to  the  factors  set
    out in s117B(1)-(6) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    (as amended) the Tribunal was no satisfied that the Appellant's removal
    would be disproportionate and the appeal was dismissed under this  head
    of claim.

 7. The Appellant now appeals on the following grounds:

      i) The Tribunal erred in its assessment of the  extent  to  which  the
         Appellant has been in the United Kingdom without leave;

     ii) The Tribunal erred in finding that Article 8 'family life' was  not
         engaged by her sexuality.




    My Findings

 8. It will be apparent from the above that no challenge  is  made  to  the
    findings  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed   under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. There is a clear finding  that  there  were
    not very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration, and that
    finding must stand.

 9. I deal with  the  second  ground  first.   The  grounds  highlight  the
    Tribunal's finding [at 62] that the Appellant's ability to express  her
    sexuality openly in the United Kingdom is a part of her private, rather
    than family life. Issue is taken with that finding as follows:

         "It is submitted that the ability to express one's sexuality,  form
         relationships,  and  have  those   relationships   recognised   and
         respected by society and the state in which the person lives is all
         part of a person's family life and the Judge has erred  in  failing
         to recognise it as such"

10. No authority for that proposition is offered. Whether or  not  that  is
    the case is however hardly  material.  First  of  all,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this case expressly finds that the Appellant's relationship
    with her girlfriend does amount to a family life [at 62] and it  is  on
    that basis that the analysis is made.  Secondly it is apparent that the
    Tribunal quite properly considered the Appellant's Article 8(1)  rights
    as a composite whole.  The Tribunal expressly considered and weighed in
    the balance the fact that the women are  comfortable  expressing  their
    sexuality in the United Kingdom and that they may be  less  so  in  the
    Philippines.  I do not find any material  error  in  approach  in  this
    respect.

11. The appeal is brought  principally  in  relation  to  the  findings  on
    proportionality.   Much of the grounds are taken up with the contention
    that the Appellant had never been served with a curtailment notice  and
    that following an application to extend leave she remained,  by  virtue
    of s.3C of the 1971 Act, lawfully in the United Kingdom.   I,  like  Mr
    Duffy and the First-tier Tribunal, am quite willing to accept that s.3C
    extended the Appellant's leave after she made an  application  to  vary
    her Tier 4 leave. It  is  not  clear  however  how  that  assists.  The
    relationship was formed when the Appellant's status was precarious, and
    it was the accepted fact that neither woman had any leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom. It was the Respondent's position that they would be
    removed together. There was a clear finding that they would be able  to
    continue their relationship once returned to their country  of  origin.
    The only matter which could arguably have  weighed  positively  in  the
    Appellant's favour was that she and her partner would prefer to stay in
    the United Kingdom where they had  each  accrued  a  private  life.  By
    operation of s117B(5) that was a  matter  that  could  only  attract  a
    little weight.   It was not therefore a matter that could possibly have
    outweighed the public interest in removing persons who do not otherwise
    qualify for leave to remain.




    Decisions

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

13. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          21st November 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 11th October 2016 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge OJM Hollingworth

