
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19919/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th February, 2014                         |On 4th March 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS JULIET DONNA MARIA MORGAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris of Counsel instructed by Smart Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department to whom I shall refer as the "claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica, who  was  born  on  14th  June,
    1967.  She appeals against the decision of the claimant taken  on  15th
    May, 2013, to refuse to vary her leave to enter or remain in the United
    Kingdom on the basis of her family and private life under Article 8  of
    the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms and to remove her from the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent subsequently appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  29th
    October, 2003,  dismissed  the  respondent's  appeal.   The  respondent
    sought  to  challenge  the  judge's  determination  and   in   granting
    permission Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman said this:

         "While the meaning of 'insurmountable obstacles' (to the pursuit of
         family life in the parties' country of  origin)  did  not  directly
         arise in MG (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ. 1192, which was in any event
         a deportation case, the Court of Appeal did hear  argument  on  it,
         and said this at paragraph 49:


             'if insurmountable obstacles are literally obstacles which  it
             is impossible to surmount, their scope is very limited indeed.
              We shall confine ourselves to saying that we incline  to  the
             view that, for the reasons stated  in  detail  by  the  UT  in
             Izuazu at paras 53 to 59, such a stringent approach  would  be
             contrary to Article 8.'


         The Upper Tribunal may wish to consider the general approach to  be
         taken in non-deportation cases,  where  this  point  is  in  issue,
         before deciding how it should be  applied  to  the  facts  of  this
         case."

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup noted that the respondent entered  the
    United Kingdom on 31st July, 2007 as a work permit  holder  with  leave
    subsequently extended to 9th April, 2013.  On 12th February,  2013  she
    married Mr Guy Emmanuel  Foster,  a  British  citizen.   She  made  her
    application on 14th April, 2013.

4.   It appears to have been agreed that the respondent could not  meet  the
    financial requirements of E-LTRP 3.1 and the judge noted that in  order
    to meet the exception EX1 the respondent had to show  that  she  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the United
    Kingdom, who is a British citizen and  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside  the  UK.
    He said, "in essence  this  is  a  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    between the interests of the state on the one hand  and  those  of  the
    respondent and her husband on the other".

5.   The judge noted that Mr Foster was not only a British citizen  who  has
    lived in the United Kingdom for  50  years,  but  he  has  three  adult
    children, two of whom are in the United Kingdom and whom he sees  on  a
    regular basis.  He is retired and is 80 years of age.  Mr  Foster  last
    visited Jamaica in 2005, or 2006, when he first met the respondent at a
    relative's funeral.  He  met  her  again  in  2007  in  Birmingham  and
    thereafter a relationship began which has resulted in  their  marriage.
    Sadly, Mr Foster was diagnosed with prostrate cancer in  2006  and  was
    subsequently treated with radiotherapy in 2007.  He is in remission and
    requires monitoring by a urologist every six months to ensure  that  he
    is still free of symptoms.  He suffers from  high  blood  pressure  and
    moderate kidney impairment.

6.   The judge noted that the respondent had  been  away  from  Jamaica  for
    seven years.  He found that there was  no  particular  reason  why  the
    respondent could not return and re-establish her life there.   He  bore
    in mind that Mr Foster, the respondent's husband, has  been  away  from
    Jamaica for a very long time except for a brief visit in 2005 or  2006.
    He noted that Mr Foster is settled in the United Kingdom and a  British
    citizen and also accepts that at the age of 80, with his present health
    conditions, it would not be easy for Mr Foster to relocate.  However he
    found that it would not be impossible for him to do so and  found  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to him doing so.  He found  that
    the respondent  had  not  shown  that  there  were  any  insurmountable
    obstacles to continuing family life in Jamaica.

7    The respondent's grounds of challenge suggest that the judge was  wrong
    to assess the question of proportionality on the basis of whether there
    were any insurmountable obstacles.  In doing so the judge  had  clearly
    applied too high a standard because he had found that it would  not  be
    impossible for the respondent and her husband to relocate  to  Jamaica.
    By suggesting that it was not impossible  the  judge  had  demonstrated
    that he had erred.  Mr Harrison for the Secretary of State told me that
    he relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter but was not  going  to  add
    anything further.  I advised Counsel that I did not need  to  hear  any
    submissions from him.

8.   In the case of Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  rules  -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) Mr Justice Cranston, sitting as a Judge of  the
    Upper Tribunal and sitting with Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor  noted  the
    exception at EX1 in paragraph 22 and paragraph 23 considered  the  case
    law in drawing conclusions at paragraph 24(c) he said:

         "The term 'insurmountable obstacles' in provisions such as  Section
         EX1  are  not  obstacles  which  are  impossible  to  surmount  (MF
         (Nigeria)).   They   concern   the   practical   possibilities   of
         relocation. In the absence  of  such  insurmountable  obstacles  if
         removal is to be disproportionate it is necessary to show other non-
         standard and particular features demonstrating that removal will be
         unjustifiably harsh by any test."

9.   It cannot, in  my  view,  be  said  that  to  expect  the  respondent's
    husband, Mr Foster, to relocate to Jamaica is not unjustifiably  harsh.
    Not only is he a man of 80 years with immediate family  in  the  United
    Kingdom, he is a British subject and has been in the United Kingdom for
    50  years.   To  expect  him  to  relocate  with  his  current  medical
    conditions is, in my  opinion,  unjustifiably  harsh  and  entirely  an
    entirely disproportionate response on the  part  of  the  claimant.   I
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  err  in  law  and  I
    substitute my decision for his.

9.   The respondent's appeal is allowed.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
