
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19571/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 3rd August 2015                       |             On 14th August 2015    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            ms Lea Acosta Abasolo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Magsino (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zahed promulgated on 2nd  April  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 4th December 2014, in which  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of Ms Lea Acosta Abasolo, whereupon the Appellant  applied  for,
    and appears to have been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, so that the matter comes before me today.

 2. I say that permission "appears" to have been granted because the  grant
    of permission, dated 10th June 2015,  while  certainly  containing  the
    statement that "the application for permission is  granted",  makes  it
    clear in three numbered paragraphs, that the contrary is the case.   In
    particular, paragraph 3 states that, "the grounds and the determination
    do not disclose an arguable error of law".  Even  so,  the  matter  has
    ended up in the Upper Tribunal for determination.

The Appellant

 3. The Appellant is a female citizen of the Philippines, born on 7th April
    1978, and she made an application to the Respondent Secretary of State,
    on 27th February 2014, for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  the
    right to reside in the UK as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national,
    exercising treaty rights, namely, one by the name of  Mr  Sagisi.   The
    Respondent refused the application on 10th April 2014.

The Judge's Determination

 4. When the matter appeared before Judge Zahed on 4th  December  2014,  it
    was conceded by Mr Simpson of Counsel, that  there  was  no  Article  8
    ground raised (see paragraph 5).  The issue was  whether  there  was  a
    "durable relationship" (see paragraph 5).  The judge was not  satisfied
    that this was the case for a number of reasons.  First,  the  Appellant
    was living with her brother at his address in Newport, Wales,  and  not
    with the Sponsor.

 5. Second, in confirmation she  confirmed  that  she  was  living  at  her
    brother's address in Wales from 19th May 2011 until her visa expired on
    2nd October 2012 (see paragraph 7).

 6. Third, the documentation that she submitted, in relation to a rent book
    for [     ], where she claimed to have been living,  showed  that  "she
    had used Tipp-Ex to change the date of the rent  book"  (paragraph  9).
    As the judge observes, "I note  that  the  Appellant's  name  has  been
    written over a previous name that has been Tipp-Ex'd.  I find that this
    rent book has been falsely created ..." (paragraph 9).

 7. Fourth, the judge concluded that, "I find there would be no reason  for
    the Appellant to be a tenant at [               ] given the  fact  that
    she was working in Newport at a care home for 24 hours over a seven day
    period ..." (paragraph 10).

 8. Fifth, the judge concluded that, "all the evidence  submitted  to  show
    that she has been living  there  has  been  fabricated  for  the  court
    hearing" (paragraph 10).

 9. Sixth, there were letters of support from witnesses  who  claimed  that
    they had seen the Appellant in a two year  relationship  with  the  EEA
    Sponsor.  As the judge noted, however, "none of these witnesses came to
    court to be cross-examined ..." (paragraph 11).

10. Seventh, there were photographs of the Appellant and the Sponsor in bed
    together, but upon giving evidence, the judge noted that, "the  Sponsor
    accepted that the photographs  were  created  entirely  for  the  court
    hearing to show that they are together" (paragraph 12).  For all  these
    reasons, the judge was not  satisfied  that  the  parties  were  living
    together as claimed.  Indeed, the judge went on to say that,  "the  EEA
    Sponsor is still married has not begun divorce proceedings and  I  find
    he does not intend to do so" (paragraph 14).

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  did  not  make  any
    reference to the burden of proof.  On 10th June 2015, Judge Mark Davies
    appears  to  have  granted  permission  to  appeal,  although  all  the
    indications are that he did  not  intend  to  do  so  given  his  three
    numbered paragraphs.

12. On 26th June 2015 a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Secretary  of
    State  making  it  quite  clear  that  the  grounds  are  "a  sustained
    disagreement with the findings which are not flawed by  error  in  law"
    (paragraph 7).

Submissions

13. At the hearing before  me,  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  L
    Magsino.  He appeared with the Sponsor, Mr Sagisi, who sat at the  back
    of the courtroom.  The Appellant took the witness  stand.   Mr  Magsino
    then simply made one submission.  He  said  that  the  relationship  is
    still  ongoing.   The  Sponsor  was  in  attendance  in   court.    The
    relationship was a durable one.  He had nothing further to add.

14. In reply, Mr Bramble submitted that he would, in the  circumstances  of
    this case where no explanation had been given whatsoever as to what the
    issues were before the Tribunal, simply rely upon the Rule 24 response.
     No issues had been identified.  There could  be  no  error  of  a  law
    finding.

15. In his reply, Mr Magsino simply replied to say  that  the  relationship
    was subsisting and that he had the  witnesses  in  front  of  court  to
    confirm this.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  The findings  of
    the judge are a  complete  answer  to  the  Appellant's  claim.   These
    findings are summarised at paragraph 13 of the determination.

17. First, the judge did not find that the couple were an unmarried couple.
     Second, he did not find that they had been  living  together  for  two
    years.  Third, he did not find that they were living as a couple  at  [
            ].  Finally, he did not find that they were consistent and  the
    claim was not credible.  Indeed, he went on to find (at  paragraph  14)
    that Mr Sagisi still was married and there was no intention on his part
    to begin divorce proceedings.  Furthermore, there was  evidence  before
    the judge that the claim had been fabricated with Tipp-Ex being used to
    falsify a rent book.  This case should never have been set down  for  a
    hearing before this Tribunal.  This  is  not  least  given  the  wholly
    inadequate submissions of Mr Magsino before this  Tribunal  today.   No
    issue was identified whatsoever.   All  that  was  said  was  that  the
    parties are living together.  Mr Bramble's Rule 24 response to that was
    adequate in itself to dispose of this submission.  There is no error of
    law.



Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th August 2015



