

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19294/2013
                                                               IA/19276/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 19th December 2013                         |on 17th February 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              Mr HARPREET SINGH
                             Mr MERSIMREN SINGH
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Awal.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on the 17th October 2013 following  a
        hearing at Birmingham on the 7th October 2013.


     2. Permission to appeal was sought and the matter considered by First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Blandy on 7th November 2013.  The  decision  is
        contradictory as it states that permission to appeal is refused yet
        the wording in the body of  the  document  clearly  indicates  that
        Judge Blandy found all grounds to be arguable. The parties accepted
        a pragmatic view was appropriate in all the  circumstances  and  so
        the hearing proceeded on the basis the reference to the refusal was
        an error and that the  intention  of  Judge  Blandy  was  to  grant
        permission.



Error of law finding and discussion



     3. Both appellants are citizens of India who were born on the 4th
        February 1986 and 2nd January 1984 respectively. They applied for
        leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants which were
        refused by the Respondent.


     4. Having heard the evidence Judge Hawden-Beal noted the assertion
        that the contracts referred to in the refusal were not included
        with the application forms because there was a change in the Tier 1
        policy on 13th December 2012 and the applications had been filed
        before this date. In the application form they stated the contracts
        would follow which they provided on 4th February 2013. The first
        appellant maintained his name appeared on the contract whereas the
        second appellant accepted his name did not, but blamed a printing
        error. The Respondent refused to award 75 points under Appendix A
        because the contracts had not been submitted.


     5. It was accepted the contracts were not submitted with the
        application, as the Respondent states in the refusal, but it was
        submitted before Judge Hawden-Beal that as they had been submitted
        before the date of decisions they should have been taken into
        account in line with the guidance provided in Khatel [2013] UKUT
        00044. It was accepted that in the interim the Court of Appeal had
        delivered its judgment in Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754 but as the
        decision had been made in May 2013 it was submitted that the
        Respondent was bound by Khatel.


     6. It was not disputed by the Respondent that the contracts had been
        received before the decision but it was not accepted they met the
        requirements of Appendix A, paragraph 41SD(c)(iv) either as they
        did not have the appellants names on them. Judge Hawden-Beal
        accepted the contracts did not show the name of the second
        appellant but found they did contain that of the first appellant
        who satisfied this provision of the Rules [16].


     7. Judge Hawden-Beal noted, however, that a further problem for the
        appellants was that paragraph 41SD(c)(iii) required them to have
        supplied advertising or marketing material which had been published
        locally or nationally, showing the required details, but this had
        not been provided and the Judge noted there was nothing before her
        showing that the wider world were aware of the work the appellants
        were undertaking. Even though it was alleged such had been provided
        there was no reliable evidence of the same before the Judge who
        found the refusal to award the 75 points was lawful and dismissed
        the appeal.


     8. The first appellants claim on human rights grounds was dismissed as
        being proportionate under both the Rules and ECHR.


     9. The grounds allege that further documents had been sent to the
        Respondent, pre -decision, following a request by the case worker.
        It is clear additional information was requested by the Respondent
        and it is said the reference by the Judge to there being no such
        request is incorrect.  It is submitted the Presenting Officer at
        the hearing conceded that the additional documents were submitted
        and, as a result, the Judge should not have needed convincing that
        the decision was lawful.


    10. As stated above, it was accepted that the contract documents were
        submitted and I have seen a copy of the proof of posting.  The
        postal address on the Tier 1 application is Home Office, Tier 1, PO
        Box 496, Durham, DH99 1WQ, which is the same as that appearing on
        the proof of posting dated 4th February 2013. According to Royal
        Mail track and trace service the item with reference BY314654142GB
        was delivered from their DURHAM Delivery Office on 05/02/13. This
        relates to the contracts and is not disputed.


    11. The submission by Mr Awal that the Respondent was bound by the
        decision in Khatel, as the Judge herself seems to have found in
        paragraph 15 of her determination, has no arguable merit.  The
        Respondent never accepted that the decision in Khatel was correct
        in law and was proved to be correct in this assertion by the Court
        of Appeal in Raju, Khatel and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754. In
        Raju the Court of Appeal appeared to make it clear that AQ was "not
        authority for the proposition... that applications were "made"
        throughout the period starting with the date of their submission
        and finishing with the date of the decisions". An applicant relying
        on a qualification on the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant route
        had to have that at the date of application for the purposes of the
        relevant rule. The Court of Appeal clearly held that where a rule
        specifies a need for evidence to be submitted with the application
        that is a specified point in time. Whilst it does not preclude an
        applicant from adducing material on an ongoing basis up to the date
        of decision there is no obligation upon the decision maker to
        consider such material. The reliance upon an evidential flexibility
        argument not been shown to have any arguable merit on this point.
        Paragraph 34 G of the Rules specifies when an application is deemed
        to be made which, in the case of an application that is posted, is
        the date of posting - see 34G(i).  Neither the contract evidence
        nor that relating to the advertising material put before the
        Respondent at this date. I reject the argument the Judge did not
        err in following a case that has been shown to be wrong in law and
        it cannot be correct that the Judge made no error if she relied
        upon bad law. As the documents had not been filed by the date of
        application, or at all, the requirements of the Rules could not be
        met.


    12. In relation to the alleged concession, I accept the submission made
        by Mr Mills that there is no evidence of such a concession being
        made by the Presenting Officer in relation to the advertising
        materials.  It was accepted the contracts had been sent on 4th
        February 2013 but not the advertising material.  There is a copy of
        an e-mail which the Judge refers to but not to the actual material
        being relied upon. There is no evidence that marketing material of
        the required standard was submitted.  No error of law has been
        proved as it is not accepted by this Tribunal that any concession
        was made in relation the marketing material. There is no evidential
        basis for finding such.  It is noted the Judge made specific
        reference to the concession in relation to the contract and it is
        reasonable to assume that if an additional concession had been made
        she would have made reference to this too. The fact she did not and
        was looking for evidence of the relevant material demonstrates this
        was an area of concern to her.


    13. It is not disputed that the contracts did not meet the requirements
        of the Rules in relation to the second appellant in any event, as
        found in paragraph 16 of the determination, and having considered
        the evidence as a whole it has not been shown the conclusions in
        relation to the Rules was not ones properly open to the Judge.


    14. The finding in relation to Article 8 is also challenged on the
        basis the Judge should not have made the same.  If this was an
        issue the Judge was asked to consider in the appeal she was bound
        to do so, although the original grounds of appeal appear to only
        refer to the decision not being in accordance with the Rules with
        no reference to Article 8 ECHR. There is a contradiction in the
        determination in that at paragraph 8 the Judge records that the
        Presenting Officer withdrew the section 47 removal directions for
        all the appellants whereas in paragraph 20 she notes that that made
        in relation to the first appellant was issued after 8th May and so
        is lawful.  It may be the case that a section 47 direction issued
        from 8th May 2013 is lawful, even it made before the applicant has
        notice of the variation decision, but if it was withdrawn it no
        longer remained extant unless reinstated, of which there is no
        evidence.


    15. The Judge was therefore faced with a situation in which both a
        lawful and an unlawful removal direction had been withdrawn but in
        which she had grounds of appeal alleging the decision was not in
        accordance with Immigration Rules. This ground as pleaded is not
        limited to the rules relating to the Tier 1 application and so must
        be read as encompassing all the Rules which, therefore, must
        include those relating to the appellants human rights. Section 86
        (2) of the NIAA 2002 imposes a statutory duty upon a tribunal to
        determine any matter raised as a ground of appeal. As a result
        there is no error in the Judge determining the claim in paragraph
        20 as she did.  Any error is in not doing so in relation to the
        second appellant who also alleged the decision was not in
        accordance with the Rules. To this extent the determination is set
        aside although the findings in relation to the Tier 1 elements of
        the appeal and the inability of the first appellant to succeed
        under the Rules in relation to his human rights claim are
        preserved.


    16. I substitute a decision that on the evidence the second appellant
        has not show he is able to succeed under the Rules in relation to
        the human rights element of his claim either as he has not shown he
        is able to satisfy paragraph 276ADE in relation his private life.
        Family life is not relied upon by either appellant.


    17. Although Article 8 ECHR is not pleaded the outcome is likely to be
        the same in light of the evidence relied upon, although this is an
        observation and no more at this stage.


    18. At the hearing I indicated that the finding was likely to be that
        the Judge had made no material error but having considered the
        matter further the correct outcome is as stated below.


Decision

    19.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.  I make no such order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) as there is no application
        for anonymity and no basis for making such an order on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th February 2014












