
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19620/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2016                  |On 19 January 2017                   |
|Prepared 22 December 2016            |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              ms kamaljit kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of India, date of birth 2 May  1984  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision dated 8 October  2014  to  reject  an
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 3 (General)  Student  on  the
    basis that false representations had been made in her application.   In
    a nutshell, the complaint was that the Appellant had used a proxy  test
    taker and therefore there had been no proper result in relation to  the
    speaking part  of  the  TOEIC  certificate  testing.   The  matter  was
    appealed and the appeal documents show that the request  was  made  for
    the case to be determined on the papers.

2.   Those grounds of appeal generally  asserted  that  there  had  been  no
    false test taken and it was said, as  is  evident  from  the  file  and
    before the Judge, that there was a blanket denial of using such a proxy
    test taker and that it had been completed  by  the  Appellant  herself.
    That statement is dated 14 December 2015.

3.   By the time the judge came to look at this matter the Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS -  Evidence  -  Burden  of  Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC). The cases of I Qadir and Shehzad [2016] have not
    undermined the Upper Tribunal's  decision  It  is  apparent  that  this
    experienced judge would have been well aware of the evidence  that  the
    Respondent was relying upon particularly as  to  the  generic  evidence
    showing how proxy test taking was discernible and demonstrable.

4.   It is true to say that the decision and reasons of First-tier  Tribunal
    Widdup dated March 2016, is somewhat delphic  but  nevertheless  it  is
    clear that he was satisfied and found on the evidence  that  there  had
    been sufficient evidence adduced to show that the certificate had  been
    obtained dishonestly.  It is clear therefore, in the  light  of  Qadir,
    that the next step was for the Appellant to have produced  evidence  to
    rebut the assessment of the evidence doubting his dishonesty.

5.   The bare assertion that a person took the test  is  not  sufficient  to
    amount to cogent evidence to displace the inference that there had been
    a proxy test taking by another person.

6.   In the circumstances it is clear that there was no material before  the
    judge to show that the Appellant had got even close to raising evidence
    to give rise to doubts about the Respondent's case.

7.   In  these  circumstances  I  therefore  conclude  that  the  judge  had
    sufficient material on which to form the view that he did and therefore
    made no error of law in terms of evaluating the evidence on  the  file.
    I accept and agree with the view of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    dated 18 November 2006 that there is the appearance of an absence of an
    evidential basis for  the  judge's  decision.   However,  on  a  closer
    scrutiny of the appeal file which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    would not have had the time and documents to do so shows that  in  fact
    there was sufficient evidence to reach the  view  that  the  judge  was
    correct.  There is nothing lodged in support of the appeal  which  goes
    to show anything further about the matter and nothing further about the
    evidence relied on to answer the Respondent's case.

8.   In the circumstances, looking carefully at the grounds, they appear  to
    be no more than a  general  assertion  of  legal  matters  but  do  not
    highlight any evidence that was not or should have been  considered  by
    the judge.

9.   Accordingly I conclude that there was no arguable error of law made  by
    the judge.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 17 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 17 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
