
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2015                        |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                            Mohammed Nezam Uddin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood
For the Respondent:    Mr A Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He was born  on  4  October
    1984.   His  immigration  history  is  set  out  in   detail   in   the
    determination and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal which we adopt and
    do not need to repeat in detail here.

 2. He appeals against the SSHD's decision of 7 April 2014 refusing to vary
    his leave to remain in the UK and to remove him by direction under s.47
    of Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

BACKGROUND

 3. The letter of refusal of 7 April 2014 sets out in  detail  the  grounds
    upon which the decision was reached.  She had also considered the right
    of the Appellant to a family life under Article 8.

 4. The Appellant had taken an English  language  test  through  ETS.   The
    tests carried  out  through  that  institution  were  all  called  into
    question when wide spread  cheating  was  alleged  and  in  some  cases
    proved.  His leave to remain depended, in part, on the validity of  his
    test result.  The SSHD had refused his application to vary his leave.

 5. The Appellant had applied for a Judicial Review which was sealed  by  a
    consent order on 23 December 2014 for three months on  the  basis  that
    his case was be reviewed by the SSHD.

 6. On 28 February 2014  the  SSHD  wrote  to  solicitors  acting  for  the
    Appellant saying that the enquiries into his ETS test were complex  and
    would take longer than three months,  she  offered  an  alternative  to
    waiting for the resolution in that the  Appellant  could  take  another
    test .  He was asked to let the SSHD know the outcome of any  new  test
    and provide the original of a bank statement, only a photocopy had been
    sent with the application and that was not acceptable within the rules,
    by 31 March 2014.

 7. He did not comply with those requirements.  No response was  sent.   In
    fact the Appellant had sat another test on 3rd March 2014  but  he  did
    not inform the SSHD of that fact nor that he was awaiting the  results:
    he passed the test and received a certificate on  9  April  2014.   The
    SSHD wrote on 7 April 2014 refusing the  application  and  giving  full
    reasons for her decision.

 8. The Appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal on  the
    basis that the her decision did not comply with the  Immigration  Rules
    and, in any event, was incompatible with his human rights.  Further  it
    was submitted that the consent order and the offer of the chance to sit
    a new test meant that the SSHD had acted unlawfully in  the  subsequent
    refusal.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a  credible
    witness.  He found that the Appellant's case did not  fall  within  the
    Immigration Rules in any event.

10. The Tribunal found that he had not submitted the original  document  as
    required.  Nor had  he  provided  the  new  test  certificate  or  even
    notified the SSHD that he had done the test and  that  the  certificate
    would be available soon.

11. The Tribunal also found, after careful consideration and analysis, that
    the Appellant's family life would not be prejudiced.  His spouse was  a
    British citizen who came from a Bangladeshi heritage, she spoke Sylheti
    and had visited Bangladesh a number of times.  His child  was  still  a
    baby and had no life outside the immediate family.  Their  family  life
    could continue by their living together in Bangladesh, if they chose to
    move together, and there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  that
    course.

APPEAL

12. On appeal it was submitted that the Appellant had, in  fact,  satisfied
    the Immigration Rules, in that he had sufficient income and savings and
    that the SSJHHD should have accepted the photocopy as proof.  We cannot
    accept  that  submission.   The  requirement  to  prove  his  financial
    suitability remained on the Appellant and was  not  discharged  by  the
    provision of a copy document.  He was, in any  event,  given  a  second
    chance to provide the original in the letter of 26  February  2014  and
    failed to do so within the time permitted.

13. Further it was argued that by her letter of 26 February  2014,  stating
    that her enquiries would not be concluded within three months, the SSHD
    was in breach of the terms of the consent order.  We do not accept that
    submission.  The letter actually gave  the  Appellant  longer  than  he
    would have had under the terms of the consent order.  The SSHD told him
    that her enquiries into the test could not be completed  in  the  three
    months.  If, and it was his choice, he chose not to wait he could  take
    a new test.  That is what he chose to do but he did not comply with the
    requirement to notify the SSHD of the results of the test by  31  March
    2014, more importantly he did not notify her that he had chosen to take
    a new test and the results would not be available until early April.

14. The appeal must fail under the Immigration Rules.

15. It was argued that the appeal should succeed on human  rights  grounds.
    It was submitted that  as  his  spouse  and  child  were  both  British
    subjects it would be unfair to expect them to leave the UK  and  go  to
    live in Bangladesh  if  the  family  was  to  stay  together.   It  was
    submitted that no or no sufficient regard had been given to the child's
    position under s55 of Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    That submission cannot succeed.  The First-tier Tribunal gave  detailed
    reasons setting out a careful consideration of  the  findings  on  this
    point.  The Appellant's wife,  although  British  born,  comes  from  a
    Bangladeshi tradition, she has visited the country a  number  of  times
    and speaks the language.  So much so that she acted as interpreter  for
    the Appellant in the appeal hearing.   His  child  is  also  a  British
    subject but is still an infant and has no life  outside  the  immediate
    family.  It is in the best interest of the child to remain in the  care
    of his mother but there are no insurmountable obstacles to  the  mother
    going to Bangladesh to live  with  her  husband,  if  that's  what  she
    chooses to do.  She has that choice but is not compelled to go.

16. The appeal must also fail on human rights grounds.


Signed   Date 7 May 2015

Mrs Justice McGowan
