
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19458/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 11 August 2015                   |On: 24 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Miss Channa Peter-Gay Durrant
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the  "secretary  of  state"  and  the
    respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The secretary of state  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid, who  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  against  a
    decision of the secretary of state dated  8  April  2014  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain in the UK.

 3. Notice of the hearing, setting out the date, time and place, was  given
    to the claimant at her address on record. There has been no request for
    any  adjournment  of  the  appeal  nor  have  any  reasons  been  given
    explaining the non attendance of the claimant or  her  representatives.
    In the circumstances, I consider that it is in the interests of justice
    to proceed with the appeal.

 4. At the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  both  parties  were
    represented. The Judge was informed at the outset that  the  claimant's
    case was being reviewed by the Home Office. He did not have any  papers
    in the possession of the Home Office. Accordingly it was agreed between
    the parties that the appeal  be  adjourned  pending  a  review  of  the
    claimant's case.

 5. The Judge refused the adjournment so  as  to  'avoid  clogging  up  the
    system'. His action would help the expeditious resolution of cases.

 6. The Judge stated  that  having  regard  to  the  oral  and  documentary
    evidence as well as submissions at his disposal "... I decide this case
    as indicated above and expressly state that, in case  of  a  'negative'
    review of the appellant's case by the Home Office, she can come to  the
    Tribunal. For clarity I must say that,  to  save  any  anxiety  to  the
    appellant, I express my decision as 'Appeal allowed.'"

 7. On 10 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  granted  the
    secretary of state permission to appeal that decision. He  stated  that
    the Judge's conclusions reached in the appeal  were  wholly  inadequate
    and he has given no good reason whatsoever in declining to adjourn  the
    hearing when both parties had agreed to that course of action. Nor  was
    there any indication "whatsoever" on what basis the Judge  allowed  the
    appeal.

 8. At the hearing on 11 August 2015, Mr Melvin relied on the  grounds  set
    out in the application for permission  to  appeal.  He  submitted  that
    there were no cogent or clear reasons for adopting the approach  taken.
    It is therefore unclear on what basis the appeal was allowed. There was
    no indication that the  appeal  is  allowed  on  the  facts  under  the
    immigration rules or the Human Rights Convention,  nor  was  there  any
    indication that the Judge found that the decision appealed against  was
    not in accordance with the law.

 9. The Judge erred in adopting that  approach  "to  somehow  protect"  the
    appellant from any adverse decision upon review. The procedure rules do
    not permit a Judge to act in this way.

10. Mr Melvin requested that if the appeal of the secretary of  state  were
    allowed, there should be a short (30 day) adjournment for the re-making
    of the determination as the preliminary view taken by the secretary  of
    state is that the appellant and her two Jamaican sons will  be  granted
    leave to remain for 30 months in the UK. However, the final process  is
    yet to be completed.

    Assessment

11. I find that the Judge has  allowed  the  appeal  simply  to  avoid  any
    anxiety to the claimant.

12. In the circumstances, it is  unclear  on  what  basis  the  appeal  was
    allowed. I accordingly find that the Judge has materially erred in  law
    by adopting that approach. I accordingly set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13. I accede to Mr Melvin's request for an adjournment of the re-making  of
    the determination on the basis that the secretary of state  is  in  the
    final process of granting the claimant and her two sons leave to remain
    for 30 months in the UK.

14. I accordingly grant the request for an adjournment for one  month  from
    the date of promulgation of this determination.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is set aside.

    List for a CMR after  the  expiry  of  one  month  after  the  date  of
    promulgation of this decision

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed        Date: 20 August 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
