
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19056/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2014                              |On 4 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE PARKER
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                 Nazmul gani

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Q Hassan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant in this appeal is a citizen of Bangladesh.  It is  common
    ground that he was granted further leave to remain as a student  on  20
    July 2013 which leave was valid until 23 March 2014.

 2. On 23 March 2013 he went on holiday to Bangladesh, which  holiday  was,
    we are told, and this does not appear to  be  disputed,  authorised  by
    West Link College, which is the college he was at, and he had been  due
    to return on 12 April 2013.

 3. It appears that he became ill while in Bangladesh and had to cancel his
    return.  It seems that he was worried that because he had  been  absent
    for a period which had not been authorised by his college, he might  be
    in difficulties when he returned because it was certainly possible that
    questions could have been asked on entry as to why he had been away for
    so long when, as a genuine student, he  would  have  been  expected  to
    attend his courses.  Be that as it may, a friend of his, it would seem,
    sent an email to the college to extend his holiday and the  appellant's
    case is that his friend subsequently gave him an envelope stating  that
    the college had extended his holiday.  It transpired  that  the  letter
    that was supposedly sent by the college was not a  genuine  letter  and
    certainly somebody knowingly produced this letter and must  have  known
    that the letter was not a genuine document.  What  the  appellant  says
    occurred was that he did not open this letter until he arrived  at  the
    UK airport on 28 February 2013 and that he did not know until that time
    that the letter was forged.

 4. This letter was quite clearly not genuine and on looking at this letter
    at the airport on arrival the appellant acknowledged that it was not  a
    genuine document, although he claimed that he had had no  part  in  its
    production.  Be that as it may, and for reasons that follow, it is  not
    necessary for us to make any definitive finding as to  whether  or  not
    the appellant was himself a  party  to  the  production  of  the  false
    document.  It cannot be disputed that the document was false.

 5. Because the document was false, the Officer representing the respondent
    at the airport made a decision to curtail the appellant's leave and  to
    refuse to allow him to enter which  was  said  to  be  under  paragraph
    321A(1) and 321A(2) of the Immigration Rules.  The  relevant  parts  of
    these paragraphs provide as follows:

         "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is  to
         be cancelled at port or while the  holder  is  outside  the  United
         Kingdom

         321A.The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave
             to enter or remain which is in force on  his  arrival  in,  or
             whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply:

             (1)  there has been such a change in the circumstances of that
                  person's case since the leave was given, that it should be
                  cancelled; or

             (2)  false representations were made or false  documents  were
                  submitted (whether or not material to the application, and
                  whether or not to the  holder's  knowledge),  or  material
                  facts were not disclosed, in relation to  the  application
                  for leave; or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
                  Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
                  the application...."

 6. The respondent notified the appellant within the decision  letter  that
    future applications would be refused under  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is a  mandatory  ground  of  refusal  and  the
    relevant parts of paragraph 320(7B) provide as follows:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused

         (7B)     where the  applicant  has  previously  breached  the  UK's
             immigration laws (and was 18 or over at the time of  his  most
             recent breach)by:

             ...

             (d)  using Deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain, or in order to obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether successful or not);"

 7. It was the respondent's case that by submitting the forged document  in
    order to mislead the respondent that he had been granted extended leave
    from his college, this Section of the Rules applied.

 8. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul,  sitting  at  Richmond  on  17
    January 2014,  but  in  a  determination  dated  18  January  2014  and
    promulgated on 24 January 2014, Judge Paul  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  He decided that it  was  clear  from  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant had recognised that the  document  was  forged  when  it  was
    opened and that he had made admissions to the  Immigration  Officer  as
    such.  There  was  therefore,  as  he  said  at  paragraph  10  of  his
    determination, no issue that the document was a forgery and accordingly
    the respondent did not have to prove this.  This was  plainly,  in  our
    judgment, correct because it does not matter for these purposes whether
    or not the appellant himself had been party to the issue  of  a  forged
    document.  What is relevant, or would have been relevant if  the  Rules
    applied, is that a forged document, that is a  document  known  by  its
    maker to be false, had been adduced on his behalf.

 9. The appellant appealed against this decision and permission  to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on  12  February  2014.
    In particular, Judge Colyer had in mind the decision of  this  Tribunal
    in Khaliq (Entry clearance - para 321) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00350  in
    which the Tribunal in a determination of the Vice President held that:

         "A person who has entry clearance that under the provisions of  the
         Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000 takes effect  as
         leave to enter does not on arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  'seek'
         leave to enter and paragraph 321 therefore does not apply  to  him.
         Paragraph 321A does but only if the circumstances set out  in  that
         paragraph can be shown to exist in his case."

10. As Judge Colyer noted, the case of Khaliq did not appear to  have  been
    brought to the attention of the judge and  it  was  therefore  arguable
    that his failure to consider this case when considering the  facts  may
    have resulted in an error of law.

11. Before us, on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Hassan  submitted  that
    paragraph 321 was not applicable in the circumstances of this appellant
    because he had not  issued  or  relied  on  any  false  documents  when
    obtaining his leave to remain or leave to enter.  He had  been  granted
    leave to remain initially in Bangladesh and had  been  granted  further
    leave, as  has  already  been  stated  above,  on  20  July  2013.   So
    effectively the use  of  these  documents  was  not  relevant  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 321 of the Rules because they were  not  used  in
    obtaining his leave.

12. On behalf of the respondent Mr  Deller  properly  accepted  that  there
    could be no suggestion that the false document  in  question  had  been
    deployed to obtain leave to enter in this case  because  that  document
    did not exist at that time.  The appellant was  not  seeking  leave  to
    enter because he already had leave.  Following  the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in Khaliq any false representation therefore  did  not  engage
    paragraph 322(1A) but the refusal letter did mention 322(1A)(2) as well
    which was not itself dealt with in Khaliq.

13. The difficulty with this argument, as Mr Deller acknowledged, was  that
    the respondent could not establish that the  production  of  the  false
    document directly led to a variation of leave to enter  or  remain  and
    while the respondent would have been helped if she was able  or  if  Mr
    Deller was able on her behalf to say that the respondent  was  entitled
    to conclude from the production of this document that the appellant was
    not a genuine student (such that it could be said that there had been a
    change in his circumstances), she could not really do so.  Although  it
    was noted that the appellant's current leave expired in two  weeks  and
    he would no doubt be advised as to consequences  were  he  to  overstay
    that current leave, nonetheless, so far as this appeal  was  concerned,
    it could not really  be  properly  argued  following  Khaliq  that  the
    respondent's decision was sustainable.

14. Although false documents had been submitted which was to  be  deplored,
    nonetheless following Khaliq it has to be established that these  false
    documents had contributed to the grant of leave which this document had
    not.   In  our  view,  Mr  Deller  was  correct  to   acknowledge   the
    difficulties in the respondent's case.   For  our  part,  as  the  Vice
    President of this Tribunal did in Khaliq, we deplore the use  of  false
    documents and it may well be that the Rules could have  made  provision
    for circumstances such as this  where  documents  are  put  forward  in
    circumstances where they should not.  However, the fact remains that as
    currently drafted the Rules do not cover  a  situation  such  as  this.
    This appellant had leave to enter.  It was not obtained through the use
    of the false document and  accordingly  neither  paragraph  321(i)  nor
    paragraph 321A(2) of the Rules  applied  to  his  situation.   We  have
    considered whether or not it would have been open to the respondent  to
    take the view that in the circumstances which were that  the  appellant
    had been absent for longer than a genuine student ought to  have  been,
    given the absence of a proper explanation and the submission  of  false
    documents, it could have been said that he was not  a  genuine  student
    and that his circumstances had changed to this effect.  But this is not
    what the respondent stated and that was not the reason, in itself, that
    the  decision  was  taken  to  curtail  the  appellant's  leave.    The
    respondent just decided that in effect  the  production  of  the  false
    document was in itself a change of circumstances and  that  cannot,  in
    itself, be correct.  As Mr Justice Parker stated during the  course  of
    the hearing, there would in any event have been a procedural difficulty
    if this point  had  been  taken  by  the  respondent  because,  if  the
    respondent wished to draw an inference  from  the  appellant's  conduct
    that he was not a genuine student, this should at the very  least  have
    been put to the appellant so that he could have given an answer and the
    answer might very well have been that whatever  the  document  said  he
    nonetheless had a genuine reason for not returning earlier,  which  was
    that he was ill while he was away.

15. In these circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  cannot
    stand but will have to be remade.  It  was  an  error  of  law  in  our
    judgment for the First-tier Tribunal not to have regard to the decision
    in Khaliq and for the reasons  which  we  have  given  we  remake  this
    decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal containing a material error  of
    law  we  set  it  aside  and  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   The
    appellant's appeal is allowed.



Signed:                                 Date: 1 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


