
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19992/2014
                                                               IA/19993/2914
                                                               IA/19994/2014
                                                               IA/19995/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 25th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 dritan caka
                      susana raquel quinteros sanabria
                                    amcq
                                    arcq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss R Moffat, Counsel, instructed by Irvine Thanvi
                    Nata Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The first Appellant is an Albanian citizen,  his  partner,  the  second
    Appellant, is a Bolivian  citizen  and  their  two  children  are  also
    Bolivian citizens. They appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    of 15th April 2014 to refuse their applications for leave to remain  on
    the basis of their private and  family  life  in  the  UK.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants (the children)  under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the appeals of the first  and  second  Appellants
    (the parents) on human rights grounds. The Secretary of  State  appeals
    with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the first Appellant  entered  the
    UK in 1999 illegally. His asylum application was refused that year  and
    his appeal against that decision was dismissed in 2004.  The first  and
    second Appellants met in 2002 in the UK when the second  Appellant  was
    also in the UK unlawfully. Their first child was born  in  April  2003.
    When she was pregnant with their second child the second Appellant  and
    their first child returned to Bolivia for a period of  eighteen  months
    and the fourth Appellant was born there.  The second Appellant and  the
    children returned to  the  UK  on  10th  March  2005  and  all  of  the
    appellants have resided together with in the UK since then.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from  the  first  and
    second Appellants and firstly considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and decided that both the children  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the UK after spending over ten  years  here.   The  judge
    went on to consider the first and  second  appellants  and,  given  his
    finding that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the UK, the judge found that it would be disproportionate to remove the
    first and second Appellants under Article 8 paying particular attention
    to the provisions of Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The Secretary of State challenged that decision. The grounds note  that
    the father's removal directions were set for Albania,  his  country  of
    nationality, and the mother and children's removal directions were  set
    for their country of nationality, being Bolivia. It is  contended  that
    the reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  the  submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing pointed to  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellants obtaining  appropriate  visas  such  that  they  could  live
    together in either Albania or Bolivia.  However,  despite  this  it  is
    contended that the judge proceeded to determine the appeal on the basis
    that the only possible outcome was that the father returned to  Albania
    on his own when the  mother  and  children  went  to  Bolivia.   It  is
    contended that the judge was required to consider  whether  the  family
    could live together in Albania or Bolivia and not simply whether it was
    reasonable for them  to  be  removed  to  separate  countries.   It  is
    contended that, in ignoring this point, the judge  misdirected  himself
    in law and failed to resolve the conflict  of  opinion  on  a  material
    matter.  It is further contended that in considering  276ADE  (1)  (iv)
    the judge erred in finding that the poor  immigration  history  of  the
    family is irrelevant.  The Secretary of State  accepted  that  a  child
    does not need to have been in the UK lawfully in  order  to  meet  this
    Rule but contended that it is clear that the question of reasonableness
    is a holistic exercise that requires the judge to look at  all  factors
    both for and against the Appellant which must necessarily  include  the
    poor immigration history and, in disregarding this weighty  issue,  the
    judge misdirected himself in law in a material way.

Error of Law

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas submitted that it is the Secretary of
    State's position that the family unit can go to Albania or to  Bolivia.
    He also submitted that the immigration status of the  parents  is  very
    much part of the consideration as to whether it is reasonable to expect
    the children to leave the UK. He submitted that the length of time  the
    children have resided in the UK should not be the only factor.

 7. Miss Moffatt relied on her skeleton argument.  In relation to the first
    ground she submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  expressly
    make the finding as to whether the  family  unit  could  live  together
    within Bolivia or Albania following the initial separation upon removal
    but that this submission is not material  to  the  conclusions  on  the
    reasonableness  of  requiring  the  children  to  leave  the  UK.   She
    submitted that the judge was correct to consider the case on the  basis
    that the father would be returned  to  Albania  and  the  other  family
    members to Bolivia because those countries where the removal directions
    were set and it  is  the  only  logical  conclusion  from  the  removal
    directions that the family would be split  as  they  would  be  removed
    separately. She submitted that the  issue  in  relation  to  visas  for
    travel to Albania or Bolivia were  speculative  and  arise  only  after
    removal to different countries.  She submitted it was  therefore  right
    for the judge to find that if they were to be removed the family  would
    be  split.   She  emphasised  that  the  issues  in  relation  to   the
    possibility of obtaining visas to Albania or Bolivia was speculation.

 8. Paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv) provides as follows;

         '276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             ...

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; ...'

 9. In my view it would have been preferable had  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge actively considered the possibility of the family unit living  in
    Albania or Bolivia.  I accept that there is an element  of  speculation
    in terms of the availability of visas for the father to go to  live  in
    Bolivia or for the other family members  to  go  to  live  in  Albania.
    However the judge did hear evidence from the father and the  mother  in
    relation to some enquiries they had  made  about  the  availability  of
    visas although it appeared that no substantive or detailed enquiry  had
    been made.

10. However I take into account Miss Moffatt's submission that the  removal
    directions had been set and that any issue of either party residing  in
    the other's country was a longer term issue which would have had to  be
    considered after removal and to this extent there  was  an  element  of
    speculation involved.

11. In any event, I do not consider that any  error  in  relation  to  this
    issue is material. This is because I accept that paragraphs 25  and  26
    of the decision the judge makes clear that the finding  that  it  would
    not be reasonable for the children to leave the UK was based mainly  on
    the children's integration in the UK,  their  progress  at  school  and
    their length of residence in  the  UK.   The  judge  found  that  their
    removal   would   affect   them   "emotionally,   psychologically   and
    educationally" [26] and it is clear that the judge found that it  would
    not be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK  regardless  of  which
    country they would be removed  to.   Accordingly  I  accept  that   the
    question as to whether the children could live in  Albania  or  Bolivia
    along with both parents was not relevant or  not  material,  given  the
    judge's clear finding that it is not reasonable to expect the  children
    to leave the UK regardless of where they were going.

12. The second ground put forward by the Secretary of State  contends  that
    in considering 276ADE (1) (iv) the judge erred in finding that the poor
    immigration history of the family is irrelevant. However I accept  that
    it was open to the judge to find at paragraph 24 that fault  cannot  be
    attached to the children in relation to their unlawful residence in the
    UK as this was not something over which they had any control.  He noted
    that 'the issue of [the children] living here unlawfully does not arise
    as Parliament has not made a distinction for children under 7 years  as
    to whether they lived here unlawfully'. In my view it was open  to  the
    judge to find that the fact that  the  children  did  not  have  lawful
    residence in the UK did not preclude them from meeting the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1) (iv).  The judge did deal with  the  immigration
    status of the adults at paragraph 29.   The  judge  referred  to  their
    immigration history as 'appalling' and weighed that in the  balance  in
    considering proportionality.  The judge decided,  however,  that  their
    appalling immigration history did not outweigh the  best  interests  of
    the children.  In my opinion  the  judge  did  take  into  account  the
    adverse immigration history of all of the appellants.

13. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge made  no  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

14. The judge made no material error of law. The decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
