
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th November 2014                            |On 13th Nov 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            Melvina Elfreda Gage
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs of Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Gordon.

 2. That the Appellant is a female Nigerian citizen, born 6th July 1960 who
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom, relying upon Article
    8  of  the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights   (the   1950
    Convention).

 3. The application was refused on 16th April 2014 and the Appellant lodged
    an appeal against that decision with the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant in her Notice of Appeal indicated that she wished to have
    her appeal determined on the papers and paid the appropriate fee.   The
    Tribunal on 29th May 2014 issued a notice  to  the  parties  indicating
    that the appeal would be determined without a hearing and if there  was
    any further evidence or submissions,  this  must  be  received  by  the
    Tribunal no later than 26th June 2014.

 5.  Thereafter  the  appeal  was  allocated  to  Judge  Gordon  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 7th July 2014 indicated that a hearing had
    taken place at North Shields Hearing Centre on  25th  June  2014.   The
    determination records that both the Appellant and her daughter attended
    the hearing and gave evidence.  The judge records  that  the  Appellant
    appeared to be very deaf, and the hearing was put back  to  enable  the
    Appellant's daughter to attend.  During the recess  the  Appellant  was
    observed on the telephone, which led the judge to the  conclusion  that
    the Appellant was not as deaf as claimed.   The  determination  records
    that the Appellant's daughter attended the hearing which recommenced at
    11:50am and after hearing evidence, the judge dismissed the appeal.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had made  mistakes  of  fact
    which caused unfairness,  and  amounted  to  errors  of  law.   It  was
    contended that neither the Appellant  nor  her  daughter  attended  the
    hearing in North Shields, and that the Appellant had requested that the
    appeal be determined on the papers.  The judge had  recorded  that  the
    Appellant had only recently started living with her daughter, and  that
    previously the daughter was claiming NASS support.   It  was  contended
    that the Appellant had always lived with  her  daughter  and  that  the
    daughter had never received NASS support.  The judge recorded that  the
    Appellant was working as a nanny, whereas the Appellant had never  been
    in a position where she could work in the United Kingdom, and had never
    had any such employment.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Frankish who recorded in paragraph 3 of his decision;

         "3.  If the application is correct, something has gone  very  wrong
             in this case.  The application asserts that this was  a  paper
             appeal and the daughter has never claimed NASS  support.   The
             determination (paragraph 4) records:
             (a)  putting the case  back  to  give  the  daughter  time  to
                  arrive, which she did;
             (b)  the Appellant pretending to be deaf but being caught  out
                  by the usher who observed her on the telephone;
             (c)  the daughter being in receipt of NASS support before  the
                  Appellant recently moved in with her.   The  discrepancies
                  indicate an arguable error of law."

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 indicating that the application for permission to appeal  was  not
    opposed.

 9. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Respondent's Submissions

10. Mr Melvin relied upon  the  rule  24  response,  and  stated  that  the
    Respondent's file indicated that there had been no  oral  hearing.   If
    the decision was set aside, Mr Melvin did not object if the appeal  was
    remitted to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant's Submissions

11. Mr Jacobs submitted that it was clear that a material error of law  had
    occurred.  Both the Appellant  and  her  daughter  attended  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing and had confirmed to  Mr  Jacobs  that  they  did  not
    attend any hearing before the First-tier Tribunal at the North  Shields
    Hearing Centre.

12. Mr Jacobs submitted that the judge was therefore clearly  in  error  in
    making reference to the Appellant and her daughter giving  evidence  as
    neither  had  done  so,  and  the  evidence  did  not  relate  to  this
    Appellant's case.

13. Mr Jacobs submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should
    be set aside  and  remitted  to  be  heard  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. I conclude that Judge Gordon has made a mistake of fact in stating that
    the Appellant and her daughter attended North Shields Hearing Centre to
    give  evidence,  and  the  evidence  given  did  not  relate  to   this
    Appellant's case.  I am satisfied that this amounts to an error of law.



15. My reasons for reaching this conclusion are that there is no Record  of
    Proceedings on the Tribunal file to indicate that an oral hearing  took
    place.  The Tribunal  records  indicate  that  the  appeal  was  to  be
    determined on the papers.  The Tribunal did not send out  a  notice  of
    hearing to the Appellant  and  therefore  there  is  no  way  that  the
    Appellant could have known when a  hearing  was  to  take  place.   The
    Tribunal sent a notice to the parties dated 29th May 2014 stating  that
    the appeal would be determined  on  the  papers  as  requested  by  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant paid the fee appropriate for an appeal to  be
    determined on the papers and did not pay a fee for an oral hearing.

16. I am therefore satisfied that the Appellant did request that her appeal
    be determined on the papers, and that neither  the  Appellant  nor  her
    daughter attended a hearing at North Shields  Hearing  Centre  on  25th
    June 2014.

17. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with  no  findings
    preserved.

18. I decided that it was appropriate to remit  this  appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.  In making this decision I
    took into account the Senior President's Practice Statement  7.2  which
    states;

         "7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:
             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal."

19. In  my  view  the  requirements  of  paragraph  7.2(a)  are  met.   The
    Appellant's case has not been properly  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

20. Mr Jacobs indicated that  the  Appellant  wished  to  have  her  appeal
    determined at an oral hearing, and a  hearing  date  was  allocated  at
    Taylor House Hearing Centre on 16th April 2015 at 10am.  This is on the
    understanding that the Appellant pays the appropriate fee for  an  oral
    hearing.  This should be done  by  the  Appellant  forthwith.   If  the
    appropriate fee is not paid, then the appeal will be determined on  the
    papers.  The appeal is to be heard by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other
    than Judge Gordon.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity order was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been  no
request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and no anonymity order is  made.



Signed                              Date 10th November 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date 10th November 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
