
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th May 2014                               |On 13th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                irfan JAVAID

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stevenson, Counsel, instructed by McGill & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13th October 1985.

2.   The appellant sought the issue of a residence card in  accordance  with
    the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 on the basis that he was the spouse of an EEA  citizen  exercising
    her treaty rights.

3.   On 2nd June 2013 the respondent refused to issue  such  a  registration
    card because the respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights as a worker.

4.   In support of the contention that  his  wife  had  been  working,  wage
    slips for the period 9th December 2012 to  20th  January  2013  and  an
    employer's letter dated 7th March 2013 from the employer Nadeem  Ashraf
    of Newbridge Post Office, 64 Bridge Street, Edinburgh were produced.

5.   The respondent in the refusal said as follows:-

         "Upon assessing the wage slips and employer letter the Secretary of
         State has undertaken various checks to verify the  employment,  but
         has been unable to do so for the following reason:


         On 11th April 2013 a telephone call was made to  the  employer  who
         confirmed that your EEA family member  had  never  worked  for  the
         company.


         On contacting the manager of Newbridge Post Office, this department
         was informed that your EEA  sponsor,  Malvina  Arlauskaite  is  not
         employed by them.  On the basis of this evidence,  this  department
         must therefore conclude that the documentary evidence of employment
         of your EEA sponsor that you provided with  this  application  must
         not be genuine and therefore inadmissible in evidence."


6.   A further matter was noted as follows:

         "In addition it is noted that the  council  tax  notice  dated  7th
         December 2012 evidences that the property  1  (1F2)  Loganlea  Loan
         Edinburgh, EH7 6NH currently receives a  single  occupancy  council
         tax discount which evidences that either the discount  is  obtained
         fraudulently or that you  are  not  resident  at  this  address  as
         claimed in your application."


    Due therefore to that evidence  and  the  lack  of  evidence  of  joint
    occupancy the application was refused.


7.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie on 29th January 2014.

8.   The Judge looked at two sets of documents.  The first set of  documents
    was the material presented in support of working in the Newbridge  Post
    Office, in particular of the letter dated 7th March 2013  and  payslips
    in respect of that employment.
9.   The Judge noted that the employer was a relative of the  appellant  and
    was concerned as to the content of the telephone call which was  relied
    upon by the respondent.  The payslips were totally pristine, which  was
    also a matter of concern to the Judge.   The  sponsor  also  sought  to
    indicate that she had been working for a period of  time  with  another
    company.  She produced a contract of employment which was  unsigned  by
    either party and payslips for the period 6th October to  10th  November
    2013.  These payslips were found also  to  be  in  pristine  condition,
    apart from all having been folded in exactly the same place.

10.  For the reasons as set out the Judge did not find that the sponsor  was
    employed as claimed in either capacity and therefore that there was  no
    evidence that she was a worker.

11.  Grounds of appeal were submitted  against  that  decision,  essentially
    complaining that the Judge had placed the  burden  of  proof  upon  the
    appellant rather than upon the respondent.  It was contended  that  the
    refusal letter itself was not evidence  and  that  the  respondent  had
    provided  no  additional  evidence  or  documentation  to  support  the
    contention in the refusal letter.  It was argued  that  the  Judge  had
    afforded inappropriate weight to the evidence from the  respondent  and
    not enough weight or consideration to the evidence as presented by  the
    appellant and sponsor.  Leave to appeal was granted on this matter  and
    the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

12.  Mr Stevenson, who represents the appellant before me, also  represented
    the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Mr Stevenson's first
    submission was that the allegation  contained  in  the  refusal  letter
    amounted to an allegation  of  fraud  or  dishonesty  as  such  was  an
    allegation  which  fell  to  be  justified  by  the  respondent.    The
    principles set out in AA Nigeria noted the higher  standard  of  proof.
    He submitted  that  all  that  was  contained  in  the  letter  was  an
    allegation and no evidence had  been  produced  by  the  respondent  to
    justify its accuracy or truthfulness.  It was submitted that the  Judge
    was in error in considering that it was for the  appellant  to  produce
    evidence to disprove that allegation.  Mr Stevenson also  submits  that
    it was an  allegation  which  was  impossible  to  deal  with,  thereby
    prejudicing the appellant still further.

13.  It seems to  me  that  Mr  Stevenson  seeks  to  place  matters  on  an
    altogether  unrealistic  evidential  basis.   In   the   decision   the
    respondent clearly indicates what  enquiries  were  made  to  ascertain
    whether or not the sponsor worked as claimed.  As it  was  a  statement
    adverse to the interests  of  the  appellant,  clearly  it  had  to  be
    established the higher standard on the balance of probabilities.   That
    having been done the burden then fell to the appellant to deal with the
    issue.

14.  Far from being  prejudiced  in  the  presentation  of  the  appeal  the
    appellant and his legal representatives had had from 2nd June  2013  to
    29th January 2014 to have sought clarification of  that  statement.   A
    request could have been made of the respondent for further  and  better
    particulars of that telephone call, particularly the name of the person
    that was spoken to in that call.

15.  It is common ground that the appellant's uncle Nadeem Ashraf owned  the
    Newbridge Post Office.  It was the evidence of the appellant's wife, as
    set out in paragraph 14 of the determination, that she had been working
    for that uncle having been offered temporary work  over  the  Christmas
    period.  She worked from November 2012 to March 2013.  Her evidence, as
    recorded in the determination, is that she worked for  the  appellant's
    uncle in the evenings so that it was possible that the employee who was
    spoken to did not know her.  In addition the post  office  is  separate
    from the shop.  All that was needed of course was  to  request  further
    details from the respondent as to  the  name  of  the  person  who  had
    answered the telephone call.

16.  Whether or  not  there  was  a  distinction  to  be  made  between  the
    "employer" or the "manager" is far from clear.  It is a matter  however
    that could have been clarified with ease by the appellant, particularly
    if the uncle had been called to give evidence as to his knowledge of or
    response to the telephone call.  It was clear that on 11th  April  2013
    the sponsor was no longer working at that post office.   The  issue  is
    however whether the statement "employer who  confirmed  that  your  EEA
    family member had  never  worked  for  the  company"  was  accurate  or
    inaccurate.

17.  A letter was indeed produced  from  the  uncle  dated  7th  March  2013
    confirming that the sponsor  had  been  employed  with  Newbridge  Post
    Office since 3rd December  2012,  holding  the  title  of  post  office
    assistant and working on a part-time basis of sixteen hours  per  week.
    It would have been open to that witness to have dealt with the issue of
    the telephone call.  The letter is silent on that point.

18.  As I indicated to Mr Stevenson it was not a situation of the  appellant
    being taken by surprise of developments at  the  hearing.   There  were
    months during which the allegation of the  telephone  call  could  have
    been dealt with.  Given the centrality of the  telephone  call  to  the
    issue of credibility it is perhaps surprising that the  uncle  did  not
    deal with that matter when he was asked to deal with others.

19.  Within the context of that telephone call it is understandable why  the
    Judge was concerned simply not to accept  the  wage  slips  upon  their
    face.  For the Judge the pristine condition of those wage slips  was  a
    matter of concern.

20.  Where the pristine quality of the payslips to stand by themselves  then
    arguably that is not a particularly cogent reason for  rejecting  them.
    For my part, having looked at those  wage  slips,  there  is  something
    curious about them in the sense that there seems to be little  evidence
    of any national insurance payments made by  the  employer  or  any  tax
    being charged.  Such a situation stands in contrast to those that  were
    produced relating to the claimed work for Industrious which  seemed  to
    have the hallmarks of normality about them.

21.  It seems, however, and I so find that the Judge was  entitled  to  look
    at the whole context of that working in deciding  whether  or  not  the
    wage slips could properly be regarded as a truthful statement  of  that
    which they purport to represent.

22.  As I indicated to Mr Stevenson, perhaps the more important issue to  be
    considered is whether or not, in  looking  at  the  evidence  that  was
    presented, the Judge was unduly influenced by the telephone call as  to
    wrongly reject all the evidence, indeed whether the Judge  had  imposed
    an unduly high standard and  burden  upon  the  appellant  in  all  the
    circumstances.

23.  Mr Stevenson invited me to find that the evidence relating to the  work
    for Industrious should have stood on its own and was compelling in  its
    nature.  Not only was there a contract of employment but also  numerous
    payslips which seem in their form and substance to be entirely  normal.
    He invited me to find that the Judge in rejecting those matters did  so
    wrongly or unfairly in the circumstances.

24.  It seems to me however that the Judge was entitled  to  look  at  those
    documents in the overall context of the other documents that  had  been
    presented.  The contract of employment had not  been  signed  by  other
    parties.  Once again as time had elapsed from the issue of the  reasons
    for refusal letter, highlighting the concerns of the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department, it would not have  been  difficult  either  to
    obtain the signed copy of the agreement or  indeed  to  have  had  some
    letter confirming the agreement or employment  by  the  employer.   The
    Judge  considered  that  those  wage  slips  were  all   pristine   but
    significantly were  folded  in  exactly  the  same  place.   The  Judge
    commented in paragraph 25 as follows "given my concerns relative to the
    contract and payslips, again I did not accept that the appellant's wife
    had demonstrated, on the balance of probabilities, that she worked  for
    Industrious."  The Judge considered that  the  contract  of  employment
    lacked evidential value because it was unsigned by either party.

25.  Mr Mullen, who represents the respondent, invited me to find  that  the
    Judge had properly considered all the evidence and that the  Judge  was
    entitled to raise her concerns as to the  nature  and  quality  of  the
    documents that had been presented, particularly in  the  light  of  the
    fact that the appellant's credibility was to some  extent  impugned  by
    the evidence of the telephone call.

26.  The  sponsor  had  indicated  that  she  had  worked  previously  in  a
    restaurant but no evidence had been adduced in relation to that matter.
     Standing by themselves I do not consider that the  pristine  condition
    of the payslips was a significant feature but taken together  with  the
    contextual concerns that have been expressed, in particular the lack of
    any response to the allegation that was made when such  response  could
    have been made, I find that the conclusions of the Judge were  properly
    open to be made.   I  do  not  find  therefore  that  an  inappropriate
    standard and burden of proof was applied in this case.  I  consequently
    do not find there to be any error of law.

27.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.  The original decision shall stand namely that the appeal in
    respect of the EEA Regulations is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

