
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19124/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd November 2016                |On 23rd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SANTOKH RAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bramall (instructed by S & S Immigration Law)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth
    sitting at Nottingham on 18th April 2016.

 2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I will,  in  this  decision,
    continue to refer to Mr Ram as the Appellant and the Secretary of State
    as the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of India. He had applied for leave to remain
    in the UK on the basis of his private and family life. His  application
    was refused in a decision dated 11th  May  2015.  In  the  refusal  the
    Secretary of State noted that the Appellant had no children and so  far
    as his relationship with his settled partner was concerned  found  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles preventing family life with  her
    continuing in India.

 4. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and his British  wife.  The
    Appellant had come to the UK in 2001  on  a  false  passport.  When  he
    married his wife it was only at that stage that he informed her he  had
    no status in the UK. The Appellant's wife has a  12-year-old  son  from
    her previous marriage who, under the terms  of  a  Family  Court  order
    lives with her former husband but with whom she has staying contact  on
    alternate weekends.

 5. After hearing both witnesses and submissions the Judge found  that  the
    Appellant and his wife were in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    and found it in the  12-year-old  child's  best  interest  to  maintain
    contact  with  his  mother.  On  that  basis  he  found  there  to   be
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in India between the
    Appellant and his wife and found that they met the requirements of Ex.1
    (b) and allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  arguing  that
    the Judge had misapplied the provisions of Ex.1 as the  child  was  not
    the son of the Appellant but of the sponsor and her former husband  and
    that he lived with the former husband.

 7. That ground is misconceived as that is not the  basis  upon  which  the
    Judge allowed the appeal. Reading the Decision and Reasons as  a  whole
    it is quite clear that in taking the best interests of the  child  into
    account it was in relation to his relationship with his mother  if  his
    mother were to relocate to India. The Judge did not allow the appeal on
    the base of Ex.1 (a) but Ex.1 (b).

 8. The grounds also suggest that the Judge erred by deciding  for  himself
    where the best interests of the child lay. That is not an error  as  it
    is now trite law that the  Tribunal,  if  it  has  sufficient  evidence
    before it, is able to make that assessment and it is not  necessary  to
    remit the matter to the  Secretary  of  State  for  section  55  to  be
    considered. Furthermore, there were Family Court orders  in  this  case
    and it has now been made clear by the case of Makhlouf [2016] UK SCE 59
    that the Tribunal is  entitled  to  rely  on  Family  Court  orders  in
    determining where the best interests of children lie.  The Family Court
    must  treat  the  best  interests  of  the  child  as   the   paramount
    consideration and if it has made an order it is because  the  terms  of
    the order are in the child's best interests.

 9. The grounds further go on to suggest that the Tribunal failed  to  have
    regard to the Appellant's immigration status and his method of entry to
    the UK. However,  if  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which he does in this case, that is  irrelevant.  He
    meets the requirements of R-LTR P.1.1 (a), (b) and (d). On the  Judge's
    findings (not challenged by the Secretary of State) the  Appellant  was
    entitled to  succeed  in  the  appeal  and  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    therefore contains no error of law.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22nd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



The first-tier Tribunal did not consider it appropriate to make a fee  award
and I agree with the  judges  reasoning.  I  therefore  make  no  fee  award
either.


Signed   Date 22nd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

