
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Iryna Labuzava
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Yeo of Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Lawrence promulgated on 24th April 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Belarusian citizen born 15th May 1975  who  on
    1st September 2010 was granted a multiple entry visit visa valid  until
    1st September 2015.

 4. She entered the United Kingdom on 6th May 2012, and was  granted  leave
    to remain until 6th November 2012.

 5. On 8th August 2012 the Claimant applied for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of her relationship with her  partner  Alan
    Frederick William Bowes-Hindle, the Baron of Kendal, to  whom  I  shall
    refer as the Sponsor.

 6. The Claimant and Sponsor married in the  United  Kingdom  on  7th  June
    2013.

 7. The application for leave to remain was refused on 10th May 2013.   The
    reason given for refusing the application under the  Immigration  Rules
    was that the Claimant did not satisfy paragraph E-LTRP.2.1 of  Appendix
    FM which states that an applicant for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom must not be in the United Kingdom as a visitor.

 8. The Respondent considered paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  although  it
    would appear that the Claimant was not entitled to benefit  under  this
    provision, as she was in the United Kingdom as a visitor.  In any event
    the Respondent accepted that the Claimant  was  married  to  a  British
    citizen but decided that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the United Kingdom.

 9. The Respondent also considered  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which sets out the requirements for  leave  to  remain  based  on
    private life, and found that the Claimant did not satisfy the  criteria
    set out in this paragraph.

10. The Claimant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Judge  Lawrence
    (the judge) heard  the  appeal  on  11th  April  2014.   After  hearing
    evidence from the Claimant  and  Sponsor,  the  judge  found  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  could  not  be  satisfied,  but
    allowed the appeal with reference to Article 8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950   Convention)   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

11. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    considering Article 8.  He had not had regard to the Immigration Rules,
    which  meant  that  his  subsequent  proportionality   assessment   was
    unsustainable.

12. Reliance was placed upon MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).   It  was
    contended  that  Article  8  should  only  be  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules if there are compelling circumstances not  recognised
    by the rules, and an  appeal  should  only  be  allowed  if  there  are
    exceptional circumstances, which are circumstances where refusal  would
    lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

13. It was submitted that the judge had failed to provide adequate  reasons
    why  he  found  the  Claimant's  circumstances  to  be  compelling   or
    exceptional.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McDade who found the grounds arguable.

15. Following the grant of permission a response was lodged  on  behalf  of
    the Claimant pursuant to rule  24  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending that the terms on which the appeal  was
    allowed would permit the case to  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and it was highly relevant to  proportionality  that
    the case would now succeed under the new rules.

16. It was contended that the judge had  given  detailed  reasons  why  the
    couple could not  relocate  to  Belarus  and  why  they  could  not  be
    temporarily separated.

17. it was contended that adequate reasons aspect of the challenge does not
    amount to an error of law challenge, and is merely a disagreement  with
    factual findings.  The judge had given sufficient reasons.

18. It was denied that Gulshan was authority for the proposition that there
    must be compelling circumstances before human rights  were  considered,
    as a judge could not consider whether there are circumstances such that
    an appeal might succeed on  human  rights  grounds  before  considering
    human rights issues.

19. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

20. Mr Parkinson relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.  He submitted that  although  the  judge  had
    referred to case law, he had relied  on  case  law  that  predated  the
    changes to the Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012, and  the  judge  had
    not given adequate reasons  why  there  were  compelling  circumstances
    which meant that the Claimant was entitled to make an  application  for
    leave to remain from the  United  Kingdom,  rather  than  returning  to
    Belarus to make the application.  Mr Parkinson  pointed  out  that  the
    Claimant had a multi-visit visa, therefore if she returned  to  Belarus
    the separation from the Sponsor would  be  brief.   Mr  Parkinson  also
    pointed out that the Sponsor had very substantial financial assets, and
    he would be able to pay for care during the Claimant's absence.

The Claimant's Submissions

21. Mr Yeo relied upon his rule 24 response, contending  that  the  grounds
    amounted to a disagreement with the findings made by the judge and  did
    not disclose an error of law.  I was asked to note that  there  was  no
    contention that the findings made by  the  judge  were  perverse.   The
    judge had given reasons for finding insurmountable obstacles existed to
    family life being carried on  abroad,  and  the  judge  had  taken  all
    relevant circumstances into account.

22. Mr Yeo submitted that cases such as Chickwamba, Hayat,  and  Zhang,  to
    which the judge had referred, were still good  law  and  there  was  no
    reason to think that  the  force  of  these  judgments  had  diminished
    because of the introduction of new Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012.

23. Mr Yeo submitted that paragraph 3 of the grounds contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal was incorrect, as  the  judge  had
    identified compelling circumstances and  had  taken  into  account  the
    unusual facts of this case, and the Sponsor's medical history.

The Secretary of State's Response

24. Mr Parkinson argued that the judge had given no reasons why the Sponsor
    could not hire care during the Claimant's absence when she applied  for
    entry clearance from abroad.

25. Mr Parkinson submitted that if Chikwamba, Hayat and Zhang were still to
    be followed, the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) would not have  stated
    that compelling or exceptional circumstances were required to  consider
    Article 8 outside the rules.

26. Mr Yeo interjected to point out that the issue of  the  Sponsor  hiring
    care had never been raised in the refusal letter and was not raised  at
    the hearing before the judge therefore it would not  be  reasonable  to
    find an error of law on something that had not been argued  before  the
    judge.

27. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

28. Having read the determination as a whole I conclude that the judge  did
    consider the Immigration Rules, before moving on to consider Article  8
    outside those rules.

29. The judge set out in paragraph 4 of his determination, the  rules  that
    had been considered in refusing the application.  In paragraph  20  the
    judge recorded that there was no dispute that the Claimant did not meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and therefore he  needed  to
    consider whether he should consider Article 8 outside the rules.  In my
    view the judge does not err on this point.  There was only  one  reason
    given by the Secretary of State for the Claimant not  succeeding  under
    the Immigration Rules, and that was  because  she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  It was not contended that she could not  satisfy
    the English language requirements or financial requirements.

30. The judge considered the case law referred to by the Secretary of State
    in the grounds contained  within  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal and recognised and set out what was stated in paragraph 24(b) of
    Gulshan which is set out below;

         "(b) after applying the requirements of the rules,  only  if  there
             may arguably be good grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
             outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on
             to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
             sufficiently recognised under them: Nagre;"

31. At paragraph 22 the judge refers to 'insurmountable  obstacles',  which
    is referred to in EX.1 of Appendix FM,  and  was  referred  to  in  the
    Respondent's refusal letter.  The judge makes a finding that there  are
    'insurmountable obstacles' in the Claimant either going alone  or  with
    the Sponsor to Belarus, to make an application for entry  clearance  to
    enable the Claimant to return to the United Kingdom  as  the  Sponsor's
    wife.

32. The judge gave reasons for this finding, which in effect is  a  finding
    that there are compelling circumstances not recognised under the rules,
    in paragraphs 24-26 of the  determination.   These  reasons  should  be
    considered in conjunction with the Sponsor's medical history  which  is
    set out in paragraphs 13-18 of the determination.

33. It is clear that the judge found the  Sponsor's  medical  condition  to
    amount to compelling or exceptional circumstances, taken together  with
    the fact that there was no  dispute  the  Claimant  could  satisfy  the
    English  language  requirement  and  financial  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The only aspect of the rules not satisfied  by  the
    Claimant, was the fact that she was in the United Kingdom as a  visitor
    when she made her application for  leave  to  remain.   The  judge  has
    therefore given reasons for his findings and in my  view  has  complied
    with the duty to give reasons set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons
    - set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  and  I  set  out  below  the  first
    paragraph of the head note to that decision;

         "(1) Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of
             the conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material
             accepted by the judge."

34. The judge has given reasons for his findings.  It may be the case  that
    other judges would not have reached the same conclusion,  but  that  is
    not the issue.  I find that the judge considered the Immigration  Rules
    before considering Article 8 outside the rules, and made findings  that
    compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  existed  which   were   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules, and gave adequate reasons  for
    those findings.  The grounds submitted by the Secretary of State amount
    to a disagreement with the findings made by the judge, but they do  not
    disclose an error of law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.



Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date 23rd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed                              Date 23rd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




