

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19022/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8th December 2014                     |On 11th December 2014     |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                          MS MUDIRAT OLATUNDUN OGUN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Appellant.


    2.   The Appellant had applied to the Secretary of State for  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules  on  the
         basis of her private life in the UK.


    3.   Judge Raymond in the First-tier Tribunal dealt with  the  case  on
         the  papers  and  promulgated  his  decision  on  4th  August  2014
         dismissing the appeal.


    4.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal who said that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge had erred in his findings.


    5.   I find it difficult to see any  justification  for  permission  to
         appeal being granted in this case. The Secretary of  State  refused
         the application on the basis that the Appellant did  not  meet  the
         private life requirements provided for in Rule 276ADE.  So  far  as
         family life was concerned no evidence was submitted with regard  to
         that; rather she had indicated that  she  wished  to  continue  her
         employment and volunteer teaching in the  UK  and  also  wished  to
         pursue IVF treatment.


    6.   The Appellant sought legal advice and was represented initially by
         Lei Dat and  Baig,  Solicitors.  She  lodged  a  notice  of  appeal
         choosing to pay the fee for a paper consideration rather  than  the
         higher fee required for an oral hearing. She  then,  in  accordance
         with directions, again through her solicitors lodged  a  bundle  of
         evidence which she relied upon.


    7.   When  dealing  with  the  appeal  the  Judge  noted  a  number  of
         difficulties in the evidence. In particular, the fact that her  now
         claimed relationship with a partner involved with her  in  her  IVF
         treatment  had  not  been  mentioned  at  all   in   her   original
         application. The medical evidence concerning medical treatment  for
         infertility  and  the  possibility  of  IVF  was  contradictory  in
         relation to the existence or otherwise of a partner. There  was  no
         evidence that the Appellant was in a financial position to fund IVF
         treatment. There was extremely thin evidence  of  the  relationship
         itself and her witnesses made no mention of it.


    8.   Unsurprisingly, on the basis of the meagre amount of  evidence  in
         front of him the Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant was  in
         the claimed relationship nor that she was in  a  position  to  self
         fund IVF treatment and dismissed the appeal.


    9.   When an Appellant chooses and pays for an appeal to be dealt  with
         on the papers then that is what they should expect. It is up to  an
         Appellant, and in this case she was represented  at  the  time,  to
         submit  sufficient  evidence  to  ensure  the  desired  result   is
         achieved. A judge can only decide an appeal on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence that an Appellant chooses to put before him.  In this case
         it was wholly inadequate. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not an
         opportunity to put right the shortcomings in  the  original  appeal
         and indeed the Upper Tribunal only has jurisdiction  to  deal  with
         the matter if it is  established  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision is tainted by an error of law. In this case it was not.


    10.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






    Signed                 Dated 9th December 2014

          Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
