
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/19912/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/19904/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 29th July 2014                               |on 1st August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               MOZAFFAR SABERI
                             Reban HABIBI MARAND
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mr Byrne, Advocate, instructed by McGill & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No order for anonymity requested or made.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are husband and wife, citizens of Iran, aged 79  and  69
    at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Their appeals  against
    removal were brought on the basis of  their  family  and  private  life
    interests.  By determination promulgated on 28th  January  2014  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Hutchinson  dismissed  their  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR outwith the Rules.

Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

         1.   The judge made a material error of law at paragraph 27 ...  by
             making the following finding:

               I find that family life for the purposes of  Article  8  does
             not exist.  The appeal therefore fails.

             While it was open to the judge to find that ties between adult
             appellants and their adult children did not go  beyond  normal
             emotional ties and did  not  establish  family  life  for  the
             purposes of Article 8 the judge erred by concluding  that  the
             appeal must therefore fail ...  Failure ... to  establish  ...
             family life cannot be equated  to  failure  to  establish  ...
             private life.  The test for existence of private life is  low:
             AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 ...

         2.   The judge erred in law by failing  to  make  findings  on  the
             existence of private life for the purposes of Article 8.   The
             judge failed to give reasons why she did not consider there to
             be a private life.  While the judge did express a view on  the
             general Article 8 proportionality assessment, this was done in
             the alternative, and after the  judge  had  already  concluded
             that the appeal must fail as a consequence of  her  conclusion
             that family life did not exist.

         3.   Private life encompasses several factors beyond  family  life,
             such as physical or  psychological  integrity.   Private  life
             extends to features integral to a person's identity or ability
             to function socially as a person.  The judge materially  erred
             by failing to give consideration to these factors.

Submissions for appellants (written and oral).

 2. There was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (although  indirectly;  the
    citations are in the written argument) reference to case  law  (derived
    ultimately from the European Court of Human Rights) to the effect  that
    in  practice  the  factors  to  be  examined   in   order   to   assess
    proportionality are the same regardless of whether  family  or  private
    life is engaged.  The threshold of engagement  for  Article  8  is  not
    high.  The First-tier  Tribunal  went  wrong  by  failing  to  consider
    private life either as a matter of form  or  in  substance,  making  no
    findings whatsoever on whether private life would be  interfered  with.
    A  fresh  hearing  was  needed,  because  the  circumstances  -  family
    including grandchildren all in  the  UK,  levels  of  dependency,  ill-
    health, ability to provide privately for care, grandchildren, old  age,
    long connection to the UK - required findings which could not  be  made
    "by reference only to the papers; assessment of  the  interference  was
    not the focus of the FtT, it does not loom in the determination at all,
    and the evidence was (quite properly) reduced in a  determination  from
    the larger hearing."

 3. Mr Byrne sought to introduce further grounds of appeal.  Ground 2(a) is
    failure to have regard to the positive obligation on the State to  take
    account of future development of private and family  life.   The  first
    appellant's dependency on his wider family  would  increase  with  age.
    Reference was made to ZB (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ  834  (and  through
    that case to other jurisprudence) on the positive duty  on  contracting
    states to show respect for family life.  The FtT failed  to  take  that
    duty into account in form or in substance.  Ground 2(b) is that the FtT
    erred by failing to take into account  that  the  first  appellant  had
    granted power  of  attorney  to  his  daughter,  as  mentioned  in  his
    statement at paragraph 4.  That constituted  a  legal  relationship  of
    dependency.  Ground 3 is that (also on the authority  of  ZB)  the  FtT
    erred by failing to have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  appellants'
    "entire family lived in the UK and comprised British citizens."

 4. The findings  in  the  determination  reached  in  the  alternative  at
    paragraph 28 onwards could not save the errors made, because everything
    said there was obiter and came on the back of the faulty  finding  that
    non-existence of family life was the end of  the  case.   The  Tribunal
    should have gone on from that point to see whether private life  issues
    arose, to analyse the relevant factors and reach a conclusion.  Lack of
    such analysis could not be put right in the Upper Tribunal, but  should
    be by way of remit to the First-tier Tribunal for full rehearing.

 5. Mr Byrne accepted that the point about a positive  obligation  at  2(a)
    was not made in the First-tier Tribunal, but he argued that it  was  an
    obvious one.  That the first appellant's age  and  relative  ill-health
    would increase dependency was something which should leap  out  to  the
    decision maker.  As to 2(b), even if the  power  of  attorney  was  not
    relied upon in argument it was put in evidence and the point was  there
    to be picked up.

 6. The evidence made it clear that there was  no  prospect  of  the  wider
    family relocating to Iran.  The appellant's daughter  had  tried  that.
    Difficulties regarding her autistic child led  the  family  to  return.
    The determination for all intents and purposes came to an  end  at  the
    finding of  no  family  life  and  could  not  be  saved  by  the  esto
    consideration which followed.

Submissions for Respondent.

 7. None of the aspects of the appellant's private life were  ignored.   It
    was inescapable from their statements and from the whole evidence  that
    family and private life elements were inseparable.  All  matters  going
    to private life involved the appellants' relatives.  It was plain  that
    they are here because of their family.  The judge at  paragraph  2  set
    out the private life requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  paragraph
    276ADE, as one of the main issues  in  the  case.   She  rehearsed  all
    relevant factors before coming to her first  conclusion  regarding  the
    existence of family life.  Reaching her final conclusion  at  paragraph
    37 in relation to the Rules, she referred again to their  private  life
    element.  She was plainly aware that the Rules provide for  private  as
    well as family life cases.  If paragraph 27 showed error,  it  was  not
    material.   The  determination  both  before  and  after  that  finding
    revolved around the overall circumstances of the appellants.  They  had
    not presented their case as two sets of  circumstances,  one  going  to
    private and one to family life, but as a whole.  The new  grounds  came
    too late and should not be  admitted.   As  to  their  merits,  factors
    relating to the first appellant's age were obvious  to  the  judge  and
    were rehearsed eg at paragraphs 18 and 19.  The appellants own property
    both in Edinburgh and Iran, and have granted  power  of  attorney  only
    regarding the property in Iran.  The power of attorney was mentioned in
    one of the statements  but  was  not  relied  upon  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as a point of significance.  In any event it does not prove an
    element of dependency. As to ground 3, the overall family circumstances
    were plainly at the forefront of the judge's mind.  There was no  error
    such as to require the determination to be set aside.

 8. If a fresh decision were needed, the primary facts were not in dispute.
     There was  no  need  to  remit.   The  Upper  Tribunal  should  simply
    substitute its own view.

Reply for Appellants.

 9. In response to the argument that the judge set  out  all  the  relevant
    factors at paragraph 16 to 23,  Mr  Byrne  said  that  these  were  all
    directed to whether there were more than ordinary emotional ties  among
    adult family members.  Whether or not that was precisely the right test
    was not currently relevant.  Those paragraphs gave the reasons for  the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 27, which was legally erroneous.   They
    did not constitute a complete  assessment  of  all  the  facts  on  the
    correct approach to proportionality, but were focused on a  narrow  and
    insufficient question.  Therefore, the error could be put right only by
    an entirely fresh decision.  The determination could not  be  saved  by
    showing that private life had been considered by  circuitous  reference
    to the private life requirements of the Rules.  An approach  read  into
    the determination in that way fell short  of  the  structured  analysis
    required.

Conclusions.

10. The judge was wrong to conclude at paragraph 27  that  a  finding  that
    family life did not exist for  purposes  of  Article  8  was  decisive.
    Removal may be disproportionate  for  interference  with  private  life
    interests alone.  More relevantly, the factors to be examined  are  the
    same regardless of whether these are thought to  constitute  family  or
    private life.

11. The determination, however, has to be read fairly and as a  whole.   In
    my view it is not fatally  flawed  by  this  one  legal  mis-statement.
    There would be no way of separating family and private life factors  in
    this case.  The circumstances considered at paragraphs 10-27 leading to
    the first conclusion and at paragraphs 28-37 leading to the alternative
    conclusion are the same.   There  is  no  reason  in  principle  why  a
    determination may not be sound on the basis of conclusions  reached  in
    the alternative.

12. As to the further grounds, the age and health of both  Appellants,  and
    the UK residence and citizenship of their relatives,  were  plainly  at
    the forefront throughout.  The existence of a power of attorney was not
    presented as an issue and I do not think it was  capable  of  advancing
    the case significantly.  The  overall  family  circumstances  were  not
    overlooked, but were always the essence of the case.

13. The final question for the judge was not one of primary fact but it was
    a highly fact  sensitive  evaluation.   The  judge's  striking  of  the
    balance, even if she wrongly thought it to be an alternative matter, is
    a judgment well within her scope.  It came after thorough rehearsal  of
    all factors put before her by both sides.  It did not take into account
    any irrelevant factors, and did not  fail  to  take  into  account  any
    relevant factors, whether termed as family or as private life.  I  find
    no basis on which the Upper Tribunal should interfere.

14. If I had thought it necessary to set the decision aside, I  would  have
    preferred the submission for the respondent that there is no reason for
    rehearing.  The primary  facts,  as  Mr  Young  observed,  are  not  in
    dispute.  The case is one where, if necessary, the Upper Tribunal could
    re-make the decision without remitting to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law,  such  as  to  require  its
    determination to be set aside.  The determination shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           30 July 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
