

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/19054/2013
                                                               IA/51951/2013
                                                               IA/51945/2013
                                                               IA/51948/2013
                                                               IA/18814/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 26th February 2015               |On:18th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Dr Nagat Elmsallati
                       Dr Abdulbasit Salem Khushkhush
                         Master Abdullah Khashkhush
                        Master Abdulrahman Khashkhush
                            Mr Mohamed Khashkhush
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Aspinall, Counsel instructed by Craig Gee
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Respondents are all members of the same Libyan family.  They  are
       respectively a mother, father, and their three sons aged and  15,  17
       and 20.   When  their  linked  appeals  came  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal there had been another  appellant,  Mrs  Alzahara  Hamza  Al
       Sokni; Mrs Al Sokni was the mother of Dr Elmsallati and at  the  date
       of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal she was aged 93 and  in
       ill-health. Since the determination was promulgated Mrs Al Sokni  has
       died and her name has therefore been removed from these  proceedings.
       For the avoidance of confusion I shall refer to the parties by  their
       names.  The linked appeals were allowed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (Judge Narayan) in a determination dated the 28th  January  2014.  On
       the 28th February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted the
       Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

       Background

    2. Dr Elmsallati first arrived on the 10th October 1994 with valid leave
       to enter as the dependent family member of a Tier 4 (General) Student
       Migrant, her husband Dr Khashkhush already being here.  She  extended
       her stay on various occasions and during her initial period of  study
       their first two sons were born here. The family  returned  to  Libya.
       Dr Elmsallati re-entered the UK in June 1999 leaving the children  in
       Libya with their father. Her third son was born one month  after  her
       arrival.  She and he remained in the UK until April  2001  when  they
       both returned to Libya. He was under two at this point.

    3. The family then remained in Libya until the 7th September  2006  when
       they all entered the UK with valid  leave.  Dr  Elmsallati  was  once
       again given leave as a Tier 4 Migrant and her family members leave to
       enter as her dependents.  The status of each was renewed so that when
       on the 13th April 2013 they applied to extend it once again, they all
       had extant  leave.  Dr  Elmsallati  made  an  application  under  the
       'Doctoral Extension Scheme' and the  remaining  family  members  were
       once again treated as her dependents.

    4. The applications were all refused on the 20th May 2013. Dr Elmsallati
       had relied on her previous CAS and as such it was not valid for  this
       application. She was refused with reference  to  Appendix  A  of  the
       Rules, and by extension, Appendix C. Her husband, mother and children
       were refused further leave because she had been.

    5. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the family conceded that the CAS
       was not valid and that they did not  therefore  qualify  for  further
       leave to remain under the  Points  Based  System.  They  did  however
       submit that the decisions to refuse further leave and to remove  them
       from the UK would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
       private lives in the UK.   Reliance was placed on "the  concessionary
       7 year child policy" announced by the Under-Secretary  for  the  Home
       Department, Mr O'Brien, on the 24th February 1997,  paragraph  276ADE
       of the Immigration Rules and  s55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009.

       The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

    6. The determination begins by summarising the unchallenged evidence  of
       each family member.

    7. In respect  of  the  appeal  of  Mohamad  Khashkhush  the  First-tier
       Tribunal found that as he was now an adult he  had  made  a  separate
       application to the Respondent and had his own appeal. That appeal was
       allowed with reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. Paragraph 39
       indicates that the Tribunal also allows the appeal in the alternative
       with  reference  to  Article  8  ECHR.  The  reasoning,  set  out  at
       paragraphs 40-41, is that this  is  a  young  man  who  has  spent  a
       substantial period of his life lawfully in the UK,  and  has  pursued
       his education with  success.  It  may  be  that  other  reasons  were
       considered, since reference is made to Counsel's  skeleton  argument.
       If  there  were,  these  are  not  elaborated  in  the  body  of  the
       determination.

    8. Turning to the appeals of Abdullah and Abdulrahman the Tribunal notes
       that the HOPO on the day, a Mr Malcom, had submitted "that they would
       qualify under the rules as applicants" under  paragraph  276ADE.  The
       appeals appear to have been allowed on that basis. As to the parents,
       their appeals are allowed "under Appendix FM"  because  they  have  a
       genuine and substantial relationship with their  children,  who  have
       been in the UK longer than seven years and it would not be reasonable
       to remove them now.   In  the  alternative  these  appeals  are  also
       allowed with reference to Article 8 ECHR. The reasoning is set out at
       paragraphs 44-48, and contains the following remarks:

          "I find that all the Appellants have been in  the  United  Kingdom
          with leave, forging and forming a useful and private life. I  find
          the  children  have  always  been  in  education  and  have   made
          substantial progress during their school lives. I  find  that  the
          Appellant and her husband...have spent  a  large  amount  of  time
          doing  voluntary  work  and  that  their  children....are  all  at
          important stages of their education. I would also have found  that
          the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom for some eight  years
          of legal residence and that the clock has not stopped in her  case
          in respect of a ten year residence application. I would  therefore
          have allowed the appeal of this Appellant and  her  spouse...under
          Article 8."

       The Grounds of Appeal

    9. The Secretary of State contends that the First-tier Tribunal made the
       following errors of law:

       i) None of the  appeals  could  be  allowed  under  paragraph  276ADE
          because none of the appellants before the First-tier Tribunal  had
          made applications under that rule;

      ii) The determination does not give "adequate  reasons"  for  allowing
          any of the appeals  under  Article  8.  Even  if  it  was  in  the
          children's best interests to remain in the UK the Tribunal  failed
          to consider that they had come here as Tier 4  dependents  and  so
          could have no reasonable expectation of being permitted to remain;

     iii)   The   Judge   erred   in   equating   "best   interests"    with
          "disproportionate". This was an error. Children whose parents  are
          here on a temporary basis can be  expected  to  leave  with  their
          parents;

      iv) There was a failure to identify  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
          which would render the removal of this family disproportionate.

       The Reply

   10. In a detailed reply dated 29th October 2014 Ms  Aspinall  points  out
       that the best interests of the children was a  primary  consideration
       for the Tribunal, and it was a matter that the Tribunal was  entitled
       to attach considerable weight to.  It is submitted that the two minor
       appellants  did  qualify  for  leave  to   remain   under   paragraph
       276ADE(1)(iv) and  that  their  elder  brother  qualifies  for  under
       276ADE(1)(v), apparently on the basis that he was "born in the UK and
       has lived here since birth".  In  response  to  the  point  that  the
       appellants could not succeed under the Rules  because  they  had  not
       made applications, Chikwamba is prayed in aid.

       Error of Law

   11. It was an error of law to allow any of these appeals  outright  under
       paragraph 276ADE of the Rules since none of the First-tier appellants
       had made applications under this  rule,  the  second  requirement  of
       which is:

          (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
          grounds of private life in the UK;

   12. The remainder of the grounds relate to Article 8.  The  Secretary  of
       State complains that there was a  failure  to  identify  "exceptional
       circumstances". There is no test of exceptionality  and  the  grounds
       are unhelpful insofar as  they  suggest  that  there  is.   What  the
       Tribunal was required to do was to consider whether the Secretary  of
       State had shown that the removal of this family - or each  individual
       component of it - was justified  as  a  necessary  interference  with
       their long-established private lives  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This
       would involve balancing the public interest in removing migrants with
       no lawful  leave  to  remain  against  the  rights  of  the  migrants
       themselves.  It is difficult to know from this determination  whether
       that has been done in this case.

   13. It would appear that the Tribunal  had  understood  the  HOPO  to  be
       conceding that the children met the requirements of paragraph 267ADE.
       If that was so it is axiomatic that the decision could not  be  shown
       to be proportionate, since there would be  nothing  weighing  on  the
       Secretary of State's side of the scales.   The difficulty  with  that
       is that it would appear from paragraph 32 that the Tribunal may  have
       misunderstood the HOPO's submissions - that is certainly the position
       adopted by Ms Johnstone - because Mr Malcolm did not concede that the
       children met all of  the  relevant  requirements.  He  accepted  that
       "there was nothing to say" that they would not qualify if  they  made
       applications, but that  was  a  matter  to  be  determined  once  the
       applications had been received.  That  is  quite  different  from  an
       outright concession that the Rules were  met.   There  is  a  further
       difficulty in that the finding that it would not be "reasonable"  for
       the children to leave  -  central  to  the  consideration  of  276ADE
       (1)(iv) - was not reasoned in any way.

   14. The challenge in respect of s55 is less easy to  understand.   I  can
       find nowhere in the determination  which  indicates  that  the  "best
       interests" finding led inexorably to a finding that the removals were
       disproportionate. The determination makes reference to  a  number  of
       factors, not all of which are  connected  to  the  children.    I  am
       nevertheless satisfied that the Article 8 findings overall cannot  be
       safely extricated from the flawed findings in respect  of  the  Rules
       and for that reason I set the decision aside to be remade.

       The Re-Made Decision

   15. Thee applications giving rise to these appeals were made on the  18th
       April 2013. Dr Elmsallati applied for further leave to  remain  as  a
       Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  and  her  family  applied  as  her
       dependents.   They did not, at the time these applications were made,
       advance  human  rights  grounds  for   the   Secretary   of   State's
       consideration. Article 8 was raised only on  appeal.   Before  me  Ms
       Johnstone agreed that I was entitled to make findings  on  Article  8
       without the matter  being  'remitted'  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However if the appeal is to be allowed  it  will  only  be  on  human
       rights  grounds  (ie  any  finding  that  an  individual  meets   the
       requirements of the rules will only be relevant to  the  question  of
       whether removal is proportionate).

   16. The matter of whether the decision maker was correct to refuse  leave
       under the Rules has already been dealt with: the Secretary  of  State
       was correct to refuse to grant further leave  to  remain  as  Tier  4
       Migrants.  This appeal is brought on human rights grounds alone.

   17. I can move swiftly through the first four Razgar  questions.   It  is
       accepted in light of the family's lengthy residence in  the  UK  that
       each individual has an established private life and that they share a
       family life with each other. I note that  although  Mohamed  has  now
       reached majority he is  still  living  at  home  and  that  in  these
       circumstances there is no "bright line" at the age of 18 which severs
       his familial relationship with his parents  and  siblings.     It  is
       accepted that the decision to remove the family would  constitute  an
       interference with  their  private  lives  in  the  UK  of  sufficient
       consequence that the Article is  engaged.   The  decision  to  remove
       persons with no lawful leave to remain is rationally connected to the
       legitimate aim of protecting the economy and the decision is one that
       the Secretary of State  is in law entitled to take.

   18. I begin my assessment of proportionality with assessing the  position
       of the children: s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
       2009.  The case advanced by Ms Aspinall is that both Abdulrahman  and
       Abdullah currently  qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
       276ADE. The only substantive matter in issue under that provision  is
       (1)(iv). Each must show that he:

          (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
          the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
          imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
          applicant to leave the UK; or

   19. What does "reasonable" mean?

   20. The genesis of this provision was the  concession  known  as  DP5/96.
       That policy,  and  those  which  followed,  created  a  general,  but
       rebuttable,  presumption that enforcement action would "not normally"
       proceed  in  cases  where  a  child  was  born  here  and  had  lived
       continuously to the age of 7 or over, or where, having  come  to  the
       United Kingdom at an  early  age,  7  years  or  more  of  continuous
       residence had been accumulated[1].   As the policy statement[2] which
       accompanied the introduction of paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) puts it:  "a
       period of 7 continuous  years  spent  in  the  UK  as  a  child  will
       generally establish a sufficient level of integration for family  and
       private life to exist such that removal would normally not be in  the
       best interests of the child" [my  emphasis].   The  current  guidance
       reaffirms that this is the starting point for  consideration  of  the
       rule.   The Immigration Directorate  Instruction  'Family  Migration:
       Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
       Private Life:  10-Year  Routes'   ("the  IDI")  gives  the  following
       guidance:

          11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
          child to leave the UK?

          The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
          UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
          preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
          children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the
          UK, to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
          unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
          the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
          to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
          required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
          more than 7 years.

          The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
          circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
          child to live in another country.

          The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
          in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
          facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
          also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
          family, by each child or on behalf of each child.

   21. I have had regard to the Hansard record of the debate in the House of
       Lords on the introduction of section 117B (6) NIAA 2002  (as  amended
       by the Immigration Act 2014)  in  which  Home  Office  Minister  Lord
       Wallace of Tankerness explained  the  government's  thinking  on  the
       significance of the seven year mark:

          "we have acknowledged that if a  child  has  reached  the  age  of
          seven, he or she will have moved beyond simply having his  or  her
          needs met by the parents. The child will be part of the  education
          system and may  be  developing  social  networks  and  connections
          beyond the parents and home. However, a child who  has  not  spent
          seven years in the United Kingdom either will be relatively  young
          and able to adapt, or if they are older, will be  likely  to  have
          spent their earlier years in their country of  origin  or  another
          country. When considering the best interests  of  the  child,  the
          fact of citizenship is important but so is the fact that the child
          has spent a large part of his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
          Kingdom"[3].

   22. All of this guidance recognises that after a period  of  seven  years
       residence a child will have forged strong links with the  UK  to  the
       extent that he or she will have an established private  life  outside
       of the immediate embrace of his parents  and  siblings.  It  is  that
       private life which is the starting point of consideration under  this
       Rule. The relationships  and  understanding  of  life  that  a  child
       develops as he grows older are matters which  in  themselves  attract
       weight. The fact that the child  might  be  able  to  adapt  to  life
       elsewhere is a relevant factor but it cannot be determinative,  since
       exclusive focus on that question would obscure the fact that for such
       a child, his "private life" in the UK is everything he knows.    That
       is the starting point, and the task of the Tribunal is to  then  look
       to other factors to decide whether, on the particular facts  of  this
       case, these displace or outweigh the  presumption  that  interference
       with that private life will normally be contrary to the child's  best
       interests. Those factors are wide-ranging and varied. The  IDI  gives
       several examples including, for instance, the child's health, whether
       his parents have leave, the  extent  of  family  connections  to  the
       country of proposed return. The assessment of  what  is  "reasonable"
       will call for the Tribunal to weigh all of  these  matters  into  the
       balance and to see whether they constitute  "strong  reasons"  -  the
       language of the current IDI - to proceed with removal notwithstanding
       the established Article 8 rights of the child in the UK. "Reasonable"
       in the context of 276ADE is  then  not  to  be  equated  with  Razgar
       proportionality.  Although both involve consideration of the same set
       of facts, the starting point is quite different. An appeal  can  only
       be allowed with reference to Article 8 'outside of the  Rules'  where
       there are some particular  compelling  circumstances  not  adequately
       reflected in those Rules: see Singh and Khaled [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.
       By contrast  it  is  the  Respondent's  stated  policy  that  "strong
       reasons" will be required to refuse leave to a child who has  accrued
       seven years continuous residence.

   23. Against that legal framework I consider  the  facts  that  relate  to
       these children.

   24. The early chronology was  not  easy  to  decipher,  since  the  dates
       provided in the witness statements were at variance from those  given
       in Counsel's skeleton argument. I make these findings on the basis of
       the evidence before me. Abdulrahman was born in the UK on the 5th May
       1997. He was taken to Libya in February 1998 and  shortly  thereafter
       came back with his mother whilst she completed her MSc.  On  the  8th
       July 1999 his brother Abdullah was born in the UK. They remained here
       until the 15th April 2001 when the whole family returned to Libya.  I
       have attached minimal significance to this very early period  in  the
       boys' lives. They were infants, effectively living between the UK and
       Libya, and as very young children their world consisted primarily  of
       each other, and their parents.

   25. Both boys came back to the UK on the 21st October 2006. At that point
       Abdulrahman  was  9  and  Abdullah  was  7.  They  have  lived   here
       continuously  since  then.  At  the  date   of   this   determination
       Abdulrahman is 17 and Abdullah is 15. As I note above  the  Secretary
       of State accepts, by way of her policy statements and those  made  on
       her behalf by ministers, that over a period of 8 and half years  that
       those children will have put down roots to the point  that  it  would
       normally be contrary to their best interests to remove them  now.   I
       have been provided with an enormous bundle of evidence  attesting  to
       the strength of the boys' private lives in the  UK.    This  includes
       not only the usual confirmation of their  attendance  at  school  but
       truly glowing references from teachers and evidence of the children's
       outstanding educational achievement. Abdulrahman  achieved  excellent
       exam results at GCSE including an A* in Maths  and  Science.   He  is
       currently taking his 'A' levels  in  Chemistry,  Maths,  Biology  and
       Physics. Abdullah's school reports consistently  describe  him  as  a
       hard-working, well-  behaved  student  who  has  achieved  "brilliant
       results". He is currently working at "above  target'  in  his  GCSEs.
       Both boys have produced evidence of volunteer  work  and  Abdulrahman
       has undertaken work experience at Salford Royal Infirmary. They  have
       produced numerous photographs of them  playing  sports  and  enjoying
       time with their many friends. I accept and find  as  fact  that  they
       have a long established private life in the UK.

   26. Asked to identify the "strong reasons" why that private life  should,
       after eight and a  half  years,  be  interfered  with,  Ms  Johnstone
       submitted that they could  continue  their  educations  in  Libya  or
       alternatively apply to come back as  students  themselves.  They  can
       speak Arabic and they will have a familiarity  with  the  culture  in
       Libya.  Thankfully neither has  any  health  concerns.  The  evidence
       would indicate that they still  have  connections  and/or  family  in
       Libya, since they are living on  remittances  sent  to  the  UK  from
       Libya. Importantly they would be  returned  with  their  parents  who
       could assist them in re-integrating.  I have considered all of  those
       factors. None in my view render it "reasonable" that  these  boys  be
       removed  now,  even  when  weighed  cumulatively.   It  also   rather
       overlooks  the  fact  that  the  security  situation  in   Libya   is
       deteriorating daily, that the airport is  being  intermittently  shut
       due to shelling (there have been no forced removals for some time  as
       a result). Armed militias, not answerable to any central  government,
       are vying for control of territory and control checkpoints throughout
       the country. This situation may today  fall  short  of  a  full-blown
       civil war but I do not find it reasonable to send  two  teenage  boys
       back to a country teetering on the brink of one.

   27. Having considered all of those  factors  I  conclude  that  the  boys
       presently meet all of the requirements of  276ADE  bar  sub-paragraph
       (ii) which requires that they have made  valid  applications.  It  is
       never in a child's best interests to delay resolution of  his  status
       and in view of Ms Johnstone's concession that I am seized of  Article
       8 I find that it would be  entirely  disproportionate  to  refuse  to
       grant further leave to remain to Abdulrahman and Abdullah.  There  is
       nothing weighing on the Respondent's side of the  scales  since  they
       meet the requirements of the Rules.

   28. I now assess the position of  their  parents.  Section  117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by  the
       Immigration Act 2014) sets out  the  public  interest  considerations
       that I must have regard to in determining proportionality:

          (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
          public interest.

          (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
          persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
          to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b) are better able to integrate into society.

          (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
          persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
          financially independent, because such persons-

                (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b) are better able to integrate into society.

          (4) Little weight should be given to-

                (a) a private life, or

                (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

          that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
          the United Kingdom unlawfully.

          (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
          a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
          precarious.

          (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

   29. I have had regard to the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration controls is in the public interest.  This is a family who
       have never, for as much as a day, been  in  the  country  unlawfully.
       They have always had lawful leave.

   30. I have had regard to the fact that it is in the public interest,  and
       in particular in the interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the
       United Kingdom, that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom are able to speak English,  because  persons  who  can
       speak English are less of a burden on taxpayers, and are better  able
       to integrate into society.  That parliament was  quite  right  to  so
       legislate is amply illustrated by this  family,  all  of  whom  speak
       English and all of whom have taken an active part in the academic and
       social life of the UK. Dr Elmsallati  and  Dr  Khashkhush  have  both
       spent  considerable  time  volunteering  in  various  groups   whilst
       completing  their  PhDs  and  are  active  members  of  their   local
       communities.

   31. There is no evidence  at  all  that  the  family  have  ever  claimed
       benefits, or that they have otherwise been a drain on  the  resources
       of public funds. Both Dr  Elmsallati  and  Dr  Khashkhush  have  paid
       private fees in their long  years  of  study  in  the  UK,  and  thus
       contributed to the funding of, inter alia, the University of  Salford
       and the University of Essex. They are currently  sustained  by  money
       sent to them from Libya.

   32. Sub-clause (4) does not apply since the family have always had leave.
       Sub-clause (5) does,  since  "precarious"  means  anything  short  of
       settled status.   That  is  the  only  part  of  the  provision  that
       diminishes the weight to be attached to  the  family's  side  of  the
       scales. I note however that the terms of sub-clause (6) are such that
       this should not, in the case of Dr Elmsallati and Dr  Khashkhush,  be
       weighed against them at all. That is because they have a genuine  and
       subsisting parental  relationship  with  their  sons,  who  are  both
       qualifying children: I have found that it would not be reasonable  to
       expect them to leave the UK.  The terms of the statute are clear:  in
       those circumstances  the  public  interest  does  not  require  their
       removal.   It  would  therefore  be  disproportionate  to  remove  Dr
       Elmsallati and Dr Khashkhush.

   33. That leaves Mohamed. In her submissions  Ms  Johnstone  realistically
       conceded that in view of the fact that he is still part of the family
       unit, she had no separate submissions  to  make  in  respect  of  his
       position.

   34. I begin by considering the Rules.  Given my finding that  the  family
       still have some "ties"  to  Libya  the  only  provision  which  could
       conceivably be applicable to Mohamed today is 276ADE(1)(v):

          (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
          least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
          any period of imprisonment); or

   35. Mohamed was born in Bedford on the 18th January 1995. At the date  of
       this determination he is aged 20 years and 2 months old.  In order to
       succeed under this provision he would need to show that he has  lived
       continuously in the UK for a period of 10 years and 1 month. Contrary
       to the statement made in the Rule 24 response, he has not lived  here
       since birth.  He last entered the UK on the 26th October 2006. He has
       not therefore yet passed  the  half  way  mark  for  the  purpose  of
       continuous residence.  By my calculation he will not reach that point
       until the 5th  August  2018[4].   He  does  not  therefore  meet  the
       requirements of the Rules.

   36. I am satisfied that there is good reason to go to look at  Article  8
       outside of the Rules. Mohamed spent the first three years of his life
       in the UK then returned here in 2006 when he was 10. He is now 19.  I
       accept that during that time he has developed a  substantial  private
       life and that his removal would result in  an  interference  with  it
       such that Article 8 is engaged.  As with the  other  members  of  his
       family there is no dispute that this is a decision that the Secretary
       of State is in law entitled to take.

   37. The question is whether it is proportionate. As with his  parents,  I
       must consider in Mohamed's case the public interest factors  set  out
       in s117B. He too has always had lawful leave to remain in all of  the
       12 years that he has spent in the UK. He speaks fluent English and is
       financially self-sufficient. I bear in mind that  he  has  never  had
       settled status, and as such can never have had any  expectation  that
       he would be permitted to remain indefinitely  in  this  country:  the
       precarious nature of his status  means  that  I  must  attach  little
       weight to his private life.

   38. In addition to the considerations set out in the statute I  take  the
       following matters into account when considering proportionality.

   39. Much like his brothers, Mohamed is a credit to his  parents.  He  has
       obviously worked very hard and achieved excellent grades  at  school,
       including  an  A*  in   Maths,   Additional   Science   and   perhaps
       unsurprisingly, Arabic.  He is currently a student at the  University
       of Salford.  I was provided with numerous documents relating  to  his
       private life in the UK, including many photographs of  him  with  his
       close friends.

   40. Although I am mandated to attach little weight to his  private  life,
       the statute is silent about his family life  with  his  brothers  and
       parents.  They have succeeded in their appeals and I accept  have  no
       intention to return to Libya in the present  climate.  Removal  today
       for Mohamed would mean  a  very  significant  interference  with  his
       family life. He  remains  part  of  the  family  unit  and  is  still
       dependent upon his parents. Although he  is  reaching  an  age  where
       young British men might move away from their family I appreciate that
       in Libyan culture that would not be so for a number of years,  if  at
       all.

   41. Mohamed would be returning alone to a very unstable country to  which
       he has not been since he was 11.  The latest operational guidance  on
       Libya lists the human rights abuses currently  occurring  as  "extra-
       judicial  killings,  abduction,  enforced  disappearance,   arbitrary
       detention, including in unofficial detention centres,  torture,  ill-
       treatment and death in detention"[5].  This  is  a  family  who  were
       entirely funded in their studies in the UK by the Gaddafi  regime:  a
       letter from the Cultural  Attach�  confirms  that  their  sponsorship
       included fees and a monthly allowance to  cover  all  their  expenses
       whilst  they  were  here.    There  is  no  claim  to   international
       protection before me but I bear in mind that the  security  situation
       in Libya is poor and that Mohamed would be  extremely  concerned  for
       his safety. The current guidance notes that those perceived  to  have
       been loyal to Gaddafi "have  also  experienced  forced  displacement,
       indiscriminate shelling, looting and  the  burning  of  homes....IDPs
       perceived to have supported Gaddafi experience harassment,  violence,
       intimidation and discrimination".  I make no finding  as  to  whether
       there is a real risk of serious harm, but I accept that  Mohamed  and
       his parents have  a  subjective  fear  which  is  not  by  any  means
       fanciful.

   42. I have considered all of those factors in the round, reminding myself
       that the public interest generally requires removal of persons who do
       not qualify for leave to remain under the Rules.  Having done so I am
       satisfied that  on  the  very  particular  facts  of  this  case  the
       Secretary of State cannot show  the  decision  to  be  proportionate.
       Mohamed is technically an adult  but  he  remains  a  child  of  this
       family, has spent as long here as his brothers,  is  well  integrated
       and in time, I have no doubt,  will  be  as  much  as  asset  to  his
       community in Manchester as his parents are.

   Decisions

   43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  and
       it is set aside.

   44. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

          "The appeals are dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

          The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds."

   45. I make no direction for anonymity because neither party has requested
       one and on the facts I do not consider such an order to be necessary.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             17th March 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[2] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[3] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014
[4] http://www.timeanddate.com : I have calculated that he was 11 years, 9
months and 8 days old when he arrived in October 2006. The 5th August 2018
will be 11 days, 9 months and 9 days from that date.

[5] OGN updated February 2015

