
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20655/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 21 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                          Mr Olusegun Adesola Dairo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R. Mehra, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Hopkin, Home Office Representing Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal against the Determination and Reasons of  First  Tier
    Judge Russell promulgated on 1st April 2014 whereby  he  dismissed  the
    Appellants' appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated  2nd  April
    2013 whereby the Respondent refused to grant the  Appellants  residence
    cards.

 2. The background facts are set out in the Determination and  Reasons  and
    so not need rehearsing.

 3. This appeal can be disposed of relatively briefly  because  the  issues
    raised are simple.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, Judge Russell,  said  there  were  three
    limbs to the appellants' claim: the Chen point, the Zambrano point  and
    Article 8 ECHR (see paragraph 9 of the Determination and Reasons).  The
    judge observed  in paragraph 13 that whilst the Secretary of State  had
    focused in her decision dated 2 April 2013 on the  Chen  point  (namely
    whether or not the  appellant  had  comprehensive  medical  cover)  the
    Secretary of State had not expressly considered the Zambrano  point  or
    the Article 8 ECHR point.  The judge  was  plainly  in  error  in  that
    finding. The Decision letter did consider both these matters.

 5. The Judge then went on to consider for himself only the Chen point  (in
    paragraphs 15 to 18 of the Determination and Reasons) but not the other
    two points. The sole basis, therefore, of the judge's decision was,  as
    set out in paragraph 18, that he  found  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he had comprehensive sickness insurance as required by
    the Regulations. The Judge failed to deal with either of the other  two
    points, namely the Zambrano point and the Article 8 ECHR point. He also
    failed  to  deal  with  an  issue  under  the  Chen  point  as  regards
    sufficiency of reasons. For  these  reasons  the  judge's  decision  is
    materially deficient and cannot stand.

 6. The Appellant's Counsel urged us to proceed  to  re-make  the  decision
    ourselves this afternoon.

 7. The practice statement dated 25 September 2013 in relation to disposals
    of appeal in the Upper Tribunal reads as follows:

         "The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         remake the decision instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
         Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade
             is such that, having regard to  the  overriding  objective  in
             Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-tier
             Tribunal."

 8. A close reading of the practice statement at paragraph  7.2(b)  reveals
    that it is focused on two aspects: (1) whether there is a  decision  in
    the appeal which should be remade and (2) whether the Upper Tribunal is
    satisfied that the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which
    it is necessary to make in order to determine or remake  that  decision
    is one such that having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective  it  is
    appropriate to make in the Upper Tribunal or to remit.

 9. There are, therefore, three problems with re-making the decision today.
    The first is that we would have no less than three  decisions  in  this
    case to remake: (1) the Zambrano point, (2) the Article  8  ECHR  point
    and (3) the partial Chen point on sufficiency of  reasons.  Second,  in
    relation to those three matters it is not a  matter  of  re-making  the
    decisions because we do not even have the benefit of a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Third, it is quite plain that each  would  involve
    significant evidence and submissions.  However,  in  our  judgment,  it
    would not be in accordance with the overriding objective or the purpose
    of this procedure for the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  such  matters
    given the nature and extent of such evidence  that  would  need  to  be
    called.

10. For those reasons, we allow the appeal by the appellant but  remit  the
    matter to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Russell  to  determine  the  three
    points which have been identified which should have been dealt with  in
    his original Determination and Reasons, namely the Zambrano point,  the
    Article 8 ECHR point and the Chen sufficiency of reasons point.

Conclusions

    There is an error of law such the the decision is set aside
    We set aside the decision.
    The appeal is remitted to First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell to conclude
    his determination




Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave


