
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20358/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2016                           |On 19 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                         ms navamaniammah paramsothy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy, Legal Representative of Linga &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  whose  date  of  birth  is  1
    February  1942.   She  applied  for  a  permanent  residence  card   as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK.  The  Secretary  of  State
    refused her application on 18 May 2015.  The appellant had applied  for
    a  permanent  residence  card  as  the  family  member  of  Siventhiran
    Paramsothy, a Danish national, who claimed  to  have  exercised  treaty
    rights for a continuous period of five years in the United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ('the EEA Regulations').  The Secretary of State did not  consider
    that the appellant had provided evidence that she had been  financially
    dependent upon the sponsor.  It was not  accepted  that  the  appellant
    resided with the sponsor. The Secretary of State therefore  refused  to
    issue the residence permit.

 2. The appellant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 11 July 2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Monson dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-
    tier Tribunal found that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that  she
    had lived with the sponsor for a continuous period of five years or had
    been dependant on him during  that  period.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  and  others  was
    inconsistent and found that the appellant had not discharged the burden
    of proving that  she  qualified  for  a  permanent  residence  card  in
    accordance with Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 4 November  2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted the appellant permission to appeal.
     Thus the appeal came before me.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 4. The grounds of appeal set out that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
    because the appellant is a direct family member, not an extended family
    member.  It  is  submitted  that  in  direct  family  member  cases  no
    financial dependency is required  and  neither  is  cohabitation.   The
    family member simply needs to be in the United  Kingdom.   Reliance  is
    placed on the decision in PM (EEA - spouse -  "residing  with")  Turkey
    [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC).  Mr Lingajothy submitted that the judge  had  got
    paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Regulations mixed up.  He asserted  that  the
    appellant had moved to the United Kingdom and was applying for  a  five
    year family permit residence card as a direct ascending dependant.   He
    submitted that Regulation 15(1)(b) requires only that the appellant has
    resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  five  years.
    He referred to the case of PM and submitted that this case  provides  a
    comprehensive analysis of the Directive and  the  relevant  Rules.   In
    particular he referred to the finding of the Tribunal in that case that
    there was no requirement to live  within  the  same  household  as  the
    sponsor.

 5. Mr Lingajothy submitted that there is no mention  of  accommodation  or
    other requirements in Regulation 15(1)(b).  He  submitted  that  having
    found that the appellant is related to her EEA sponsor  and  that  they
    have both resided in the UK for five years and in addition that she  is
    dependent  upon  her  sponsor  that  is  sufficient  to   satisfy   the
    Regulations.  As to the question of dependency he submitted that  being
    dependent for the purposes of Regulation 15(1)(b)  does  not  have  the
    same meaning as it does for the  purposes  of  an  application  for  an
    extended  leave  in  which  stricter  requirements  are   imposed   and
    accommodation is one of them.  He submitted that  the  respondent  must
    not impose stricter requirements that go  against  the  spirit  of  the
    Directive and case law.  The appellant has already demonstrated and met
    the requirements of dependency when she  was  granted  extended  leave.
    All she needs to do now is to demonstrate that herself and the  sponsor
    have resided in the United Kingdom for five years.  He  submitted  that
    that has not been disputed by the respondent.  He referred to the  Home
    Office  guidance  "Free  Movement  Rights:  Direct  Family  Members  of
    European Economic Area (EEA) Nationals" dated  25  November  2016.   He
    referred in particular to page 19 and the paragraph headed  "Continuous
    Residence in the UK for Five Years".  In this  paragraph  he  submitted
    there is no requirement for the sponsor and any family member  to  have
    resided within  the  same  household.   He  relied  on  Article  of  16
    Directive 2004/38/EC where in particular it provides that the right  is
    not subject to the  conditions  in  Chapter  III.   He  submitted  that
    different conditions apply to direct family members  and  to  those  of
    extended  family  members.   He  submitted  that  the  purpose  of  the
    provisions was to permit family members to reside in Member States  and
    that to depart from that  would  be  contrary  to  the  European  Union
    Regulations and contrary to the Citizens' Directive.

 6. Mr Jarvis submitted that there was a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of
    the legal framework by the appellant.  He submitted that the  appellant
    misunderstood Regulation 15 by asserting that there was no  requirement
    at all to show any dependency.  He referred to the case  of  Siew  Lian
    Lim v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  Manila  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1383.   He
    submitted that this case is relevant because at paragraphs 23 - 25  and
    30 the Court of Appeal sets out very  clearly  what  the  test  is  for
    dependency.  He submitted  that  in  order  to  qualify  for  permanent
    residency under Regulation 15(1)(b) the appellant must have been living
    continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the   EEA
    Regulations which he submitted meant 'as a dependent relative'  of  the
    sponsor.   He  distinguished  the  case  of  PM  by  referring  to  the
    requirements for a spouse.  The reason why a spouse does  not  need  to
    demonstrate  that  the  parties  have  lived  together  in   the   same
    accommodation is because the requirement for a spouse  is  simply  that
    they are married.  In accordance with Regulation 7(1)(c) the  appellant
    must demonstrate dependency and that this has a specific meaning as set
    out in the Lim  case.   He  submitted  that  otherwise  the  words  "in
    accordance with these Regulations" would simply be otiose if  all  that
    needed to be demonstrated was that the person had lived in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He submitted that the appellant had not demonstrated that for
    the five year period she had remained dependent on the sponsor so  that
    she could not satisfy the requirement that the five years of continuous
    residence were in accordance with the Regulations.  He  submitted  that
    there was no challenge in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  credibility
    finding of the judge or the finding that the  appellant  has  not  been
    residing or dependent on the sponsor during the five year period.  With
    regard to the guidance he submitted that that section had to be read in
    the context of the guidance and in any event is not  binding  upon  the
    Tribunal.  He submitted that  the  question  was  who  was  financially
    assisting the appellant and who was the appellant  dependent  on.   The
    answer to that question was the finding of First-tier Tribunal that the
    appellant had not demonstrated that she was dependant upon the  sponsor
    or had lived in his household for 5 years against which he submitted no
    appeal against has been made.

 7. Mr Lingajothy in reply submitted that the case law of Lim relied on  is
    fundamentally different and does not apply in the circumstances of this
    case.  He submitted that what the respondent was asking the Tribunal to
    do was to go back to the beginning of the five year period of residence
    and consider whether that at that point the appellant was dependent  on
    the sponsor.  He submitted that the judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had gone  behind  that  decision  to  see  whether  the  appellant  was
    dependent at the point of issue of the  former  residence  permit.   He
    submitted that there was no requirement to living  conditions  attached
    to the issue of a residence permit under Regulation 15.

Discussion

 8. The EEA Regulations provide:

         Family member
         7. (1) Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-
         (a) his spouse or his civil partner;
         ...
         (c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his
         spouse or his civil partner;
 9.
         Permanent right of residence
         15. (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
         the United Kingdom permanently-
         ...
         (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA
         national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA
         national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
         period of five years;
         ...



10. The appellant applied under Regulation 15(1)(b). The essential issue if
    whether or not she has resided in the UK  'with  the  EEA  national  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations.' The respondent  appears  to  have
    accepted that the appellant had resided in  the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of 5 years and that  the  sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights.

11. The First-tier Tribunal set out the following at paragraphs  26  to  29
    and paragraphs 32 and 33:

         "26. In order to establish that she  is  entitled  to  a  permanent
             residence card pursuant to Regulation 15(1)(b), the  appellant
             must show that for a continuous period of five years  she  has
             been a member of the EEA sponsor's household and/or  that  she
             has been financially dependent on him.

         27.  I accept that the appellant was a member of the EEA  sponsor's
             household in Denmark, and that she accompanied him to  the  UK
             as his dependent relative.  But  as  there  are  other  family
             members in the UK who can provide accommodation and  financial
             support to the appellant, there is no  evidential  presumption
             that the appellant has continued to be a dependent relative of
             the sponsor in the UK for a continuous period of five years.

         28.  The onus is on the appellant to prove her case, and  the  case
             advanced in the witness statements is substantially undermined
             by the documentary evidence and also by  the  evidence,  which
             was elicited in the course of the hearing.

         29.  The discrepancies which have emerged are not  minor,  but  are
             fundamental.  Contrary to what is clearly represented  in  the
             witness statements of the sponsor and his sister,  it  is  not
             true (as they well know) that since  arriving  in  the  United
             Kingdom the appellant has only resided with her eldest son  at
             the Primrose Lane address.  Both  of  them  admitted  in  oral
             evidence that the  appellant  had  initially  resided  in  her
             daughter's household, which is consistent with the fact that a
             GP  at  Grafton  Medical  Partners  in  Tooting  High   Street
             certified on 15 January 2015 that the  appellant,  whose  home
             address was in St James Road, had  been  registered  with  his
             practice since 2010.  It is also consistent with the fact that
             the appellant was given a screening appointment  for  diabetic
             retinopathy at St George's Hospital in  Tooting  by  a  letter
             dated 27 November 2009.  Although both of  them  claimed  that
             the period for which the appellant resided with  her  daughter
             was very short, this assertion  is  not  consistent  with  the
             documentary evidence and it was also contradicted by the  last
             witness.  If the sponsor had moved out of his sister's address
             soon after his arrival in 2008, it is  not  credible  that  he
             would not have got around to changing the address given on his
             bank statements until some time after January 2012.  Also, his
             sister denied that the sponsor's Barclays Bank statements were
             received  at  her  address,  claiming  that  he  had  notified
             Barclays of his change of address within three to four months.
              The evidence of the younger son that the sponsor moved out of
             his sister's accommodation some three to  four  years  ago  is
             consistent with the documentary evidence,  in  that  the  last
             bank statement for the sponsor at the St James's Road  address
             is a statement for the month to 30 November  2012.   The  next
             statement for the sponsor issued by Barclays Bank is  for  the
             month ending 31 December 2012, and the address  shown  in  the
             bank statement is 149A Wickham Road, Croydon.

         ...

         32.  It may be the case that  the  appellant  is  currently  living
             under the same roof as her  eldest  son.   But  when  she  was
             living with her daughter, she was living in the  household  of
             her British national daughter, not her older son's  household.
             Moreover,  there  is  no  reliable  evidence  that   she   was
             financially dependent on her  elder  son  (rather  then  being
             dependent on her British national daughter) when living in her
             daughter's  household.   Her  residence  with   her   daughter
             continued until, at the earliest, the end of November 2012, so
             on any view she cannot  have  accrued  five  years  continuous
             residence in the elder son's household.

         33.  This has been a concerted attempt to mislead the  Tribunal  as
             to where the appellant has been living since  she  arrived  in
             the United Kingdom, and with whom.  Hence the members  of  the
             family who have been given evidence to the  Tribunal  are  not
             shown to be reliable witnesses on the issue in controversy  in
             this appeal, and in consequence I find the appellant  has  not
             discharged the burden of proving  that  she  qualifies  for  a
             permanent  residence  card  in  accordance   with   Regulation
             15(1)(b) of the Regulations 2006."

12. There was no  appeal  against  the  findings  of  the  judge  that  the
    appellant had not lived in the sponsor's  household  for  a  continuous
    period of five years in the UK.  Neither was there any  appeal  against
    the finding of the judge that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that
    she had been financially dependent on the sponsor during the five  year
    period of residence.  Rather the grounds of appeal are that  the  judge
    erred in finding  that  there  was  any  requirement  at  all  for  the
    appellant  to  demonstrate  dependency  on  the  sponsor  or  that  the
    appellant was required to demonstrate that she had lived  in  the  same
    household as the appellant.  I note that the case before the First-tier
    Tribunal was not argued on this basis.

13. Reliance is placed on the case of PM. Essentially the appellant  argues
    that all that is necessary is for a non-EEA National to demonstrate  at
    the beginning of the 5-year period that they satisfy  the  Regulations.
    In the case of PM this would be (in accordance with Regulation 7(1)(a))
    that the person was the spouse of an  EEA  National  exercising  treaty
    rights, and in the case of the appellant that she was dependent on  the
    sponsor in accordance with regulation  7(1)(c).  Once  qualified  as  a
    family member all that is required is that person  resides  in  the  UK
    according to the appellant. Although in PM it was held that  there  was
    no requirement for a spouse to continue to live in a  common  household
    with the EEA National there is a requirement that  the  parties  remain
    married in order for a permanent right of residence to  arise  (subject
    to Article 13 of the Citizen's Directive). It is not  simply  the  case
    that  permanent  rights  of  residence  accrue  without  a   continuing
    marriage. In PM it was held:
         '34.     We recognise that the fact that spouses or civil partners
         decide not to live together in a common household, may sometimes
         invite inquiry into the nature of the relationship.
         35.     No such inquiry could possibly arise in this case, where
         there has been genuine matrimonial cohabitation for some time, a
         child has been born to the couple and there are continuing social
         relations by the parties to the marriage in the context of contact
         with the child.
         36.     The EEA Regulations (reg 2(1)) precludes those who are
         party to a marriage of convenience from being a spouse and
         therefore a family member under reg 7. As recital 28 of the
         Citizens Directive makes clear, a marriage of convenience is an
         abuse of rights but it is a term strictly limited to relationships
         "contracted for the sole purpose" of enjoying free movement rights
         and with no effective social nexus between the parties. An
         inference of marriage of convenience cannot arise solely because a
         married couple are not living in the same household.
         37.     However, for the reasons we have given above, we conclude
         that reg 15(1)(b) applies to those who entered a genuine marriage
         where both parties have resided in the United Kingdom for five
         years since the marriage; the EEA national's spouse has resided as
         the family member of a qualified person or otherwise in accordance
         with the Regulations and the marriage has not been
         dissolved.'(emphasis added)

14. So although there is no requirement to live in a  common  household  in
    accordance with PM the appellant must still demonstrate  that  she  was
    dependent on the sponsor during the 5 years of continuous residence.  I
    accept  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that  'in   accordance   with   these
    Regulations' would be otiose if all that was needed was for  a  non-EEA
    National to live in the UK without any dependence on the  EEA  National
    subsequent to entry as a  dependent  ascending  direct  relative.  This
    accords with Article 16  of  the  Citizen's  Directive.  The  right  of
    permanent residence arises after the continuous period of  5  years  of
    legal residence, i.e.  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Citizen's Directive. In  joined  Cases  C-424/10  and  C-425/10  Tomasz
    Ziolkowski and Others and Marlon Szeja v Land Berlin  it  was  held  at
    paragraph 46:



         'It follows that the concept of  legal  residence  implied  by  the
         terms 'have resided legally' in Article 16(1) of Directive  2004/38
         should be construed as meaning a period of residence which complies
         with the conditions laid down in the directive, in particular those
         set out in Article 7(1).'

15. In order to satisfy Regulation 15(1)(b) the appellant  is  required  to
    demonstrate that she has been dependent on the sponsor for  the  5-year
    period. The First-tier Tribunal considered that the appellant needed to
    show either dependency or membership of the sponsor's household  during
    the relevant period. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proving either.

16. There was no appeal against the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appellant had not demonstrated dependence on the sponsor.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material error of
    law.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 18 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

