



Upper tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/20469/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 4 March 2014                           |On 12 May 2014              |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |

                                   Before
                               JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                             MS SHABANA SHABANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation:
For the appellant:         Ms R Duley of Counsel Insructed by Sky  Soliitors
ltd
For the Res   For the Respondent:    Mr  G  Saunders.,  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer.


 1. The appellant, born on 16 April 1967. She is a national of Afghanistan.
    The respondent refused her application for further leave to  remain  on
    17 May 2013. Her appeal against the respondents' decision was heard  on
    22 October 2013 by First Tier Judge, Judge Owens.  After  hearing  oral
    evidence from  the  appellant,  and  taking  account  of  the  relevant
    documentation, the judge allowed the appeal, giving his reasons in a 12
    paged typed determination. The respondent has brought  this  appeal  by
    permission to the Upper Tribunal contending that decision of the  First
    Tier Judge is in material error of law  for  reasons  advanced  in  the
    grounds of appeal. Judge A K Simpson granted permission. She  took  the
    view that the decision of the First Tier Judge was based on  his  wrong
    understanding of the principles in  MA  &  SM  (Zambrano:  EU  Children
    outside Iran [2013] UKUT, drawing upon paragraph  19  of  Jamil  Sanneh
    [2013]ECWA 793 (Admin). The Judge accepted that  "there  must  be  some
    form of compulsion rather than choice before Article 20, 21 of the TFEU
    are engaged and that in this case compulsion is not made out even where
    there would be stark consequences on the working access  of  the  other
    carer."

 2. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Saunders  representing  the  respondent
    relied upon the written grounds of appeal. He further said that I  need
    to bear in mind that the couple do not live  together  but  the  father
    does indeed play a considerable part in the upbringing of the children.
    However he argued that this was not caused by necessity of compulsion.

 3. Ms Dulay in response submitted  that  the  grounds  submitted  did  not
    establish any material error of law in the determination. At  the  date
    of the decision, Ms Dulay reminded me that the youngest child was  only
    9 months old. He submitted that the facts of the present case  were  so
    different to those in the case of MA,  In  this  context  she  drew  my
    attention to  the  findings  of  fact  made  in  paragraph  53  of  the
    determination of Judge Owens, which she  argued  were  clear,  evidence
    based and materially different to those in MA and SA.  Judge  Owen  had
    found quite correctly that the mother of the children  had  been  their
    primary carer since their birth. Mr Saunders interjected  to  say  that
    Judge Owens had not said that it would be impossible for the father  to
    take care of the children. When I asked if impossibility was the  legal
    threshold required, Mr Saunders resiled and said that  mere  difficulty
    would not be enough as threshold. Mr Saunders again  reminded  me  that
    the father was playing a considerable part in  the  upbringing  of  the
    four children, youngest female born in 2012, second , female child born
    2009, third a boy born in 2011 and the eldest , a boy born in 2008.

4.   I have examined with  care  the  reasons  advanced  in  the  letter  of
refusal by the
    Secretary of State. I note that the Secretary of State did  not  accept
    the appellant, (the mother of the four  children)  to  be  the  primary
    carer for the children and a number of inferences from  that  followed.
    Judge Owens heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  as  well  as  her
    partner. He also considered all the documentary evidence which had been
    placed  before  him.  After  analysing  all  the  evidence,  oral   and
    documentary, the Judge made clear and reasoned findings  of  fact.  The
    Judge treated the evidence of the Appellant with great caution  as  can
    be see in paragraph 36. He found the "Appellant's partners evidence  as
    more reliable as it came across as being more plausible and  consistent
    with the small amount of supporting evidence. He answered the questions
    readily  without  hesitation  and  gave  open  answers   to   difficult
    questions. His evidence was  much  more  detailed  and  less  evasive."
    (Paragraph 37). At paragraph 44 of his determination the  Judge  finds,
    "I find that as a matter of fact that the children all reside currently
    with their mother at the family home. I find that it  is  their  mother
    who provides their day to day care particularly given their  ages.  The
    youngest child is nine months old and the eldest is five years old. All
    four children need a  lot  of  physical  care  in  terms  of  dressing,
    bathing, feeding, playing and supervision and I find  that  it  is  the
    Appellant who fulfils this role on a day to day basis. The two  younger
    children given their ages are particularly reliant on  her."  Following
    analysis of facts ad his findings in paragraphs 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53,
    the Judge quite correctly and properly finds in paragraph 58  that  the
    Appellant satisfies Regulation 15A of the EEA Regulations and that  she
    has a derivative right of residence on this basis.


 4. The grounds advanced by the  Secretary  of  State  do  not  attack  the
    findings as being unreasonable or irrational. The  Secretary  of  State
    takes a different view of the facts which the Judge has with care found
    to be wrong.

5.   In the circumstances I find the decision of  Judge  Owens  was  not  in
    material error of law and his decision to allow the appeal  should  not
    be disturbed.




Judge K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
9 May 2014

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I agree with Judge Owens for not making an award in this appeal although  he
had allowed it.




