
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20206/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 January 2015                           |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Jagjit Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell
For the Respondent:    Ms A Oji


                   DECISION AND REASONS - NO VALID APPEAL

 1. For ease of reference purposes I refer to the parties as they  were  in
    the First-tier Tribunal so that Mr Singh is hereafter  referred  to  as
    the appellant and the Secretary of State for the Home Department as the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on  7  November  1985.
    According to a decision letter of the respondent dated 2 May  2014  the
    appellant made an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  the  points-based  system.
    That application was dated 17 April 2013.   In  that  same  letter  the
    appellant was informed that his application was refused  under  one  of
    the general grounds of refusal (paragraph 322(1A)) because he  provided
    a Test of English for International Communication  (TOEIC)  certificate
    in support of his application  as  evidence  of  his  English  language
    ability.  However, after verification with the  awarding  body  it  was
    confirmed that he had used deception during  the  examination  process.
    As the examination process used to assess his English language  ability
    was confirmed to be not genuine, his Tier 4  sponsor's  assessment  did
    not meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  A  and  Appendix  O  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As it had been decided that he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules no points had been awarded under  "Attributes
    - Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS)". The refusal  was  made
    under paragraphs 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Within the decision letter of 2 May 2014 it is stated:-

         "I have considered all the information available to  me  and  I  am
         satisfied that Jagjit Singh is liable to administrative removal  as
         defined in Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on the
         basis  that  during   an   administrative   review   process,   ETS
         (Educational  Testing  Service)  have  confirmed  that  your   test
         obtained was through deception.  We are  therefore  satisfied  that
         you have submitted a document in support of  your  application  for
         the purpose of obtaining leave by deception.

         I   have   also   considered   whether   it   is   appropriate   to
         administratively remove Jagjit Singh and, having taken into account
         all of the facts available to me  now,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         prejudice he may suffer is not such that is  unfair  to  serve  him
         with form IS151A Notice to a person liable to removal."

 4. There then appears in the bundle a copy of form  IS151A  in  which  the
    appellant's name appears but there is no signature or date given.  That
    form is headed "Notice to a person  liable  to  removal".   There  also
    appears in the file a copy of form IS151A part 2 "Decision to remove an
    illegal entrant/person subject to administrative removal under  Section
    10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999".   Again  this  form  is
    addressed to the appellant but contains no date of  service,  signature
    or date of signature.  It is not clear to me whether those  forms  ever
    were signed and completed.  If they were they are not in the file.   It
    may be that the copies in the court bundle are simply incomplete copies
    of the original.

 5. What I am able to ascertain from looking at the file and the grounds of
    appeal is that no objection has been taken by the appellant raising any
    matter in relation to the points made in  the  previous  paragraph.   I
    anticipate that had the documents not been properly served  this  would
    have been a matter raised a long time before now.

 6. The appeal having  been  lodged,  the  matter  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge T Jones.  By a decision dated 13 May 2014  he  took  the
    preliminary issue point as to whether this is a valid appeal.  This was
    dealt with on the papers and without reference  to  either  party.   He
    noted as follows:-

         "2.   .....  The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  aver   to   the
             respondent's decision being wrong and do not address the issue
             concerning the right of appeal arising only  out  of  country.
             There is no evidence or suggestion of that a prior application
             has been made to or  rejected  by  the  respondent  concerning
             human rights.  Therefore I do not find that Section  92(4)  of
             the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  applies.
             There is no suggestion that this appellant is an EEA  national
             or a dependant or family member of an eea  national,  or  that
             any other grounds of appeal are to be relied on.

         3.   However, on the face of this appeal, the appellant had at  the
             time of application leave to remain.  I  am  reminded  of  the
             decision in CD  (s.10  curtailment:  right  of  appeal)  India
             [2008]  UKAIT  00085  which  states  that  any  decision  that
             involves the invalidation of or de facto curtailment of  leave
             gives rise (to) an in country  right  of  appeal  pursuant  to
             Section 82(2)(e) NIAA 2002, whether or not the  appellant  has
             made a prior asylum or human rights claim."

 7. The file  indicates  that  the  judge's  decision  was  served  on  the
    appellant, his solicitors and the Presenting Officers' Unit at Feltham,
    Middlesex.  The respondent did not seek leave to appeal  that  decision
    and the matter proceeded to a hearing before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    G A Black who allowed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22
    September 2014.  The judge referred to the preliminary  issue  decision
    and  noted  at  paragraph  13  "At  the  start  of  the  hearing   both
    representatives confirmed that they had not  received  a  copy  of  the
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jones".   The  respondent's
    representative indicated that she had intended to raise the question of
    jurisdiction (the  right  of  appeal  point)  as  a  preliminary  issue
    submitting that the appellant  had  no  in  country  right  of  appeal.
    However, on being provided with a copy of the determination of Tribunal
    Judge Jones the representative conceded that a decision had  been  made
    in that regard.  Paragraph 14 of the determination noted that  after  a
    short adjournment the representative did not renew her application that
    there was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  I take it from that that
    she did not necessarily accept that there was jurisdiction to hear  the
    appeal either.

 8. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision and permission
    to appeal was granted.

 9. I received submissions from both parties and  I  have  noted  them  and
    taken them into account.

10. Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 provides, so  far  as
    is material:-

         "(1) A person who is not a British citizen may be removed from  the
             United Kingdom, in accordance  with  directions  given  by  an
             Immigration Officer, if -

             (a)  having only a limited leave to enter or remain,  he  does
                  not observe a condition attached to the leave  or  remains
                  beyond the time limited by the leave;

             (b)  he uses deception in  seeking  (whether  successfully  or
                  not) leave to remain;

         ...

         (8)  When a person is notified that a decision  has  been  made  to
             remove him in accordance with this Section,  the  notification
             invalidates any leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             previously given to him."

11. Section  82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides, so far as is material:-

         "(1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person
             he may appeal to the Tribunal.

         (2)  In this part, 'immigration decision' means -

         ...

             (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom if the result of the  refusal  is  that
                  the person has no leave to enter or remain,

         ...

             (g)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions under Section 10(1)  ...  (b)
                  ... of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (removal  of  a
                  person unlawfully in the United Kingdom),

         ...

         (5)  The right of appeal  under  Section  (1)  is  subject  to  the
             exceptions and limitations specified in this part."

12. The "limitations" as they were at the material time set out in the 2002
    Act include limitations as to  the  types  of  appeal  which  could  be
    brought whilst remaining in the United Kingdom.  Section 92 of the 2002
    Act provides, so far as is material:-

         "(1) A person may not appeal under Section 82(1) while he is in the
             United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind  to  which  this
             Section applies.

         (2)  This Section applies  to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
             decision of a kind specified in Section  82(2)(c),  (d),  (e),
             (f), (ha) and (j) ..."

13. The consequence of Section 92 of the 2002 Act is that an appeal against
    a removal decision under Section 10(1)(b) of the 1999 Act attracts only
    an out of country right of appeal, whereas  a  decision  to  refuse  an
    application to vary or extend an earlier  grant  of  limited  leave  to
    remain attracts an in country right of appeal if  the  effect  of  that
    decision is that the person no longer has leave to remain.

14. A removal decision under Section 10(1)(b) of the 1999 Act has been made
    in this case.  The appellant was given notice in the decision to remove
    him that he is entitled to appeal the decision under Section  82(1)  of
    the NIA Act 2002, but only after he has left the United Kingdom.

15. It follows from what I have said above that I find that  the  appellant
    did not have a valid right of appeal and the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    on the preliminary issue point  was  wrong  to  decide  otherwise.   It
    appears to me to make no practical difference that the  respondent  did
    not seek to appeal the preliminary issue decision of that judge or that
    Judge G Black did not go behind that decision and maintained that  this
    is a valid appeal.  If the statutory regime dictated that there was  no
    right of  appeal  in  country  then  any  number  of  decisions  saying
    otherwise would not allow the appellant to succeed.

16. Put simply therefore  there  is  no  valid  appeal  and  this  document
    provides the decision in relation to that.  I add only  that  CD  (s.10
    curtailment: right of appeal) India [2008] UKAIT 00085  which  Judge  T
    Jones relied on is no longer good law. See RK (Nepal)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 359: See also R  (On  the
    application of Mohamed Bilal Jan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] UKUT 265.

17. There is no need for an anonymity direction in this case and  therefore
    I do not make one.

Notice of Decision

No valid appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
