
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20743/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2016                              |On 1st August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr md shah alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOTE MADe)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Khan


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of comprehension the parties are referred to by  their  status
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer allowing the Appellant's appeal against
    the refusal of his  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant and to remove him from the UK by  way  of  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  this  decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal so hence the Respondent's decision  on  6th  January
    2016.  The Respondent appealed against that decision  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew.   The  ground
    upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:

         "It is arguable that the judge may have erred in his  finding  that
         the Appellant had completed a supplementary course."

 3. I was provided with a Rule 24  reply  from  the  Appellant's  solicitor
    which was taken into account  and  considered  by  all  parties  before
    submissions began.

Error of Law

 4. In submissions before me Mr Walker for the Secretary of State  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had not erred  in  law.   The  Appellant's
    solicitor Mr Khan  had  produced  a  copy  of  the  guidance  that  was
    complained to have not been applied by the judge which was the  Tier  4
    policy guidance as it was on or after 6th April 2015  (given  that  the
    decision of the Respondent was made on 20th May 2015).  That  guidance,
    as accepted by the  Respondent,  is  identical  to  the  November  2015
    guidance that was in fact considered by the First-tier Judge except for
    one sentence which reads "You can undertake supplementary study at  any
    time during the period of leave granted for your main course of study".



 5. Aside from that one addition, paragraph 313 of the April 2015  guidance
    is identical to paragraph 290  of  the  November  2015  guidance,  both
    paragraphs being headed 'Can I do extra studies whilst in the UK?'  The
    gist of the guidance is that Appellants are allowed to do supplementary
    courses and they can be in any subject and do not have to relate to the
    main course of study and that supplementary study must not in  any  way
    hinder the progress made  by  the  student  on  their  main  course  of
    studies.  Consequently, the ground of complaint that the judge  wrongly
    considered the guidance and issue before  them,  bearing  in  mind  the
    guidance was said to be different at the time the decision  was  taken,
    as opposed to that given to the judge at the date of the  hearing,  has
    not been established by the Respondent on appeal.

 6. I find that there is no error  of  law  given  that  the  guidance  was
    identical except for one sentence which has no effect  at  all  on  the
    interpretation of whether a student may or  may  not  do  supplementary
    study and what that supplementary study may or may not be.  It is  also
    worth noting that the Rule 24 reply from the Appellant's solicitor does
    mention that Tier 4 Migrants are permitted to  undertake  supplementary
    courses of study for which they do not need to  take  the  Respondent's
    permission and that they do not need to inform their Sponsor  of  their
    supplementary study. Indeed, the only restriction is that  they  should
    ensure that the supplementary study does not hinder the  progress  made
    on their main course of studies.

 7. Consequently the guidance being materially the same as it was in  April
    2015 and as considered by the First-tier Judge and given that there  is
    no bar to performing  supplementary  study  under  Section  50  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 given that  supplementary
    study does not require any  sponsorship  by  a  registered  educational
    institution, I find that there was no error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier shall stand and is hereby affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

