
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent (MJ).  This  order
    is made to protect the interests  of  MJ's  children.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant claims to be a citizen of South Africa  with  a  date  of
    birth of 2 May 1975.  He claims to have entered the United Kingdom with
    his mother in September 1989 when he was 14 years of  age.   He  claims
    that he lived in London with his mother and her boyfriend until  moving
    to Exeter, in the West Country around two years later.  There, he lived
    with friends until he formed a relationship  with  "HB"  with  whom  he
    lived for  around  fifteen  years.   The  appellant  and  HB  have  two
    children, "D" and "H" who were born on 7 January  2004  and  4  January
    2006  respectively.   When  that  relationship  came  to  an  end,  the
    appellant formed a new relationship with, his current partner, "SJ" and
    they have a child "S" who was born on 21 October 2014.

 4. On 30 August 2014, the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain based upon  his  private  and  family  life  in  the  UK.   That
    application was refused on 6 November 2014 with no right of appeal.  On
    9  December  2014,  a  pre-action  protocol  letter  was  sent  by  the
    appellant's (then) representatives and on 27 January 2015 the appellant
    issued judicial review proceedings.

 5. On 22 April 2015, the Secretary of State made a  new  decision  on  the
    appellant's application for leave based upon  his  family  and  private
    life.

 6. The Secretary of State decided that the  appellant  could  not  succeed
    under either the "partner" or "parent" routes  under  Appendix  FM  nor
    under para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 7. The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant could  not  succeed
    under the "suitability" requirement in S-LTR.1.6. because the  presence
    of the appellant in the UK was "not conducive to the public good" as he
    was unable to verify his identity or nationality and  that,  during  an
    interview under caution with an Immigration Officer on 4 December 2014,
    he had been "difficult and uncooperative".

 8. Further, in relation to his family life claim,  whilst  accepting  that
    the appellant's relationship with SJ was a genuine and subsisting  one,
    the  Secretary  of  State   was   not   satisfied   that   there   were
    "insurmountable obstacles"  to  continuing  family  life  in  his  home
    country  or  that  he  had  established  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with any of his British citizen children  such  that  para
    EX.1. of Appendix FM applied.

 9. As regards para 276ADE and the  appellant's  private  life  claim,  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant had established he
    had lived in the UK for at least twenty years (para 276ADE(1)(iii))  or
    that there were "very significant obstacles" to  his  integration  into
    South Africa (para 276ADE(1)(vi)).  Finally,  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that there were no "exceptional circumstances" to justify the
    grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.  As  a  consequence,  the
    Secretary of State rejected the appellant's claim under the  Rules  and
    Art 8.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  He did not  request
    an oral hearing and consequently  the  appeal  was  determined  on  the
    papers.   Judge  O'Flynn  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

11. Judge O'Flynn accepted, at para 17, that the appellant had provided "no
    evidence of his nationality or identity or when he arrived in the  UK."
    He went on to find that, therefore,  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had entered the UK when he said he  had  and  that  he  could
    satisfy the requirements of para 276ADE on the basis of having lived in
    the UK for at least twenty years.

12. However, Judge O'Flynn accepted that the appellant's relationships both
    with SJ and  his  three  British  citizen  children  were  genuine  and
    subsisting (see paras 18-21).  Having done so, Judge O'Flynn went on to
    make a number of findings in paras 22 and 23 of his determination.   He
    concluded that the appellant  met  the  requirements  for  leave  as  a
    'parent' required by R-LTRPT.1.1(d)(i)-(iii) and as a 'partner'  by  R-
    LTRP.1.1(d)(i)-(iii).

13. As regards the 'parent' route, the appellant's children with HB (namely
    D and H) were British citizens under the age of  18;  HB  was  not  his
    partner; and he did not have "sole parental responsibility" for  either
    child but he had "access rights" to the  children  and  was  taking  an
    active role in their upbringing.  Further, para EX.1.  applied  because
    it would be unreasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  UK  and
    travel with the appellant to South Africa.

14. As regards the 'partner' route, again, EX.1. applied as it would not be
    reasonable to expect his partner or their child S to leave the  UK  and
    live in South Africa with him.

15. In addition to allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  Judge
    O'Flynn went on to consider the appellant's claim under Art  8  outside
    the Rules.  He found that Art 8.1 would be engaged as there would be an
    interference with his "family life" if removed.   Judge  O'Flynn  found
    that it would be "entirely unreasonable" to expect the appellant family
    members, who were all British citizens, to live in South Africa and  it
    would be disproportionate interference with his family life if he  were
    removed.

16. Accordingly, Judge O'Flynn allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on two grounds.  First, the judge had erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules as he had failed to consider whether
    the  appellant  met  the  'suitability'  requirement  given  that   the
    appellant had failed to verify his nationality and identity  and,  when
    interviewed, he had been deemed to be  "difficult  and  uncooperative".
    That is a mandatory requirement of Appendix FM and the judge  had  been
    wrong to allow the appeal simply by finding that EX.1. was satisfied.

18. Secondly, the judge had erred in law in his analysis  under  Art  8  in
    that he had failed properly, or at all, to consider the factors set out
    in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA
    Act 2002"), apart from s.117B(6) and whether it would  be  unreasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK.  In respect of  which,  in  any
    event, the judge had failed to give adequate reasons why  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK.   The  judge  had
    failed  to  consider  the  public  interest  in  effective  immigration
    control, that the appellant was not financially  independent  and  that
    little weight should have been given to  his  private  or  family  life
    given that he was in the UK unlawfully.

19. On 7 April 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

20. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Relevant Legal Provisions

21. Appendix FM sets  out  the  requirements  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    'partner' or 'parent'.  R-LTRP.1.1(d) is  the  relevant  provision  for
    this appeal which provides that:

         "The requirements to be met  for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         partner are -

         (d)(i)   the applicant must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTR:
              Suitability leave to remain; and

         (ii)     the applicant meets  the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-
              LTRP.1.2-1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1 [-2.2]; and

         (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies."

22. (The words in square brackets in d(ii) were added from 3.08.15 (HC 297)
    and so do not apply to the appellant's application which was made prior
    to that date.  LTRP.2.2 excludes individuals  who,  for  example,  have
    overstayed for more than 28 days unless EX.1 applies.)

23. There is no challenge to the judge's findings as to the genuineness  of
    the relationship between the appellant and SJ and  that  she  satisfies
    the requirements of being a "partner" for the purposes of the Rules.

24. The relevant suitability provisions for this appeal  are  found  in  S-
    LTR.1.6. and S-LTR.1.7.  Those provide as follows:

         "S-LTR.1.6. The  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive to the  public  good  because  their  conduct  (including
         convictions which do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to
         1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other   reasons,   make   it
         undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.

         S-LTR.1.7. The applicant has failed without  reasonable  excuse  to
         comply with a requirement to -

         (a)  attend an interview;

         (b)  provide information;

         (c)  provide physical data; and

         (d)  undergo a medical examination or provide a medical report."

25. By virtue of S-LTR.1.1  if  an  individual  cannot  satisfy  either  S-
    LTR.1.6. or 1.7. then leave to remain will be refused (see S-LTR.1.1.).



26. The other relevant provisions  are  found  in  EX.1.  and  EX.2.  which
    provide as follows:

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (a) (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
               relationship with a child who -

               (aa)    is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                   18 years when the applicant was first granted  leave  on
                   the basis that this paragraph applied;

               (bb)    is in the UK;

               (cc)     is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                   continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
                   preceding the date of application; and

                (ii)   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
               leave the UK; or

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
               partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in
               the UK or in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
               protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to  family
               life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
         obstacles' means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

27. The relevant provisions concerned with the 'parent' route are  set  out
    in R-LTRPT.1.1.(d)(i)-(iii)

         "(d)(i)  the applicant must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTR:
               Suitability leave to remain; and

         (ii)     the applicant meets  the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-
               LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1. [and 3.2].; and

         (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies."

28. (The words in square brackets in d(ii) were again  added  from  3.08.15
    (HC 297) and so do not apply to the appellant's application  which  was
    made prior to that  date.   LTRPT.3.2  excludes  individuals  who,  for
    example, have overstayed for more than 28 days unless EX.1 applies.)

29.  It  was  accepted  by  Judge  O'Flynn  that  the  appellant  met   the
    relationship requirements in E-LTRPT.2.2.-2.4. in respect of  D  and  H
    who lived with his former partner.  That was on the basis that they are
    both British citizens who are under the age of 18 and live  with  their
    mother who is a British citizen and not the appellant's partner and  he
    has access rights for the children and continues to play an active role
    in their upbringing.

30. None of those findings is challenged in  the  grounds,  nor  were  they
    challenged by Mr Richards who represented the Secretary of State before
    me.

31. However, the appellant could not succeed under the  'parent'  route  in
    respect of his daughter S, as SJ, with whom the appellant and  S  live,
    is the appellant's partner (see E-LTRPT.2.3(b)(ii) and (iii)).

32. As regards the appellant's claim based upon private life that is  dealt
    with in para 276ADE(1) as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR.1.2 to S-LTR.2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and ...

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or ...

         (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."

33. In this appeal, having not accepted the appellant's  evidence  that  he
    had lived in the UK since 1989 (and therefore  "at  least  20  years"),
    Judge O'Flynn made no findings in relation to para 276ADE(1)(vi).

34. The relevant provisions when considering Art 8 are in Part  5A  of  the
    NIA Act 2002 in ss.117A, 117B and 117D.

35. By virtue of s.117A(2), in determining the "public interest question" a
    court  or  Tribunal  must,  in  particular,  "have   regard"   to   the
    considerations listed in s.117B.  The "public interest question" is the
    issue of proportionality under Art 8.2 (see s.117A(3)).

36. Section 117B sets out the public interest considerations applicable  in
    all cases as follows:

         "117B. Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

37. For the purposes of s.117B(4) a  "qualifying  partner"  is  defined  in
    s.117D(1) to include a partner who is a British citizen.

38. For the purposes of s.117B(6), s.117D(1) defines a  "qualifying  child"
    to include a person who is under the age of 18 and a British citizen.

Error of Law

39. The Secretary of State's grounds identify, in my judgment,  two  errors
    of law in the judge's decision.

40. Firstly, in allowing the appellant's appeal under the Rules, the  judge
    failed  to  consider  whether  the  appellant   met   the   suitability
    requirement in S-LTR.1.6. namely whether his presence was not conducive
    to the public good because of his conduct, character,  associations  or
    other reasons.  That was expressly part of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision based upon the fact that the appellant had failed  to  provide
    any documentary evidence relating to his identity  or  nationality  and
    had  been  deemed  to  be  "difficult  and  uncooperative"  during  his
    interview  under  caution  by  an  Immigration  Officer.    The   judge
    recognised this was part of the Secretary of State's case at para 5  of
    his determination and at para 17 noted  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    independent evidence of the appellant's  nationality  or  identity.  At
    para 3, he set out the respondent's case, in particular on this  issue.



41. The judge's failure to make  any  finding  in  relation  to  S-LTR.1.6.
    which, if established by the Secretary of State (upon whom  the  burden
    of proof lay), was a mandatory  requirement  such  that,  even  if  the
    appellant met the substantive requirements as a 'partner'  or  'parent'
    (or indeed para 276ADE), he could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

42. Secondly, whilst the judge made reference to s.117B, in effect, he only
    considered the application of s.117B(6) in concluding that it would not
    be "reasonable to expect" the appellant's British citizen  children  to
    leave the UK.  In reaching that finding, Judge O'Flynn was required  to
    consider  all  the  circumstances  including,  balancing  against   the
    interests of the children, the public interest.  That  was  established
    by the Court of Appeal in R(MA (Pakistan) and  Others)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705.  That decision, post-dates Judge O'Flynn's  determination
    but, nevertheless, sets out the correct approach in law.

43. In any event, the judge made no  reference  to  other  aspects  of  the
    public interest set out in s.117B, in  particular  s.117B(3)  that  the
    appellant is not financially independent and also that his relationship
    with his partner and his private life has been established  at  a  time
    when he has been unlawfully in the UK and that, by virtue of s.117B(4),
    "little weight" should be given to it.

44. I accept the Secretary of State's  contention  that,  in  reaching  his
    finding that the appellant's removal would  be  disproportionate  under
    Art 8, the judge failed properly to apply and consider the factors  set
    put in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

45. The judge's failure properly to  carry  out  the  "balancing"  exercise
    required by MA (Pakistan) in  relation  to  s.117B(6)  also  taint  his
    positive finding under EX.1. that  it  would  "not  be  reasonable"  to
    expect his children to leave the UK (see MA (Pakistan) at [13])

46. For these reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and Art 8 involved the making of  an  error
    of law.  His decision cannot stand and is set aside.

Remaking the Decision

47. Having heard submissions from Mr Richards, on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State and the  appellant  himself,  I  indicated  that  the  judge's
    decision contained an error of law and could not stand.

48. I indicated to the appellant that the decision would need to be remade.
     After some discussion, the appellant indicated firmly and clearly that
    he did not wish the appeal to be  adjourned  in  order  to  obtain  any
    further evidence or advice or representation.  The appellant  indicated
    that he could not afford to travel again to the hearing centre from his
    home.  He unequivocally indicated that  he  wished  me  to  remake  the
    decision at the current hearing.

49. I indicated that, in those circumstances, I would remake  the  decision
    having heard any evidence and submissions from the  appellant  and  any
    submissions from Mr Richards.

50. In the result, the appellant handed up to  me  a  number  of  documents
    relating to his dealings with his (former) legal  representatives.   He
    also gave oral evidence and was cross-examined by Mr Richards.  At  the
    conclusion of the appellant's evidence, I  heard  submissions  from  Mr
    Richards and the appellant as to the proper disposal of the appeal.

Discussion and Findings

51. In making my findings under the Rules and Art  8,  I  apply  the  civil
    standard, namely the balance of probabilities.  The burden of proof  is
    upon the appellant with the exception of the  suitability  requirements
    in S-LTR when the burden is upon the Secretary of State.

52. It is the appellant's case that he came to the United Kingdom  in  1989
    with his mother when he was 14 years old.  He has lived here since that
    time, namely at the date of the application almost 24 years and at  the
    date of the hearing before me 25 years.  Judge O'Flynn did  not  accept
    that he arrived in the UK in 1989 as there was no supporting  evidence.
    But, as Judge O'Flynn pointed out at para  17,  he  did  not  have  the
    benefit of hearing  the  appellant  give  evidence  and  assessing  his
    credibility.  I had that advantage.

53. There is documentary evidence from the appellant's GP that he has  been
    registered with a practice in Tiverton  since  2003.   The  appellant's
    evidence before me was that he had moved to the West Country about  two
    years after he arrived in 1989.  That would place his move to the  West
    Country at around 1991.  His oral evidence was that he lived  with  his
    friend (who had lived three doors away in London) in Exeter and outside
    Exeter together with other friends from the area when he moved in  with
    HB in Tiverton.  His relationship with HB lasted for about  fifteen  or
    sixteen years and they split up about five or six years ago.  HB, in  a
    letter dated 30 April 2015, confirms that she had known  the  appellant
    for about fifteen years and attested to his close relationship with her
    other children and also D and H whose father was the appellant.   Judge
    O'Flynn accepted this evidence and it was not challenged before me.

54. Mr Richards invited me not to find the appellant to  be  a  witness  of
    truth in respect of his country of origin and how long he had  been  in
    the country.  Mr Richards relied upon a number of  inconsistencies  and
    vague responses in his evidence.  In particular,  Mr  Richards  pointed
    out that in his interview under caution he had said that  his  mother's
    boyfriend (D) had picked them up at the airport when they arrived  (see
    question 12 at A3).  However, in his oral evidence he had  denied  that
    her boyfriend had picked them up.  Further, in his  oral  evidence  the
    appellant had said that he had been in a hospital in South  Africa  but
    could not remember its name or whether he was there because  there  was
    something wrong with him or someone else.

55. Further, Mr Richards relied upon the fact that the  appellant  had,  in
    effect, not seen through any enquiries  with  the  South  African  High
    Commission in  seeking  to  establish  his  nationality.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the appellant's evidence, that an application  had  been
    made online to the High Commission by an Immigration  Officer  when  he
    had reported to a police station but he had not followed it  up  (apart
    from a telephone call last November/October) because a fee  had  to  be
    paid, was unsatisfactory.

56. Mr Richards submitted that I should not accept the appellant's evidence
    that he had been in the UK since 1989 and that he was a  South  African
    national.

57. On the basis of that, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to meet the 'suitability' requirement in S-LTR.1.6, namely  that
    his presence was "not conducive to the public good" and also S-LTR.1.7.
    in that the applicant had "without reasonable excuse" failed to  comply
    with the requirement to "provide information".

58. Unlike Judge O'Flynn, I had the benefit of hearing the  appellant  give
    evidence.  I formed the clear impression that the appellant was seeking
    to tell the truth about his immigration history and what he believes is
    his nationality.  He gave detailed but unscripted evidence in  response
    to questions by me recounting his arrival in the UK in  1989  with  his
    mother, that he lived with her and her boyfriend  (D)  for  almost  two
    years before moving to the West Country where he lived in, and outside,
    Exeter for a number of years with friends.   He  began  a  relationship
    with HB and subsequently he moved in with her in Tiverton.  She already
    had  children,  for  whom  he  became  their  effective   father,   and
    subsequently they had two children, D and H born in  January  2004  and
    January 2006 respectively.

59. The appellant's account of his relationship  with  HB  is,  as  I  have
    already noted, supported by  a  letter  from  HB  which  Judge  O'Flynn
    accepted as truthful evidence.  Likewise, the appellant told  me  about
    his split from HB and the subsequent development of a relationship with
    SJ with whom he moved in about four and a half years ago.  They  remain
    together and have a child  born  in  August  2014.   That  evidence  is
    supported by a letter from SJ which, again, was  before  Judge  O'Flynn
    and which he accepted as truthful.

60. The appellant also gave detailed evidence about the process  concerning
    his  application  for  leave  and  his   dealings   with   his   former
    representatives.  He  explained  that  they  had  contacted  the  South
    African High Commission but he had never seen the letter.  He  told  me
    that when he reported at the police station in Exeter he  obtained  the
    help of an Immigration Officer who filled in a  form  on  the  computer
    which he had seen headed "Republic of South Africa" and was  told  that
    it would take three to six weeks for an outcome.  He said  he  did  not
    know whether they sent the form or it was transmitted via the computer.
     He explained how there had  been  confusion  over  the  submission  of
    supporting birth certificates to the Home Office.  He told me  that  he
    had been told that he had to pay �85 approximately for the form  to  be
    filed with the South African High Commission but he had not  been  able
    to afford  that.   He  had  last  telephoned  the  High  Commission  in
    November/October last year but had no dealings with them since.

61. In cross-examination, the appellant was asked why he had not  contacted
    his school (which he had said was in Johannesburg) to  confirm  he  had
    been a pupil; to which he replied he did not know that he was  supposed
    to have done that nobody had told him to do so.  He said  that  he  was
    from South Africa and he had tried his best to prove  his  nationality.
    He had done all that he could.

62. Having heard the appellant give his evidence,  I  accept  that  he  was
    seeking to be a truthful witness.  Much of his account is supported  by
    other evidence which is not now challenged.   The  appellant's  account
    is, largely, consistent.  I do not consider that the discrepancy in his
    account about whether his mother's boyfriend picked them  up  from  the
    airport, in itself, leads to a conclusion that he  is  not  a  reliable
    witness.  That event was many years ago and he was only 14 years of age
    at the time.

63. Whilst I accept that the appellant could, perhaps, have  done  more  to
    establish his nationality with the South  African  High  Commission,  I
    accept that he has attempted to do what he can.  His  account  that  an
    Immigration Officer helped him by filling in a form online would  be  a
    bold lie indeed, if it were a  lie,  given  the  possibility  that  the
    Secretary of State could  produce  evidence  that  it  never  happened.
    There is no such evidence in this  appeal.   The  suggestion  that  the
    appellant should have contacted  his  school  in  Johannesburg  is,  of
    course, a possible course of action that he could have taken but is not
    one, in my judgment,  that  would  immediately  'come  to  mind'.   The
    appellant accepts that he has not sought to find his mother in order to
    support his account but,  equally,  his  evidence  is  that  they  lost
    contact many years ago when he moved to the West Country.

64. It is for the appellant to establish on a balance of probabilities  the
    underlying facts of his  claim.   It  is  not  essential  in  order  to
    establish   nationality   that   an   individual   produce   supporting
    documentation.   For  the  reasons  I  have  given,  having  heard  the
    appellant  give  evidence  and  in  the   light   of   the   supporting
    documentation that exists, I find the  appellant  to  be  credible.   I
    accept the appellant's evidence that he arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in 1989 as he claimed and that he is a South African citizen.

65. Dealing first with the 'suitability' requirement in S-LTR.1.6.,  it  is
    plain from the  preceding  paragraphs  (namely  S-LTR.1.3.-1.5.)  which
    deals with various  levels  of  offending  by  an  individual  that  an
    individual's presence may be "not conducive to the public good" under S-
    LTR.1.6. even where he has no convictions because of his  "conduct  ...
    character, associations, or other reasons".

66. Nevertheless, given the nature of this ground which creates a mandatory
    ground of refusal, those features must be of sufficient seriousness  to
    justify a "non-conducive" conclusion.  I have no doubt  that  a  wilful
    refusal by an individual to engage with the Home Office or in assisting
    them to determine an important aspect of a claim is capable of  falling
    within the rubric of S-LTR.1.6.  Here, however, I am satisfied that the
    appellant has not wilfully refused to assist the Home Office.   Indeed,
    he has, on my findings, sought to assist them  albeit  that  he  could,
    perhaps, have done more.  He was, after all, a child  when  he  entered
    the UK on his account.  It is now said  that  his  failure  to  provide
    documentation as to  his  identity  and  nationality,  taken  with  his
    "difficult and uncooperative" stance at  the  interview  under  caution
    makes his presence in the UK "not conducive to the public good".   That
    is a matter upon which the Secretary  of  State  bears  the  burden  of
    proof.  The record of the appellant's interview  is  at  A1-A5  of  the
    respondent's bundle.  There is no indication  there,  in  my  judgment,
    that the appellant was being uncooperative.  He answered  the  question
    he was asked albeit that he did not know the answers to some,  such  as
    the address in Finsbury Park where he had lived and the surname of  his
    mother's boyfriend.  In my judgment, his conduct at the interview taken
    together with the fact that he has not (in  the  circumstances  I  have
    found) provided documentary evidence of  his  identity  or  nationality
    does  not  lead  me  to  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    established that the appellant's presence in the UK is  "not  conducive
    to the public good".

67. Consequently, I am not satisfied that  the  suitability  ground  in  S-
    LTR.1.6. applies.

68. Turning to S-LTR.1.7., this ground was not relied upon by the Secretary
    of State in her decision letter and it does not  appear  to  have  been
    relied upon before Judge O'Flynn.   It  was  not  relied  upon  in  the
    grounds upon which permission was sought and granted.  It is,  however,
    now relied upon by Mr Richards for the first time.  It is based upon  a
    failure to provide  the  nationality  "information"  to  which  I  have
    referred.   I  have  considerable   reservation   in   permitting   its
    introduction at such a late stage of the proceedings.  If the Secretary
    of State believed it was a viable basis for refusing leave why  has  it
    been such a late arrival to the proceedings?  It is,  in  my  judgment,
    not a point of any significant strength.  The ground, couched with  the
    proviso of doing so "without reasonable excuse", adds  nothing  of  any
    substance to the ground in S-LTR.1.6 in this appeal.  The appellant was
    a child when he came to the UK and it is not surprising that he has  no
    nationality or identifying documents given that he has  been  estranged
    from his mother  since  around  1991.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant has behaved unreasonably, even if he could have done more  in
    his dealings  with  the  South  African  High  Commission.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the Secretary of  State  has  established  that  he  has
    failed "without reasonable excuse" to provide the information.

69. Consequently, I am not satisfied that  the  suitability  ground  in  S-
    LTR.1.7 applies.

70. Having reached those findings, I now turn to consider  the  substantive
    requirements of the Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR.

71. I approach the appellant's claim under Art  8  applying  the  two-stage
    process: first, under the Rules; then second,  outside  the  Rules  and
    whether there are 'compelling; circumstances not adequately or  at  all
    dealt with under the Rules to outweigh the public interest (see,  Singh
    and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  In that latter task, I take into
    account the 'best interest' of the appellant's children as a  'primary'
    but not determinative consideration (see  ZH(Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4).  I also have regard,  in  assessing  proportionality,  to  the
    factors set out in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

72. I begin with the  appellant's  private  life.    In  relation  to  para
    276ADE(1)(iii), as I have accepted the appellant's evidence  and  found
    that he came to the UK in 1989, he has lived  continuously  in  the  UK
    "for  at  least  20  years"  and,  therefore,   succeeds   under   para
    276ADE(iii).

73. In any event, I am satisfied that, even if the appellant has  not  been
    in the UK for 20 years, there are very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in South Africa.  He was young, most likely on any  view  a
    child, when he came to the UK.  He is now 41 years old.  He  has  spent
    the majority of his life in the UK.  There is no evidence that  he  has
    any family, friends or continuing connections with South  Africa.   His
    life has, in effect, for the foreseeable past been in the  UK.   Whilst
    of course he speaks English, the absence of any ties with South  Africa
    whether cultural, familial, social or otherwise would  present  immense
    obstacles to his integration into  a  country  he  has  not  known  for
    decades.  Whilst the  requirement  in  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  undoubtedly
    imposes a 'high hurdle', the problems  of  integration  would  be  very
    significant.

74. For these reasons, the appellant succeeds under para 276ADE.   However,
    I would not rest my decision solely on that basis.  I am also satisfied
    that the appellant succeeds under the 'partner' route and the  'parent'
    route in Appendix FM.

75. Given the positive findings made by Judge O'Flynn, and  which  are  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State at this stage of the  proceedings,
    the appellant succeeds under either route  by  establishing  that  para
    EX.1. applies.  The remaining requirements of R-LTRP (in respect  of  a
    partner) and R-LTRPT (in respect of a parent at least in relation to  D
    and H) are met.  In particular, I am satisfied that the  appellant  has
    established that it would be unreasonable to expect his  children,  all
    of whom are British citizens, to leave the UK  and  live  with  him  in
    South Africa.  In  reaching  that  finding,  I  apply  the  'balancing'
    approach set out in MA (Pakistan).

76. The appellant has a genuine and continuing relationship with his  older
    children whose mother is HB.  They were born on 7 January  2004  and  4
    January 2006.   At  the  date  of  application,  they  were  10  and  8
    respectively.  They are now 12 and  10  years  old  respectively.   The
    evidence before Judge O'Flynn, which he accepted and which is  now  not
    challenged, is that the appellant plays an integral part in their lives
    prior to the breakup of his relationship with HB but that he  continued
    to play a very active part in their lives (see, e.g. para 20).   It  is
    inconceivable that they, given their mother HB is a British citizen and
    no longer in a relationship with the appellant, could  be  expected  to
    leave the UK to live with the appellant.  Despite  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has never had a lawful basis for being in the  UK,  which  is
    reflected in the public interest in effective immigration  control,  it
    would be wholly unreasonable in my judgment to  uproot  those  children
    and relocate them to South Africa.

77. Equally, I am satisfied that it would be unreasonable to expect SJ  who
    has a son (the father of whom is not the appellant) to  leave  the  UK.
    She is established in the UK and her son is established in school.  The
    appellant's involvement with SJ's son, who is  in  primary  school,  is
    supported by letters from the school which Judge O'Flynn referred to at
    paras 31 and 32 and accepted.  Judge O'Flynn found at para 40 that  the
    appellant's removal would "have a devastating effect not  just  on  him
    but on eight  other  people".   That  finding  has  not  been  directly
    challenged and is, in my judgment, supported by the  evidence.   In  my
    judgment, the appellant has established that para EX.1 applies and that
    therefore he succeeds under both the 'parent' and 'partner' route.

78. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed under the Rules.

79. It is not strictly necessary to do so, but I now turn to consider Art 8
    outside the Rules.  I am satisfied that the appellant's  removal  would
    be disproportionate having regard to all the circumstances which, in my
    judgment, are compelling and outweigh the public interest.

80. I was not  addressed  specifically  on  the  'best  interests'  of  the
    children.  I suspect that  may  be  because  the  resolution  of  those
    interests is obvious.  All the children are British citizens.  They are
    young or teenagers and their mothers are also  British  citizens.   The
    best interests of the children from his relationship with HB are to  be
    in the UK with their  mother  and,  if  possible,  with  the  continued
    involvement of the appellant.  I accept the strength of the evidence of
    his involvement with them.  They are not to be  in  South  Africa  (see
    above) with the appellant.  The best interests of his son and  step-son
    (with whom he lives together with SJ), likewise are to  be  with  their
    mother and the appellant in the UK.  They  are  a  'family  unit'  and,
    again, the strength of evidence strongly supports its  continuation  in
    the UK.

81. In reaching my finding, I take into  account  the  public  interest  in
    effective immigration control (s.117B(1)).  The appellant has never, on
    the evidence before me, had any leave to enter or  remain  in  the  UK.
    His presence has always been unlawful.  However,  that  said,  when  he
    entered he was a child, albeit a young teenager.

82. The appellant is proficient in English but this  does  not  detract  or
    lessen the public interest (s.117B(2) and Rhuppiah v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803).

83. I accept that the appellant is not financially independent and that the
    public interest recognised in s.117B(3) applies.

84. Further, I accept that the appellant's private and family life has been
    formed whilst he was unlawfully  in  the  UK  (see  s.117B(4)).   As  a
    consequence, in principle, that private and family life is to be  given
    "little weight".  However, there can be circumstances where appropriate
    weight needs to be given to private and family life  despite  the  fact
    that it has been established whilst the individual is unlawfully in the
    UK or, in the case of private  life,  his  status  is  precarious  (see
    Rhuppiah v SSHD at [53]-[54].  Sales LJ (in the context  of  s.117B(5))
    said this:

         "53. Reading section 117A(2)(a) in conjunction with section 117B(5)
         produces this: "In considering the public  interest  question,  the
         court or tribunal must have regard to the consideration that little
         weight should be given to a private life established by a person at
         a time when the person's immigration status is precarious". That is
         a normative statement which is less definitive than those given  by
         the other sub-sections in section 117B and section 117C. Although a
         court or tribunal should have  regard  to  the  consideration  that
         little weight should be given to private life established  in  such
         circumstances, it is possible without violence to the  language  to
         say that such generalised normative guidance may be  overridden  in
         an exceptional case by particularly strong features of the  private
         life in question, where it is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to
         attach only little weight to private life. That is to  say,  for  a
         case falling within section 117B(5) little weight should  be  given
         to private life established in  the  circumstances  specified,  but
         that approach may be overridden where the private life in  question
         has a special and compelling character. Such an  interpretation  is
         also necessary to prevent section 117B(5) being applied in a manner
         which  would  produce  results  in  some  cases  which   would   be
         incompatible with Article 8,  i.e.  is  necessary  to  give  proper
         effect  to  Parliament's  intention  in  Part  5A;  and  a  similar
         interpretation of section 117B(4) is required,  for  same  reasons.
         .....


         54.  In my  view,  reading  section  117A(2)  and  section  117B(5)
         together in this way, as is appropriate,  means  that  considerable
         weight should be given to Parliament's statement in section 117B(5)
         regarding the approach which should normally be adopted.  In  order
         to identify an exceptional case in  which  a  departure  from  that
         approach would be justified, compelling reasons would  have  to  be
         shown why it was not appropriate. .... Identification of  the  test
         as one of compelling circumstances differentiates the  position  in
         an appropriate way from that  applicable  in  relation  to  foreign
         criminals,  in  relation  to  which  a  test  of  "very  compelling
         circumstances" applies." (emphasis added)


85. Consequently, the normative guidance may be overridden where there  are
    "particularly strong features" of private life and - I would add in the
    context of s.117B(4) - family life.  Judge O'Flynn  made  a  number  of
    positive findings, not subject to challenge,  that  the  appellant  was
    closely involved with  both  his  families  and  that  it  was  in  the
    children's best interests to grow up knowing  their  father  (or  step-
    father).  They are all British citizens.  The lives of the children are
    undoubtedly most firmly rooted in the UK as is the life of SJ.   I have
    already identified above the strength of the  appellant's  claim  based
    upon private and family life.  Here, the appellant came to the UK  when
    he was only 14 years of age.  That is a factor which must be taken into
    account together with the expansive period of time over  which  it  has
    been formed.  He is now 41 years of age.  That is 27 years later.   His
    family life with his  "first  family"  was  formed  over  a  period  of
    fourteen or fifteen years.  His family life with  his  "second  family"
    was formed, after that period, albeit for a shorter time since  he  met
    SJ.  His family ties in the UK must be taken into  account  along  with
    his private life based upon 27 years living in the UK.

86.  Further,  s.117B(6)  applies  as  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his British citizen children (and
    step-child) and, for the reasons I set out above  at  paragraphs  75-77
    (and para 80 in respect of 'best interests), it would  be  unreasonable
    to expect them to leave the UK.

87. I acknowledge that the public interest is engaged given the appellant's
    immigration history  and  give  it  due  weight  in  carrying  out  the
    balancing  exercise  inherent  in  proportionality.   This  is  not   a
    deportation appeal and does not, therefore, engage the stronger  public
    interest where an individual is a "foreign criminal".  As Judge O'Flynn
    noted in his determination, there is no evidence that the appellant has
    any convictions.  There is no evidence that following his arrest  on  4
    December 2014 on suspicion of assault  and  criminal  damage  that  any
    further action was taken.  Taking into account all the factors  I  have
    identified, I am satisfied  that  the  circumstances  are  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the public interest in removing  the  appellant.
    Having full regard to the factors set out in  s.117B,  I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant's removal has not been established to  be  justified
    as a proportionate interference with his private and family life in the
    UK.

88. For these reasons, the appellant has  established  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and that his removal would breach
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

89. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appellant's
    appeal under the Rules and Art 8 involved the making  of  an  error  of
    law.  That decision is set aside.

90. I remake the decision. I allow the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
    and under Art 8 of the ECHR.


                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In allowing the appeal, Judge O'Flynn did not  consider  it  appropriate  to
make a fee award as the outcome of the appeal turned on  evidence  not  made
available to the Secretary of State.  That point remains good and I  see  no
basis for reaching a different conclusion.  No fee award is made.
                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
