
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20424/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                          |On 19 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                     Mr Loic Gaetan Tcheliebou Noubisie
                       (anonymity dirECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Wainwright, Law Klinik LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated  on  15  July  2014.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bagral
    dismissed the appeal  of  the  appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse a residence card to him on  the  basis  of
    his marriage to an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  within  the
    EEA.

 2. The appellant claims that he was married to his partner,  a  Ms  Celine
    Vieira, who is a French national, under a customary marriage which took
    place in the Cameroon on  1  December  2010.   Various  documents  were
    produced as evidence in support of the proxy marriage.   Initially  his
    application for a residence card was refused on the  basis  that  proxy
    marriages were not recognised in the Ivory Coast, but  he  renewed  his
    application. Although the Secretary of State still  refused  to  accept
    that the  marriage  had  been  treated  as  valid  by  the  appropriate
    authorities where it was conducted, that decision was reversed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which made  a  finding  in  paragraph  14  of  the
    determination that it was prepared to accept that the marriage had been
    duly registered in accordance with the law and was thus valid.

 3. However, the next hurdle that had to be overcome  was  to  satisfy  the
    Secretary of State (and the Tribunal on appeal) that the proxy marriage
    was recognised in the country of the nationality  of  the  sponsor,  in
    this case France.  That requirement is compulsory, as set  out  in  the
    case of Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024.  That
    decision has subsequently been clarified and confirmed in the  case  of
    TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.

 4. In the absence of evidence that the marriage  would  be  recognised  in
    France, the appeal was bound to fail regardless of any finding that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge reached on the question of whether the spouse
    was exercising treaty rights. However it was the finding on the  latter
    issue, which was adverse to the appellant, which is the subject  matter
    of the appeal that comes before us with permission of a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal granted on 9 October 2014.

 5. The basic challenge was on the  basis  of  inadequacy  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning in paragraph 15 of the determination  for  rejection  of  the
    evidence that was adduced by the appellant to show that his partner was
    working within the jurisdiction.  She claimed that she was employed  by
    a company called Farkas Cleaning Services Limited. When  the  Secretary
    of State originally refused the application, a legitimate  concern  had
    been raised as to whether or not that company was actually  trading.  A
    company search had been performed for that  company,  and  although  it
    showed it was incorporated on 5 September 2011, at the  time  when  the
    reasoned decision was given it was listed as non-trading and  its  cash
    net worth and current liabilities were unreported.   Not  surprisingly,
    therefore, the Secretary of State said: "this Department has  questions
    regarding whether or not your sponsor is genuinely employed  with  this
    company."

 6. Queries were also raised by the Secretary of State in relation  to  the
    wage slips that were provided and the evidence of money being paid into
    the sponsor's bank account. On behalf of the  appellant  Mr  Wainwright
    submitted that if one looks at the face  of  the  documents  that  were
    supplied, and in particular the payslips, there is nothing to  indicate
    that they are anything other than perfectly  genuine  documents.   They
    bear an national insurance number, they  show  that  tax  was  deducted
    through PAYE, they show the  amount  of  national  insurance  that  was
    deducted, and they show the tax code, all  of  which  could  have  been
    checked by the Secretary of  State  and  verified  with  HM  Revenue  &
    Customs.  They are addressed to the appellant's partner at her  address
    at Katherine Road in London which also appears on her bank  statements,
    so the information is consistent.

 7. In at least one instance the bank statement and the amount of money  on
    the payslips tally  although,  as  the  Judge  said,  there  were  some
    payslips which were adduced in the  bundle  without  the  corresponding
    bank statements and there appears to be  only  one  example  where  the
    payslip and the bank statements match.

 8. The Judge said in the determination that no  further  evidence  of  the
    sponsor's  employment  has  been   adduced   from   HMRC   that   would
    independently verify the sponsor's employment.  Mr  Wainwright  pointed
    out that on the face of the documents they appear to be  genuine;  they
    could easily be checked with HMRC and in the absence of any  reason  to
    dispute their authenticity it is not incumbent on the appellant  to  go
    any further than to produce such documents.

 9. The Judge also said that no response was made by the appellant  to  the
    respondent's assertions in the refusal.  That appears to be a reference
    to the concerns about whether the company Farkas Cleaning Services  was
    trading.  However,  in  the  bundles  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (certainly in the Respondents' bundle) there  was  a  print-out  of  an
    updated web search from Companies House which clearly  shows  that  the
    company was trading, and it was  trading  in  the  sector  of  cleaning
    services which the appellant and his partner attested was the  type  of
    job that she was doing. Although that document may have  emanated  from
    the respondent rather than the appellant, it  was  factually  incorrect
    for the Judge to say that no response has been made to  that  assertion
    that the company was not trading.

10. Although the Judge goes on to say in paragraph 15 "on the  totality  of
    the evidence I am far from satisfied that the sponsor is working" there
    is no real explanation as to why that conclusion was reached or why  he
    felt the evidence was unsatisfactory.  There is no suggestion that  the
    evidence has been concocted or that the documents had been  forged  and
    no such suggestion has been made by the Secretary of State.

11. Looking at the material in the round it does seem to us that  there  is
    an error of law in the way in which the First-tier Tribunal  has  dealt
    with the evidence about the sponsor's work, and if that were  the  only
    point arising on this appeal then there would be very little difficulty
    in coming to the conclusion that the appellant should succeed.

12. However, the problem is whether or not that error of law  is  material.
    Ms Kenny on behalf of the Secretary of State submits that it cannot  be
    a material error of law because one comes back to the fatal flaw in the
    application, namely the failure to provide the evidence that  satisfies
    the test in Kareem. We agree with those submissions.  The  position  is
    that the application as it stood at the time the appeal came before the
    First-tier Tribunal was doomed to failure by reason of the  absence  of
    that evidence.  That remains the case.

13. Of course it will always be open to  the  appellant  to  make  a  fresh
    application with supporting documentation and to  provide  the  missing
    evidence of the recognition of his marriage under French law, but given
    that that evidence was missing before the First-tier Tribunal,  we  are
    unable to come to the conclusion that the error that we find  was  made
    in the determination  actually  had  any  significant  bearing  on  the
    outcome. The appeal fell to be  dismissed  in  any  event  for  reasons
    identified specifically by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  paragraph
    13 of the determination where he said: "As a starting point there is no
    evidence that the marriage is recognised  in  France,  the  country  of
    nationality of the sponsor."

14. For those reasons, and obviously with some regret given  that  we  find
    that the point that was raised by Mr Wainwright was well-made as far as
    it went, we dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed [pic]Date 13 November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews



