

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20342/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 15 July 2013              |
|Delivered orally on 24 June 2013              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                             NICOL NSOBAM GEMUH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of the Cameroon who was born on 25  October
      1980.  On 11 April of 2012 he applied for a residence card as evidence
      of his permanent right of residence under  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003).  That was based upon a
      claimed retained right following the divorce of the appellant from  an
      EEA national.  On 11 September 2012 the Secretary of State refused the
      appellant's application on the basis that the appellant had failed  to
      establish that retained right under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

   2. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  following  a
      hearing Judge Whiting dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  2006
      EEA Regulations and also under Article 8 of the European Convention on
      Human Rights.  On 27 February  2013  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      Ievins) granted the appellant permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal.
      The appeal initially came before me on 23 April.  In a decision  dated
      17 May 2013, I concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
      relation to the appellant's claim for a retained  right  of  residence
      did not disclose any error of law and that decision should stand.   My
      reasons are set out in full in my decision and it is not necessary  to
      repeat them here.

   3. In addition to the claim based upon his previous marriage,  an  aspect
      of the evidence before Judge Whiting concerned the appellant's claimed
      relationship with a French national, Ms Livia Lienafa.   Part  of  the
      appellant's  claim  was  that  he  and  Ms  Lienafa  had  a   'durable
      relationship' and that he was therefore an extended family  member  of
      Ms Lienafa and that, therefore, he should be considered as such  under
      regulation 8 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.   As  I  made  clear  in  my
      decision, the Judge failed to deal with that matter and so I set aside
      the Judge's decision to that extent only so that  the  decision  under
      regulation 8 could be remade.

   4. The hearing took place before me on 24 June 2013.  The  appellant  was
      not represented and the respondent was represented by Mr Hibbs.

   5. The appellant placed before me a number of documents including letters
      from the school of his claimed partner's children and from her college
      where, his case was, that she was studying together with a  number  of
      other documents which showed addresses at which the appellant  claimed
      to live and at which Ms Lienafa claimed to live.    In addition, I had
      a brief statement of 21 January 2013 from the  appellant  and  also  a
      statement from Ms Lienafa of that date together with a letter dated 21
      June 2013.  Ms Lienafa and the appellant both gave oral evidence.

   6. Their evidence was in harmony as to  their  circumstances.   They  had
      both known one another for some time when they met in  the  summer  of
      2007.  In April 2012 however their relationship  developed  such  that
      they started to date and see one another.  Ms Lienafa has two children
      (David and Samuel); their father is not the appellant.  They are  aged
      5 and 3.  Between April of last year and Christmas and the New Year of
      2013, the evidence of both the appellant and Ms Lienafa was that their
      relationship developed further. The appellant began staying over at Ms
      Lienafa's property at 86 Letterstone Road,  Rhymney  in  Cardiff.  The
      evidence was that gradually the number of nights  that  the  appellant
      stayed became more and more until in  the  end  he  was  staying  most
      nights and certainly around five nights each  week.   The  appellant's
      evidence was that he had his own property in Grangetown in Cardiff and
      he would return there some nights but at some point  before  Christmas
      of last year, the appellant and Ms Lienafa  decided  that  they  would
      move in together and as soon as the appellant was able to rent out his
      property which he said he had now done he moved in full time  to  live
      with Ms Lienafa at her address where she lives with her two  children.
       They share the bills and outgoings.  Ms Lienafa pays the council  tax
      and for the food.  The appellant pays the rent and the utility bills.

   7. The evidence from both Ms Lienafa and the appellant was of the serious
      nature of their relationship and that the appellant was fully involved
      with the upbringing of her two children.  He effectively  fulfils  the
      parental role of a father looking after them when Ms  Lienafa  is  not
      around and she gave evidence of how when she was studying he had, when
      David the older  child  had  become  ill,  called  the  ambulance  and
      accompanied David to the hospital.

   8. The documentary evidence which I will not set out in detail, since  it
      is largely not contentious, shows either one or other party living  at
      the address of 86 Letterstone Road  or  both  parties  living  at  the
      address in Letterstone Road.  At the hearing, the appellant produced a
      P60 for the tax year ending April 2013 which also shows that  address.
      Ms Lienafa's evidence was that she is a student  at  the  Cardiff  and
      Vale College. She is undertaking a BTech in Business Studies  and  has
      just completed Level 2. She told me that she had been informed through
      a phone call from her tutor that she had acquired a merit and was able
      now to move on next year to Level 3, beginning in September.  That  is
      a two year course and there is documentary evidence from  the  Cardiff
      and Vale College in  letters  dated  4  June  2013  and  15  May  2013
      confirming her studies.  Both witnesses confirmed that  the  appellant
      is employed working for a company providing satellite TV.

   9. The relevant legal provision  is  regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  EEA
      Regulations which states that an extended family  member   of  an  EEA
      national is:

           "...the partner of  an  EEA  national...and  can  prove  to  the
           decision maker that he is in a durable relationship with the EEA
           national.

  10. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish on a balance of
      probabilities  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of  the  2006   EEA
      Regulations.

  11. On behalf of the respondent Mr Hibbs cross-examined both the appellant
      and Ms Lienafa.  Having done so, his submissions  consisted  of  this:
      he relied upon the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  that  a  durable
      relationship normally requires a relationship to last  for  two  years
      and for it to be one akin to marriage.  He submitted briefly that  the
      bills were in different names and could be obtained but there  was  no
      Government Department documents which would be  perhaps  more  cogent.
      It was at this point that the appellant handed up his P60 showing  the
      address claimed to be in common with Ms Lienafa.

  12. In reaching my findings I have taken into account the evidence of  the
      appellant and Ms Lienafa and the documents submitted by the appellant.
       I had the benefit of  hearing  the  appellant  and  Ms  Lienafa  give
      evidence and I formed a clear view on the credibility of the witnesses
      I heard.  Mr Hibbs did not expose any defects in their evidence  which
      lead me to doubt they were telling the truth.  They  both  gave  their
      evidence in a clear way without any suggestion of delay  in  order  to
      contrive an answer and I accept what they say as being the truth.  The
      substance of their evidence is supported by the documentary  evidence.
      I make the following findings on the evidence.

  13. I accept that Ms Lienafa (whom it is accepted is French) is a  student
      and therefore an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

  14. The next question is whether the appellant has  established  that  his
      relationship with  Ms  Lienafa  is  a  "durable"  one  falling  within
      Regulation 8.  I  have  no  doubt  that  their  relationship  is  most
      certainly one "akin to marriage".  They cohabit and have done so since
      Christmas  2012/New  Year  2013;  they  share   in   effect   parental
      responsibility for Ms Lienafa's two children; they share the costs  of
      running the home that they share in common and the photographs  I  saw
      concerning a recent family event, namely the  baptism  of  one  of  Ms
      Lienafa's sons, shows in my view that they  live  in  a  happy  family
      environment.  I have no doubt that they live together  and  that  they
      are living in a  relationship  akin  to  marriage.   The  question  of
      whether it is durable is not resolved simply  by  asking  whether  the
      relationship has lasted for  two  years.   Although,  of  course,  the
      duration of a relationship is relevant  to  its  "durability".   Their
      relationship has existed since April 2012.  It has developed over that
      time to the present  situation  where  they  are  a  couple  with  the
      appellant performing a parental role towards Ms  Lienafa's  sons.    A
      durable relationship means a lasting or  continuing  relationship  for
      the future. It is one  that  because  of  its  nature  has  continuing
      substance into the future.  Both the appellant and Ms Lienafa told  me
      about their plans to marry either at the end of  this  year  or  early
      next year when they are able to complete  what  they  started,  namely
      saving money to do that.  I am satisfied that their relationship is an
      established one - one of substance and genuine  and  one  intended  to
      continue into the future and mature into marriage in due  course.   In
      my view their relationship is one that can properly be described as  a
      "durable relationship" within the 2006 Regulations.

  15. For these reasons I am satisfied on a balance  of  probabilities  that
      the appellant  is  an  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
      exercising Treaty rights and falls within regulation 8(5) of the  2006
      EEA Regulations.

  16. That finding does not in itself entitle the appellant to  a  residence
      card.  Rather it engages the provision in regulation 17(4) of the 2006
      EEA Regulations which sets out the Secretary of State's discretion  to
      grant a residence card to an extended family member of an EEA national
      exercising Treaty Rights.  It is that which the appellant is  entitled
      to in this appeal: see Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
      00340 (IAC).  The appellant  is  an  extended  family  member  and  it
      remains for the Secretary of State  to  decide  how  to  exercise  her
      discretion under regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

Decision

  17. Consequently the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error of law to the  extent  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      decide whether the appellant was an extended family member of  an  EEA
      national exercising Treaty rights.

  18. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal on the  basis
      that the appellant had not established a right of permanent  residence
      based upon a retained right derived in part from his  former  marriage
      stands.

  19. I remake the decision allowing the appeal to the extent  that  I  have
      indicated, namely that the Secretary of State's decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law as the appellant has  proved  that  he  is  an
      extended family member of an EEA national.  It is for the Secretary of
      State to consider  whether  discretion  should  be  exercised  in  the
      appellant's favour to grant him  a  residence  card  under  regulation
      17(4) of the 2006 EEA Regulations..




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    15th July 2013














