
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/20062/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On November 6, 2015                  |On November 11, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MR RONALD MUKIBI
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Arlington Crown Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Uganda  and  he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as on the basis of his private and family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused his  application  on  April  23,  2014  and  the
    appellant appealed against that decision under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 1, 2014.

 3. The matter was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott  on  May
    12, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on June  2,  2015  the  Tribunal
    refused his appeal under Immigration Rules and under ECHR.

 4. The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  June  16,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had  erred  by  failing  to  find  family  life
    existed for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR and by failing to have  full
    regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers on August 17, 2015 on the  basis  the  grounds  were  arguable
    albeit he indicated the appellant  should  not  take  the  granting  of
    permission of permission as an indication the appeal would succeed.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Hawkin had represented the appellant at the earlier hearing and  had
    drafted the grounds of appeal. He submitted that the Tribunal had erred
    by failing to find that family life existed between the  appellant  and
    his mother. It was clear from the evidence that the appellant  provided
    the necessary support for his  mother  and  in  light  of  her  medical
    condition he submitted that the ties  between  her  and  the  appellant
    amounted to far more than the  normal  emotional  ties  that  generally
    existed  between  a  mother  and  an  adult   child.   In   considering
    proportionality the Tribunal also erred by failing to have full  regard
    to the positive factors reflected in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 8. Mr Kotas relied on the Rule 24 statement  dated  August  28,  2015  and
    submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had  addressed  those  issues   between
    paragraphs [38] to [40], [50] to [51] and [56] to  [57].  The  Tribunal
    had, in particular, noted  the  appellant's  mother  was  in  full-time
    employment as well as having a part-time  job.  The  findings  made  on
    family life were  neither  perverse  nor  irrational  and  Mr  Hawkin's
    submissions amounted to a mere disagreement. As regards section 117B of
    the 2002 Act the Tribunal had reminded itself that immigration  control
    was in the public interest and was entitled  to  find  the  appellant's
    private life  had  been  created  whilst  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious. The fact the appellant spoke  English  and  apparently  was
    capable of being supported by his mother  did  not  mean  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove him. The decision taken by the Tribunal  was
    fully open to it.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

 9. Permission to appeal had been granted to the appellant on the basis  it
    was arguable that the Tribunal had erred  by  not  factoring  into  its
    decision the provisions of part 5A of the 2002 Act or the interests  of
    the appellant's mother.

10. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  September  9,  2013  as  a
    family visitor and his leave was valid  until  February  28,  2014.  He
    applied for leave to remain to care for his mother and  in  considering
    his appeal the Tribunal had regard to the oral evidence given  by  both
    the appellant and his mother as well as the 115-page bundle of evidence
    submitted on his behalf.

11.  The  Tribunal  had  noted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules but considered the appeal outside
    of the Immigration Rules.

12. Mr Hawkin had accepted that no application had been made for  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM under the Immigration Rules and at the earlier
    hearing he had conceded it would be difficult to  argue  the  appellant
    had no ties with Uganda given the period of time he had lived in Uganda
    compared to the time he had lived here.

13. The Tribunal had regard to the appellant's  mother's  health  condition
    and the report provided by the doctor.   Mr  Hawking  argued  that  the
    tribunal failed to have regard  to  the  appellant's  mother's  medical
    condition and her specific  needs  but  I  am  satisfied  the  tribunal
    balanced the oral and written evidence of  her  condition  against  the
    fact that she continued to work full time as a  supervisor  in  a  care
    home and had an additional part-time cleaning job.

14. The Tribunal had concluded that the appellant's mother  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that she required any physical care other  than  for  short
    periods of time and concluded, as it was entitled to, that not only did
    she hold down two different jobs but she had previously availed herself
    of NHS care in the United Kingdom and would be able to in the future.

15. The Tribunal acknowledged the appellant's  mother  would  not  wish  to
    return to Uganda but in assessing the extent of any  family  life  that
    existed the Tribunal took account of the  level  of  contact  that  had
    previously taken place between the appellant and his mother  and  noted
    that for many years their relationship had been conducted  at  a  great
    distance.

16. The Tribunal concluded at paragraph  [53]  there  were  no  exceptional
    reasons to apply Article 8 outside the Rules but nevertheless  went  on
    to consider whether the appellant had either family or private life.

17. At paragraph [54] the Tribunal reminded itself that any dependence  had
    to go beyond normal emotional ties  and  that  each  case  was  a  fact
    sensitive case. The finding at paragraph [55] that the  dependence  did
    not go beyond normal emotional ties was a finding that was open to  the
    appellant and the Tribunal provided various reasons for that conclusion
    and I am satisfied those findings were clearly open to it. Accordingly,
    the finding at paragraph 56 was finding fully open to it and  there  is
    no error of law by the tribunal in not considering family  life  within
    the terms of Article 8.

18. The Tribunal considered at paragraph [57] the issue of private life but
    noted that his private life had been established when he  knew  he  had
    only been given permission to stay in the United Kingdom for a  limited
    period. The appellant had come for a visit  and  the  fact  he  created
    friendships and worked as a  volunteer  merely  demonstrated  that  the
    private life he had created was created at a time when his  immigration
    status was precarious.

19. In any event, the Tribunal went on to consider proportionality  between
    paragraphs [58] and [60] and concluded that any interference  would  be
    proportionate.

20. The appellant made his application in full knowledge that  he  did  not
    meet the Immigration Rules.

21. Whilst the Tribunal did not specifically mention the factors set out in
    section 117B I find the fact  favourable  answers  are  given  to  sub-
    sections parts of section 117B did not alter the  starting  point  that
    the maintenance of effective immigration  control  was  in  the  public
    interest.

22. Although the appellant speaks  English  and  his  mother  was  able  to
    financially support him the Tribunal and I have to have regard  to  the
    fact the Immigration Rules were not met  and  the  fact  there  was  no
    family life within the meaning of Article 8 and the appellant's private
    life had been established whilst his immigration status was  precarious
    were significant matters the Tribunal was entitled to have regard to.

23. In the circumstances, I find the Tribunal's findings were  open  to  it
    and there was no material error of law in either the approach to family
    life or the ultimate decision to refuse the appeal under Article 8.

    DECISION

24. There was no material error.

25. I uphold the original decision and dismiss the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
