


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20892/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2017                     |On 23 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             ALIEEH MOSSAVIEVAKY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Nowaparast, NLS Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1. I refer to the Appellant as the Secretary of State and to the  Respondent
   as the Claimant in this appeal. The Claimant is a national  of  Iran  who
   was born on 3 March 1953.  On 7 January 2013 she  applied  for  leave  to
   remain in the UK on the basis of her family and private life with her son
   Amir Reza as her dependant. The application was  refused  on  5  November
   2013. The application was reconsidered and refused again on 17 July  2014
   and her son's application was granted under the private life route  until
   17 December 2016.  The Secretary  of  State  considered  her  application
   under the parent and private life route and refused her application in  a
   decision dated 11 May 2015. The Claimant appealed against  this  decision
   to the First-tier Tribunal under  section  82  (1)  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Her appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge O'Rourke in a decision promulgated on 20 October 2016.

2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
   and permission was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
   Manuell on 14 February 2017. The grounds for the grant of permission were
   that it was not easy to see how an appeal which was bought under  Article
   8 ECHR could have been allowed under the  Immigration  Rules,  let  alone
   which  Immigration  Rule  applied.  The  reasoning  was  found  to   lack
   discernible logic.

3. I found that there was a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons recorded at paragraph 9  of
   the decision:


    "The Respondent's decision is dated 11 May 2015  and  hence  the  appeal
    provisions introduced by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  applied  and  the
    Claimant had an appeal on human rights grounds only unless  transitional
    provisions applied. It does not appear to have been argued that the  new
    provisions did not apply to the Claimant nor is any finding made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in that regard. In the circumstances, the First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Rules.
    Further, the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the Claimant met  the
    requirements of the Rules is unreasoned. It is not clear which  Rule  is
    being applied to the Claimant or why the  Claimant,  whose  son  was  21
    years old, would satisfy the requirements of that Rule. The reasoning is
    not adequate as fairness requires that the losing party should  be  left
    in no doubt why they have won or lost. In this case it  is  unclear  why
    the appeal was allowed. In the circumstances I find  that  there  was  a
    material error of law."

   4. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and adjourned with
      directions for the remaking of the decision in the appeal in the Upper
      Tribunal. I preserved the findings of fact  at  paragraph  15  of  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


    The Re-making of the decision in the appeal


    The Hearing

   5. The Claimant and her son, Amir Reza, adopted their witness statements.
      They were not asked  questions  in  examination  in  chief  or  cross-
      examined. I heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Richards
      submitted that it was clear that the Claimant had no claim  to  remain
      under the Rules and it was purely a claim under Article 8  outside  of
      the Rules. Given the findings of fact in paragraph 15  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal's determination it was clear that there  was  no  family
      life in the UK. The Claimant's sons were  adults  and  were  perfectly
      capable  of  looking  after  themselves.   There  was  nothing  of  an
      exceptional nature in  her  private  life  in  the  UK  and  when  the
      Claimant's rights as an individual were balanced  against  the  public
      interest in maintaining an effective immigration control, the decision
      of the Secretary of State was clearly  proportionate  especially  when
      one bore in mind that the Claimant also had children in Iran. He asked
      me to dismiss the appeal.

    6. Ms Nowaparast confirmed that the Claimant relied on Article 8 outside
       the Rules. However, she asked me to attach weight to the  history  of
       the case. Had the application been decided in accordance with the law
       the Claimant would have had leave. The Claimant  had  an  established
       private life with her eldest and youngest son. She resided  with  her
       eldest son and was dependent on  him  financially.  She  also  had  a
       family life with her younger son although they lived  under  separate
       roofs. Despite the unfortunate circumstances where they  were  forced
       to live apart there  was  a  dependency  on  his  mother.  Her  son's
       evidence was that he stayed with them whenever possible and the  only
       reason was that they were living apart was  due  to  the  unfortunate
       circumstances that there was inability to keep up mortgage  payments.
       Despite them both being adults and despite the ability of the  oldest
       son to look after himself, the youngest son's evidence  was  that  he
       needed his mother there. She asked me to find that there was a family
       life that existed between all three family members. It  was  of  note
       that the Claimant and her son's evidence regarding the  breakdown  of
       the relationship with the father was the same. She  did  not  have  a
       husband. Addressing proportionality and  the  public  interest,  when
       balancing her rights she asked me to take into consideration that she
       had the ability to speak English and she was here  for  a  long  time
       with lawful residency and she had  established  a  private  life.  In
       terms of proportionality the history of the case was  something  that
       ought to be taken into consideration.  She  asked  me  to  take  into
       consideration that she had  been  here  since  2003.   She  addressed
       return to Iran in paragraph 5 and 8 of her witness  statement.  There
       was an error in relation to period of her absence from the UK in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   She  asked  me  to  take  into
       consideration the effects on her two sons in the UK  should  they  be
       separated from their mother. Any separation was  likely  to  be  more
       than temporary.


Discussion


    7. I preserved the findings of the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  15
       of the decision. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke found that at the
       date of the hearing before him, the Claimant's youngest son, as a  21
       year old in employment, no longer had any greater dependency  on  the
       Claimant than any other young man of the same age would have  on  his
       mother. He found that he was independent and self-supporting. He  did
       not accept the Claimant's descriptions of her  connections  in  Iran.
       She had two sons and two siblings there and he found that  there  was
       no reason to suppose they would not support her. Further, no  medical
       evidence was  provided  and  there  was  no  reason  to  assume  that
       treatment for her conditions would not be available to her  in  Iran.
       In respect of her private life he found that she  had  never  worked,
       being latterly financially dependent on  her  son,  Amir  Masood  and
       formerly on her husband. She ceased her studies in the UK in 2005  on
       health grounds, but no medical evidence had been presented in respect
       of those matters. There were letters of support attesting to her good
       character. She remained fluent in Farsi.


    8. At the hearing before me, the Claimant relied on a witness  statement
       which was received under cover of a letter dated 5 October  2017.  In
       it she states that she came to the UK in April 2003 in order to  find
       a place of study and was accepted by Swansea University. She returned
       to Iran after three months and then was granted entry clearance as  a
       student and came to the UK in September 2011 with her three children.
       She details how she remained here as a student until  February  2009,
       returning to Iran in December 2009  when  her  mother  was  ill.  She
       describes her studies and says that her health is deteriorating every
       day. She considers that she has now adapted to UK society. Amir  Reza
       now works full time in Toby Carvery. She lived with him  in  a  house
       she had bought in 2007 but this was repossessed in  January  2016  as
       she could not keep up the mortgage payments. She then  went  to  live
       with her eldest son in a two bedroom flat and Amir has lived  with  a
       family friend near to his place of work. She says she still  plays  a
       role in his life and he depends on her  emotionally.  She  cooks  for
       him, washes his clothes and is there for him. She is concerned  about
       his future if she were to return to Iran.


    9. Amir Reza's statement is at page  7  of  the  Claimant's  bundle.  He
       states that his mother is his rock and the thought of  her  returning
       to Iran makes him feel devastated. He feels his mother and his  older
       brother in the UK are the only family he now has.  Although  they  do
       not live together she does a lot for him. He would  feel  scared  for
       her if she went back and a woman of her age and illness would not  be
       able to cope with the change.

  10. In PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer Chennai  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      612 the Court of Appeal court considered Ghising (family life - adults
      - Gurkha - policy) [2012] UKUT 00160  (IAC)   and  its  post-  Ghising
      decision in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]
      EWCA Civ. 630. Underhill LJ stated (at [26]) that  the  principles  in
      Kugathas had to be understood in the light of the subsequent case law,
      including the decision in Singh's case.  In Singh's case  Sir  Stanley
      Burnton,  stated  at  [24]  that   there   was   no   requirement   of
      "exceptionality", that all depends on the facts, and that  there  must
      be something more than the love and affection between an adult and his
      parents or siblings which will not of  itself  justify  a  finding  of
      family life. He also stated that a young adult living with his parents
      will normally have a family life to be respected under article 8.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal made no finding as  to  whether  family  life
       existed between the Claimant and her sons. However, as stated  above,
       he found that Amir did not depend on his mother, lived  independently
       and was self-supporting. At the date of the hearing  before  me,  the
       Claimant and her son live apart, he is now 22  years  old  and  works
       full-time. Whilst I accept that they see each  other  regularly,  and
       that she will cook for him and wash his clothes, I find that the love
       and affection between them is normal  and  there  are  no  additional
       elements  of  dependency  or  evidence  of  'real',  'committed'   or
       'effective' support (Ghising).


   12. The Claimant's older son with whom she lives did not give evidence at
       the hearing and there is no witness statement from him. He  was  born
       in 1980 and he and the Claimant are living together through force  of
       circumstances as she was unable to pay her mortgage payments and  her
       house was repossessed. The evidence before me does not show that they
       enjoy family life.


   13. In addressing the questions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 I find that  the
       Claimant does not enjoy family life  in  the  UK  but  that  she  has
       established a private life since she came here in 2003. I  also  find
       that the proposed interference is of sufficient gravity to engage the
       operation of Article 8 and that the  interference  is  in  accordance
       with the law and necessary in a  democratic  society.  The  remaining
       question is therefore whether the interference  is  proportionate  to
       the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


   14. My starting point in terms of proportionality is whether the Claimant
       can satisfy the Immigration Rules. Ms  Nowaparast  did  not  seek  to
       argue that the Claimant met the requirements of  E-LTRP2.2.  She  did
       not seek to persuade me that the Claimant meets the  requirements  of
       paragraph 276 ADE  (1)  (iv)  of  the  Rules  which  require  her  to
       demonstrate that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  her
       integration,  but  I  consider  it  here  for  completeness.   As  an
       Immigration Rule, it ranks as a statement of the Secretary of State's
       policy, to be contrasted with a legal Rule.  I am  required  to  give
       considerable weight to such policy statements: Hesham Ali v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 at [46].  The  First-
       tier Tribunal found that there would be no serious obstacles  to  her
       integration into Iran as she had spent fifty years of her life there,
       is well-educated, speaks Farsi and has two adult sons,  two  siblings
       and a husband (even if estranged) living in that country.


   15. In SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 Lord Justice Sales gave a  broad
       definition of 'integration' -


"It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job  or  to  sustain  life
    while living in the other country ... The idea  of  'integration'  calls
    for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the  individual
    will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the
    society  in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
    participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted
    there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that  society  and
    to build up within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships to
    give substance to the individual's private or family life."


   16.  In  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part   5A   -   compelling
       circumstances test) [2017] UKUT  00013  (IAC)  the  Hon.  Mr  Justice
       McCloskey held at [37]:


"The other limb of the test, "very significant obstacles",  erects  a  self-
    evidently elevated threshold, such that mere hardship, mere  difficulty,
    mere hurdles and mere upheaval or inconvenience, even where  multiplied,
    will generally be insufficient  in  this  context.  The  philosophy  and
    reasoning,  with  appropriate  adjustments,  of  this  Tribunal  in  its
    exposition of the sister test "unduly harsh" in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015]
    UKUT 223 at [46] apply."


   17. According to the Claimant's witness statement, she has  visited  Iran
       in December 2005 and from September 2006 to January 2007. It  remains
       the case that she has close relatives there. Although she  states  in
       her witness statement that her health is deteriorating every day  and
       that she  is  under  a  consultant  for  asthma,  diabetes  and  high
       cholesterol, no supporting medical evidence has been submitted nor is
       there any evidence to show that medication would not be available  in
       Iran. She is well-educated and still  speaks  fluent  Farsi.  In  the
       circumstances I find that on return to Iran she  would  still  be  an
       'insider' and have the capacity to participate in  society  there.  I
       find that whilst there may be initial  inconvenience  in  relocating,
       given the length of her residence and existence  of  close  relatives
       there would not be very significant obstacles to her integration.


   18. I find therefore that the Claimant does not meet the requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules in any capacity.


   19. I now also address, having regard to all the factors relevant to  the
       balancing  exercise,  and  applying  the  "balance  sheet"   approach
       approved by the Supreme Court in Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of  State
       [2016] UKSC, whether the Claimant's removal would be proportionate.


   20. Sections 117A and 117B are found in part 5A of the 2002 Act and apply
       in all cases where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to  determine
       whether a  decision  made  under  the  Immigration  Acts  breaches  a
       person's rights under Article 8.


Section 117A is as follows:

           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).


   21. The considerations referred to in section 117A(2)(a), which are  said
       by that provision to be applicable in  all  cases  where  the  public
       interest question is under consideration, are as follows:

            (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
           public interest.

           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.


   22.  In  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part   5A   -   compelling
       circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  held
       that in the case of a foreign national who is  not  an  offender  the
       following test applies in relation to private life at [47]:

    "We return to the question posed above: what is the  legal  test  to  be
    applied in a case such as the present?  The answer, which we deduce from
    a combination of the governing statutory provisions and, in  particular,
    the decision in Rhuppiah, is that these Appellants  must  demonstrate  a
    compelling (not very compelling) case in order to  displace  the  public
    interests inclining towards their removal from the United  Kingdom.   In
    formulating this principle, we do not overlook the question  of  whether
    the adverb "very" in truth adds anything to the adjective  "compelling",
    given that the latter partakes of an absolute flavour.  It seems  to  us
    that the judicially formulated test of "very  compelling  circumstances"
    has been driven by  the  aim  of  placing  emphasis  on  the  especially
    elevated threshold which must be overcome by foreign national offenders,
    particularly those convicted of the more serious  crimes,  who  seek  to
    displace the potent public interests favouring  their  deportation.   In
    contrast, immigrants such as these Appellants confront a  less  daunting
    threshold."

   23. The Claimant entered the UK in April 2003 and was granted  successive
       periods of entry clearance as  a  student  until  February  2009.  In
       September 2009 she applied for leave to remain under Article  8  with
       her son Amir Reza and this was refused  on  6  October  2009  with  a
       limited right of appeal. On 7 January 2013 she applied for  leave  to
       remain on the basis of her family  and  private  life  but  this  was
       refused on 5 November 2013.  The  application  was  reconsidered  and
       refused again in July 2014. The Claimant's private life was therefore
       established at a time when her status was precarious between 2003 and
       2009 and  thereafter  she  had  no  leave  and  she  was  in  the  UK
       unlawfully. By statute I am required to give  little  weight  to  her
       private life. I have born in mind also what  Mr Justice McCloskey has
       recently said in the case of Kaur (children's best interests / public
       interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC), namely that the  "little
       weight" provisions in Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  do  not  entail  an
       absolute, rigid measurement or concept; "little  weight"  involves  a
       spectrum which, within its self-contained boundaries, will result  in
       the measurement of the quantum of weight  considered  appropriate  in
       the fact sensitive context of every case.


   24. In relation to the other factors  required  to  be  considered  under
       s117B, the maintenance  of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
       interest. The Claimant can obtain no positive right  to  a  grant  of
       leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree  of
       fluency in English, or the strength of  her  financial  resources  as
       these are neutral factors (Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803). In Rhuppiah
       the Court  of  Appeal  held  at  paragraph  63  that  the  expression
       'financially independent' should be given its natural meaning  of  as
       indicating someone who is  financially  independent  of  others.  The
       Claimant is not financially independent because she is  dependent  on
       her son. There is no supporting evidence as to her ability  to  speak
       English and but I accept given the period she has been here  and  the
       fact that she studied at Swansea University that she may well do so.


   25. The Claimant argues that it would be disproportionate to  remove  her
       because  of  her  relationship  with  her  sons,  her   health,   her
       integration into the community in the UK and the fact that she has no
       one to go to and no house to return to in Iran. She also argues  that
       she made an application for leave to remain in January 2013 when  her
       youngest son was under the age of 18 and she should have been granted
       leave in line with him. She argues  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
       decision to refuse her leave at the time was unlawful and  that  this
       weighs in her favour in the proportionality exercise.


   26. I accept that she enjoys a strong relationship with  her  adult  sons
       and her return to Iran would mean they did  not  see  each  other  as
       often. However, both are working and have each other for support. The
       relationships can be maintained by way of visits and modern means  of
       communication. The Claimant also has two sons in Iran and  I  do  not
       accept that she would be without accommodation on return or that  her
       UK based sons would not send her money if she needed it.  Whilst  she
       may now feel that the UK is her home, she lived in Iran for 50  years
       and would be able to integrate on return. As stated above,  there  is
       no evidence before me as to her medical condition.


   27. Ms Nowaparast has not sought to argue that this case is analogous  to
       the 'historic' injustice line of case law and in any event, the ratio
       of these cases is that where children have grown up and  embarked  on
       lives of their own, the bonds which constituted family  life  are  no
       longer be there and Article 8 has no purchase. Whilst I  accept  that
       the fact that Amir Reza may well have satisfied the  requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules in 2013 when the application was made  and  had
       the decision been made correctly, the Claimant may have been  granted
       leave in line. However, he is now 22 and leads an  independent  life.
       Whilst I accept that some weight has to be given to the fact that she
       should have been granted leave in line with her son in 2013 I do  not
       consider that weight to be  great  in  the  light  of  their  present
       circumstances.


   28. Weighing all the factors in the balance and giving due weight to  the
       public interest I find that  the  Claimant  has  not  demonstrated  a
       compelling case and that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is  a
       proportionate one as the interests of  immigration  control  outweigh
       the Claimant's private life ties.


 Notice of Decision


Having set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  re-make  the
      decision in the appeal by dismissing it on Article 8 grounds.


      No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Dated

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

