
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20998/2015
     IA/21010/2015
     IA/21007/2015
     IA/21002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 27, 2017                        |On  October 3, 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR G K
                                   MRS K G
                                MASTER I G K
                                MASTER I G K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
     Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I make an anonymity direction in this matter pursuant to Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellants  are  citizens  of  India  with  the  first  and  second
    appellants being husband and wife and the third and  fourth  appellants
    being their children.

 3. On November 19, 2014 the appellants lodged an application for leave  to
    remain  on  compelling  and  compassionate  grounds  outside   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent refused their  applications  on  May
    20, 2015 and grounds of appeal  were  lodged  by  the  appellants.  The
    matter was listed before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shanahan
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on June  10,  2016  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on July 4, 2016 she dismissed their appeals.

 4. The appellants appealed those decisions and permission  to  appeal  was
    refused firstly by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Easterman  on
    October 21, 2016 and secondly by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on  January
    10, 2017.

 5. The appellants lodged a judicial review on February 9, 2017 and on  May
    4, 2017 the High Court stated-

         "This is a very rare case in which I think  there  is  an  arguable
         case based on the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  conclusion  in  [49]
         and the importance of the seven years since the age of 4 that I has
         been here. Apart from section 55 the  question  of  proportionality
         arises in respect of his private life. In addition, while there has
         been some overstaying it is clear that the father was initially let
         down and subsequently given very poor advice by his  representative
         so that the overstaying is not blatant. If no request for a hearing
         is made the court will make a final order quashing the  refusal  of
         permission without a further hearing."

 6. On July 21, 2017 Vice President Ockelton granted permission to appeal.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard submissions  on
    the error or law from both representatives. Mr Bates accepted  that  if
    there was an error in law then the decisions should be remade  and  the
    appeals allowed as their position now would be  stronger  than  it  was
    fifteen months ago.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Bates argued that whilst the High Court  had  given  permission  the
    Judge had considered  the  appropriate  authorities  and  in  a  finely
    balanced decision had found that refusing their applications would  not
    be disproportionate. Their status in the United Kingdom had always been
    precarious and the decision taken was open to the Judge.

 9. Ms Jegarajah submitted that in giving permission  the  High  Court  had
    applied a higher test than that applied  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  when
    considering whether there was an error in law. She submitted the  Judge
    had erred in her overall approach to the seven-year rule and thereafter
    had wrongly applied PD and others (Artilce 8-conjoined  family  claims)
    Sri Lanka UKUT 00108 (IAC).  She  submitted  there  had  to  be  strong
    reasons for refusing the third named-appellant's appeal and bearing  in
    mind the evidence submitted she argued  the  Judge  had  erred  in  her
    approach to this appeal and thereafter erred in refusing the  remaining
    appellant's appeals.

    ERROR OF LAW

10. These appeals date back to June 2016 although their actual applications
    were made in November 2014 and refused by the respondent in May 2015.

11. The Judge clearly considered the facts very carefully and in a detailed
    decision she refused all appeals.

12. The parties recognised that the third-named appellant's appeal was  key
    to the outcome of all the appeals in that he had come to  this  country
    legally and had been  here  for  over  seven  years.  For  the  reasons
    explained in the Judge's decision  the  appellants  became  overstayers
    after November 2012 albeit it was accepted that they had  attempted  to
    extend their leave in this country but  had  been  let  down  by  legal
    representatives-a fact recognised by the High Court when setting  aside
    the Upper Tribunal's decision to refuse to give permission to appeal.

13. The Judge's consideration of the third-named appellant's appeal can  be
    found between [38] and [49]. The Judge concluded that  the  third-named
    appellant's interests were best served living in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The High Court made it clear when sending the matter back to the  Upper
    Tribunal that it was the Judge's finding at [49] and the importance  of
    him being here for seven years that provided the basis for an  argument
    there had been an error.

14. Having identified that the third-named appellant's best interests  were
    in the United  Kingdom  the  Judge  would  have  had  to  consider  the
    proportionality of removing this appellant and her family applying  the
    principles of PD and others (Artilce  8-conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
    Lanka.

15. In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 Elias LJ confirmed that the  Upper
    Tribunal was correct in Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]
    UKUT 674 (IAC) to find that if the criteria in section 117B(6) are met
    then Article 8 will be infringed; no further balancing consideration is
    needed. At [46] Elias JL stated-

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

16. Having read the Judge's decision I am satisfied that whilst she clearly
    had regard to all the evidence her approach was not from  the  position
    emphasised in MA (Pakistan) namely that there had to be strong  reasons
    for refusing leave.  She  accepted  the  third-named  appellant's  best
    interests were to remain here but refused his appeal on  the  basis  of
    his  parent's  circumstances  and  the  availability  of  housing   and
    employment for his parents. The Judge found the expert reports did  not
    address how the third-named appellant would be able to adapt to  change
    circumstances but the error of law was a failure  to  identify  "strong
    reasons" for refusing  leave  especially  in  circumstances  where  the
    appellant had spent his formative years in this country.

17. In light of the firm guidance given in this appeal by the High Court  I
    find there was an error in law.

    REMAKING OF DECISION

18. Mr Bates had already  conceded  that  the  family's  circumstances,  in
    September 2017, were even stronger than they were in June 2016 when the
    Judge originally heard  the  appeal.  I  also  had  before  me  further
    evidence adduced under Rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Rules

19. Taking all the evidence into account and bearing in mind the  reason  I
    found an error in law I find that in light of the immigration  history,
    the finding made in [49] of the Judge's decision and the fact there are
    no strong reasons for refusing the  third-named  appellant's  appeal  I
    allow both his appeal and those of his parents and sibling.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I have remade the decision and I
    allow all appeals under article 8 ECHR.


Signed                              Date     02.10.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was requested and in any event the appeal was allowed based  on
the evidence provided during the appeal process.



Signed                              Date     2.10.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

