
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/20460/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 May 2017                     |On 2 June 2017                     |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              SALIM YAKUB NATHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Patel for KG Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 26 October 1968.
3. This was an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on 12 May  2017,  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against a refusal of leave to remain on the  basis  of
   his private life and relationship with Sufia Patti and  her  son  from  a
   previous relationship (BP) on all grounds .
4. The Appellant granted permission to appeal that decision.  At  a  hearing
   dated 21 February 2017 Upper Tribunal O'Connor set aside the decision  in
   so far as it related to Article 8 outside the Rules and  specifically  in
   relation to his consideration  of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
5. The matter came before me for re hearing.
The Law
 6. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability.
 7. The Appellant's  appeal  is  pursuant  to  Section  82(1)  (b)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')  which
    provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where  the  Secretary
    of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim.  S84  of  the  Act
    provides that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be brought on  the  ground
    that a decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.
 8. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014). Section 117 (3) provides that  the  'public  interest  question'
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
 9. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

  10. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who- (my bold)

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"


11. In relation to the weight to be  attached  to  family  life  where  the
    Appellants status  has  been  precarious  I  have  taken  into  account
    Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 00138 (IAC) the headnote of
    which reads

    1. That "precariousness" is a criterion of relevance to family life  as
    well as private  life  cases  is  an  established  part  of  Article  8
    jurisprudence: see e.g. R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  and
    Jeunesse v Netherlands, app.no.12738/10 (GC).
    2. The "little weight"  provisions  of  s.117B(4)(a)  and  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are confined  to  "private
    life" established by a person at a time when their  immigration  status
    is unlawful or precarious.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  when
    answering the "public interest question" posed by s117A(2)-(3) a  court
    or tribunal should disregard  "precarious family life" criteria set out
    in  established  Article  8   jurisprudence.   Given   that   ss.117A-D
    considerations are not exhaustive, in certain cases it may be an  error
    of law for a court or tribunal to disregard  relevant  public  interest
    considerations.
Evidence
12. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason
    for refusal letter. The Appellant put in an  appeal  and  a  bundle  of
    documents for the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  short
    additional statements dated 18 May 2017 from the Appellant , BP and Mrs
    Patti.
Submissions

13. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) He acknowledged that that BP  was  a  British  Citizen  and  that  the
      Appellant had a genuine relationship with him.

   b) He accepted that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  relationship  with  a
      qualifying child.

   c) The countervailing factor in this case was that the Appellant  was  at
      all relevant times an overstayer.

   d) He relied on R (on the application of Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -
      Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
      00189 (IAC) which found  that  in  all  cases,  it  will  be  for  the
      individual to place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such
      temporary separation will interfere disproportionately with  protected
      rights.

   e) In this case it was reasonable for the Appellant to return to his home
      country and make an application for entry clearance.

14. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Patel submitted that :

   a) The Appellants partners health was poor and if he left this would have
      an adverse impact on her.

   b) BP was at a critical stage of his education. He is unable to care  for
      his mother.

   c) BP has also been given an opportunity to  participate  in  a  coaching
      course for 7-8 year olds in respect of which his step father had  been
      very supportive.

   d) The countervailing factor is that the Appellant was an overstayer  but
      his partners health and the best interests of  the  child  tipped  the
      balance in his favour.
Findings

15. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round before  reaching
    any findings.  I have done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below, I must  emphasise
    the findings have only been made having taken account of  the  evidence
    as a whole.
16. The Appellant is a 48 year old citizen of South Africa who was  refused
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  his  family  and
    private life.
17. The Appellant appeals the decision of the Respondent on the basis  that
    the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

18. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


19. I accept satisfied that the Appellant and Mrs Patti have a family  life
    in the United Kingdom together with BP Mrs Patti's son from a  previous
    marriage who is now 18 years old having  reached  that  age  on  7  May
    2017.. Mrs Patti and the Appellant went  through  an  Islamic  form  of
    marriage  on  10  August  2010  and  therefore  have  now  been  in   a
    relationship for nearly 7 years.


20. In relation to their family life in order for Article 8 to be engaged I
    must be satisfied that the removal of  the  Appellant  would  interfere
    with their enjoyment of that family life and I  accept  that  it  would
    because I accept that Mrs Patti and her son would not return  with  him
    and would not be required to do so as they are both  British  Citizens.
    They may choose to do so  but  I  proceed  on  the  basis  that  it  is
    reasonably likely they  would  not  and  therefore  there  is  a  clear
    interference.


21. I accept that as the Appellant has been in the UK since  his  visa  ran
    out in 2010 and therefore he has established a private life. The nature
    and quality of that life is much harder to assess as  there  is  little
    evidence of engagement with the wider community:  no  friends  attended
    court in support  of  his  appeal  and  there  was  little  to  suggest
    activities beyond his family.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


22. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


23. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate his conduct
    by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


24. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy his private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


25. Consideration of the issue of  proportionality  is  'consideration  of
    "the public interest question" as defined by section  117A(3)  of  the
    2002 Act. I am therefore required by section 117A(2)(a) to have regard
    to the considerations listed in section  117B  and  I  have  therefore
    considered those factors in relation to this appeal together with  any
    other facts that I consider relevant to  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision to remove..


26. I am satisfied that Mrs Patti's son does not meet  the  definition  of
    child for the purpose of section 117B 6 as  he  is  over  18  and  the
    definition in section117D defines a 'child' as one who  is  under  18.
    Therefore section 117B 6 does not apply.


27. I accept that Mrs Pattis son is in full time education and  has  found
    that the Appellant has been supportive in relation to his  school  and
    extra  curricular  activities.  I  accept  that  they  have  a   close
    relationship as BP lives at home and it is accepted that the Appellant
    and Mrs Patti have been in a relationship since  2010/2011  when  they
    married. I acknowledge that he would prefer that the Appellant  remain
    in the UK.


28. I take into account  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest and I am satisfied that  significant
    weight should be given to that. I note in this context that while  this
    is not an appeal against the refusal under the Immigration  Rules  that
    the Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. These challenges were set out in full in
    the refusal letter and were confirmed in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup and were not  challenged  in  the  error  of  law
    hearing.   Therefore it is a fact that the Appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to a partner,  spouse
    or parent  and  EX.1  did  not  apply  and  these  provisions  underpin
    immigration control in the UK  .  I  must  therefore  give  significant
    weight to the fact that both the Appellants relationship with Mrs Patti
    and her son were considered under the Rules but they  did  not  entitle
    him to leave. It is apparent from the documents which  accompanied  the
    Statement of Changes that the changes to the  Rules  were  intended  to
    promote consistency, predictability and transparency in decision-making
    where  issues  under  article  8  arose,  and  to  clarify  the  policy
    framework. The changes  were  said  to  reflect  the  Government's  and
    Parliament's view of how, as a matter of  public  policy,  the  balance
    should be struck between the right to respect for  private  and  family
    life


29. I am satisfied that in relation to the Appellants private  life  it
    was established at  a  time  when  the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
    illegally as clearly the Appellant entered the  UK  on  a  6  month
    visit visa which expired in August 2010 and he had no other form of
    leave thereafter and made no attempt to regularise his status until
    he made an application in 2015. I note that while not  a  provision
    of section 117B I am entitled to take into account that the  family
    life that the Appellant enjoys with Mrs Patti and her son was  also
    established at a time when he was in the UK illegally and Mrs Patti
    knew that the Appellant was in the UK illegally when  she  met  and
    married him.


30. The Appellant speaks English but that is a neutral factor.


31. The Appellant has not been financially  independent  since  he  has
    been in the UK as he has been living with Mrs  Patti  and  enjoying
    the benefit  of  her  accommodation  which  is  funded  by  Housing
    Benefits and Council Tax Support. I note also in  the  bundle  that
    there are records of hospital appointments for the Appellant so  he
    has also been a drain on the NHS enjoying  treatment,  including  a
    hernia operation, that he has not paid for and was not entitled to.




32. I accept that Mrs Patti suffers from anxiety and depression and  is
    therefore unable to work and could not attend the Tribunal  in  the
    morning although her symptoms improve by the afternoon. There is no
    reference  in  the  medical  evidence  to  what  contribution   the
    Appellant makes to her well being and I note that she has  suffered
    these symptoms since 2005 well before  their  relationship  started
    (Bundle page 144) so it  is  unclear  to  me  that  the  Appellants
    presence has assisted or alleviated her mental health issues  other
    than in general terms. There is no indication of  what  impact  his
    removal would have on her condition from any independent source and
    Mrs Patti addresses it in the most general and vague terms  in  her
    very brief witness statement. While I am prepared  to  accept  that
    she would prefer the Appellant to remain in the UK on the basis  of
    the  evidence  before  me  I  unable  to  find  that  his  removal,
    particularly if it was for a limited period  of  time,  would  have
    such  an  impact  on  Mrs  Patti  that   the   removal   would   be
    disproportionate: I remind myself  that  the  Appellant  bears  the
    burden of proving this is such is his case.


33. I find that permanent separation is indeed not the only choice open
    to the couple as I am satisfied that the Appellant could return  to
    South Africa to re apply for entry  clearance.  It  was  previously
    found that the Appellant has family there and I am  satisfied  that
    they could assist him for the period of time it took to  make  such
    an application and that given he lived there previously there would
    be no particular problems  in  returning  there  to  make  such  an
    application: certainly no such issues were identified to me.  There
    were no  facts  placed  before  me  to  suggest  such  a  temporary
    separation was disproportionate other than the  close  relationship
    with BP and the anxiety and depression suffered by  the  Appellants
    partner. I have taken those factors into account  Moreover  I  have
    reminded myself on R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix
    FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015]
    UKUT 00189 (IAC). Which found that in all cases, it will be for the
    individual to place before the Secretary  of  State  evidence  that
    such temporary separation will  interfere  disproportionately  with
    protected rights. There was no  evidence  before  me  that  such  a
    separation would be disproportionate.

34. I am satisfied that in this case the application failed to comply  with
    the Immigration Rules and no circumstances were  identified  why  those
    Rules should not be applied in this case in the usual  way,  there  was
    nothing disproportionate in applying the Rules in accordance with their
    terms, with the effect  that  Appellants  application  failed  and  the
    Appellant would have to make a new one.


35. In determining whether  the  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control I find that  none  of  the  facts
    underpinning the Appellants life in the  United  Kingdom  taken  either
    singularly or cumulatively  outweigh  the  legitimate  purpose  of  the
    Appellants removal.

36. I have considered the issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
    Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not
    a vulnerable person. I see no reason to  make  any  direction  in  this
    regard.

Conclusion

37. On the facts as established in this appeal, there  are  no  substantial
    grounds for believing that the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
    treatment in breach of ECHR.

Decision
38. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date 1
June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

