
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Ejatu [J]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene - Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 28th  January  1978.
    The Appellant has an extensive immigration history.  She first  applied
    as a visitor on 25th August 2005.  On 31st December 2013 the  Appellant
    applied for a derivative residence card as confirmation of a  right  of
    residence under European Community  law  as  the  primary  carer  of  a
    British citizen who is  residing  in  the  UK.   That  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 22nd April 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Omotosho on 5th December 2014.  In a determination promulgated on
    10th December 2014 (albeit marked 10th November 2014)  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 3. On 18th December the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 4th February 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies granted permission to appeal.  Judge Davies considered that  the
    judge's findings with regard to the finding that the Appellant was  the
    primary carer was arguably flawed  in  that  he  had  given  inadequate
    consideration to the role that the children's father  played  in  their
    care and that he had not had regard  to  the  role  of  the  children's
    father in providing financial support.  He considered  that  the  judge
    had given inadequate consideration to the  ability  of  the  children's
    father to look after them should the Appellant be removed and the  fact
    that the children's father worked did not justify a  finding  that  the
    Appellant was the primary carer.

 4. The issue was whether or not there is a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  A Rule 24 response was lodged  by
    the Appellant's solicitors.  This is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purpose of continuity throughout the  appeal  process
    the Secretary of State is referred to herein as the Respondent and Miss
    [J]  as  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    solicitor Mr Akohene.  Mr Akohene is familiar with this  matter  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Whitwell.

Submission/Discussion

 5. Mr Whitwell acknowledges that the grounds challenge whether or not  the
    Appellant is the primary carer of her two  children  [RJK]  (born  23rd
    February 2011) and [RAK] (born 13th December 2012).  He acknowledges it
    is not disputed that the  Appellant's  partner  Mr  [JK]  and  the  two
    children are British citizens nor is it disputed that the Appellant  is
    not married to Mr [K].  What is disputed by the Secretary of  State  is
    whether the Appellant can  under  the  EEA  Regulations  be  considered
    reasonably to be the primary carer of the  two  children.   It  is  the
    submission of Mr Whitwell that there is nothing to stop either  Mr  [K]
    caring for the children whilst the Appellant  leaves  the  country  and
    reapplies for entry clearance or for the children to leave the UK  with
    the Appellant.  Indeed he goes further by pointing out that there  will
    be nothing to stop the whole family leaving as a family unit.

 6. Mr Akohene acknowledges that parental responsibility is shared and that
    this is agreed but that care is a physical concept and it is clear that
    Mr [K] is in full-time employment and that the Appellant is at home and
    therefore the primary carer.  He points out that Section 55 of the 2009
    Act impacts on all applications particularly of this nature and that it
    is necessary for the court to consider what is in the best interest  of
    the children and that this has been done  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He submits there is no material error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and asked me to dismiss the Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 9. It is not easy to try and extract from the Secretary of State's Grounds
    of Appeal where they contend that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    made a material error of law.  It is clear from reading  those  Grounds
    of Appeal that the Secretary of State disagrees with the  finding  that
    the Appellant is the primary  carer  for  the  children  and  that  the
    Appellant has primary responsibility for the care of  the  children  as
    required under Regulation 15A(7)(b)(i) of the 2006  Regulations.   What
    the  Grounds  of  Appeal  amount  to  however  is  nothing  more   than
    disagreement with the finding of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   Such
    an approach does not assist Mr Whitwell in his valiant submissions  and
    it is difficult to understand quite why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    granted permission to appeal.

10. Analysing the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  he  has  given
    careful consideration to the documents produced and to the law relating
    to the obtaining of a derivative right of residence.   Thereinafter  he
    has  gone  on  to  consider  the  factual  detail.   Miss   Jalloh   is
    acknowledged to be a citizen of Sierra Leone and that she came  to  the
    UK as a visitor in February 2009 and has lived here since.  She started
    a relationship with her partner Mr [K] who is a British citizen in 2010
    and it is acknowledged that they have two children and that they are  a
    family unit.

11. The judge found that the family live together in the same household and
    that the  father  shares  parental  responsibility  for  the  children.
    Regulation 7 states the basis for a primary carer as:

      a) if the applicant is a direct relative or  legal  guardian  of  that
         person; and

      b) (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that person's
         care; or

         (ii)     shares equally the responsibility for that  person's  care
             with one other person who is not an exempt person.

12. That Regulation has been given due  and  proper  consideration  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 28.  The judge was  entitled  to
    make the generalisation at paragraph 29 of his  determination  that  as
    the family live together in the same household that  Mr  [K]  (and  the
    judge had heard his evidence) shares parental  responsibility  for  the
    children and the judge has made  conclusions  at  paragraph  29  having
    given full reasons as to how he  reached  those  conclusions  that  the
    Appellant has primary responsibility for the care of the children.

13. The judge has gone further than this and has gone on thereafter to give
    due and proper consideration to the consequences of the children if the
    Appellant were removed or asked to  leave  the  UK.   This  takes  into
    account the family circumstances.  I acknowledge that the Secretary  of
    State challenges the outcome.  This is a  very  poor  appeal  based  on
    nothing more than disagreement with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Further if such a decision  is  to  be  challenged  it
    would have been helpful if the Grounds of Appeal  had  done  more  than
    merely amount to disagreement and had gone on to show how and why there
    might have been a material error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

14. This is a well constructed decision,  with  clear  findings  and  sound
    reasoning as to why such findings were made.  The decision discloses no
    material error of law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    is maintained and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the decision is maintained and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

