

                                    [pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On: 4 June 2013
                                             Decision Promulgated:

                      On: 6 June 2013


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                            Ms Priya Devi Koonja


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Latter, instructed by Raj Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


This is an appeal against the determination dated 28 February 2013 of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Ruth which refused the appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision of 3 September 2012 to refuse leave  to  remain  under
Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's case is that she came to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  2006,
through her sister met a British national,  Mr  Dehokenanan,  and  formed  a
relationship with him. She returned to Mauritius in 2006 in  line  with  her
visit visa. Mr Dehokenanan visited her there in 2008. She came back  to  the
UK as  a  visitor  in  October  2008  and  moved  in  with  Mr  Dehokenanan,
continuing her relationship with him and caring for him as he had  a  number
of medical problems. Having obtained an extension of leave as a  carer,  she
then  overstayed  and  made  the  current  application   to   stay   as   Mr
Dehokenanan's partner under Article 8 of the ECHR.

However, the respondent and Judge Ruth did not  accept  that  the  appellant
was in a relationship with Mr Dehokenanan such that they had a  family  life
and did not find removal would be a  disproportionate  interference  to  any
private life she had established in the UK.

 Mr Latter's first submission was that Judge Ruth  failed  to  consider  the
material evidence of a witness, Mr Houlihan. At [29] of  the  determination,
Judge Ruth records only that  Mr  Houlihan  adopted  a  statement  dated  29
February 2012, originally  produced  for  a  bail  hearing.   This  was  not
accurate, maintained Mr  Latter,  as  Mr  Houlihan  had  adopted  both  that
statement  and  a  much  more  detailed  one  dated  23  October  2012.   On
examination, the handwritten record of proceedings shows that Mr Latter  was
correct in this regard and that Mr Houlihan adopted both of  his  statements
before Judge Ruth. However, the reference at [29] only to  the  adoption  of
the bail statement, according to Mr  Latter,  showed  that  Judge  Ruth  had
failed to consider the  witness  statement  dated  23  October  2012  of  Mr
Houlihan. This was  material  as  it  contained  specific  evidence  on  the
appellant and Mr Dehokenanan being in a relationship.

It was my view that Judge Ruth did  take  Mr  Houlihan's  witness  statement
dated  23  October  2013  into   account   when   he   made   his   decision
notwithstanding  his  incorrect  recording  at  [29]  that  only  the   bail
statement was adopted in evidence. Judge Ruth refers  specifically  at  [16]
to the witness statement dated 23  October  2012  as  forming  part  of  the
evidence before him. He can only be referring here to the witness  statement
dated 23 October 2012 as it  was  the  only  "separate"  statement  from  Mr
Houlihan that was before him. I did not find that the  failure  at  [29]  to
record that Mr Houlihan adopted both his statements was sufficient  to  show
that he did not take the  witness  statement  dated  23  October  2012  into
account when [16] shows that he was clearly astute to it.

Also, at [49], Judge Ruth addressed Mr Houlihan's evidence, thus:

    "49.   I turn now to the evidence of Mr Houlihan. He is a lodger in the
         sponsor's  home  and  gave  evidence  that  he  believes  that  the
         appellant and sponsor are in a relationship akin to marriage  since
         they share a room and he has seen them in circumstances that  would
         suggest to him  their  relationship  is  a  close  one.  In  cross-
         examination it became clear that he has never  seen  them  kissing,
         holding hands or expressing the type of affection which  one  might
         expect between partners and he could not provide direct examples of
         behaviour he has witnessed which could  not  be  explained  by  the
         appellant and sponsor being  close  family  members  or  carer  and
         patient rather than partners. While  I  fully  accept  Mr  Houlihan
         believes  what  he  says,  I  do  not  accept  that  his   evidence
         establishes the claims of the appellant and sponsor."

If Judge Ruth had reached his decision only on the basis  of  Mr  Houlihan's
bail statement, he  could  not  have  known  that  he  considered  that  the
appellant and Mr Dehokenanan were "in a relationship akin to marriage  since
they share a room and he has seen them in circumstances that  would  suggest
to him their relationship is a close one".  There was nothing  in  the  bail
statement about such matters. This further indicated to me that he took  the
witness  statement  into  account.  It  is  possible  that  he   took   this
information from oral evidence given by Mr Houlihan  or  from  the  skeleton
argument which summarised Mr Houlihan's evidence at  paragraph  11(e).  But,
where he clearly had in mind the key parts of Mr  Houlihan's  evidence  when
reaching his decision, it did not appear  to  me  to  be  significant  which
account he took it from. It remained my view, in any event,  that  [16]  and
[49] were sufficient to indicate that Judge Ruth did take the  statement  of
23 October 2013 into account.

Mr Latter's alternative submission was that Judge Ruth had materially  erred
in his consideration of Mr Houlihan's evidence. Judge  Ruth's  finding  that
the evidence of Mr Houlihan could be interpreted as showing  only  that  the
appellant and Mr  Dehokenanan  were  "close  family  members  or  carer  and
patient rather than partners" was  not  compatible  with  the  statement  at
paragraph 9 of the witness statement dated 23 October 2012 that  the  couple
shared a room and that there was "only 1 double  bed  in  their  room."  The
handwritten record of proceedings shows that  Mr  Houlihan's  oral  evidence
was that the bedroom shared by the appellant  and  Mr  Dehokenanan  had  not
only a bed but "sofas" in it, however. Further, Judge Ruth's findings on  Mr
Houlihan's evidence were made in the context of the evidence as a whole.  He
set out in some detail from [34] to [48] his reasons for  finding  that  the
evidence of the appellant, Mr Dehokenanan and he appellant's  sister  to  be
"entirely lacking in credibility." These included the speed with  which  the
appellant entered into a relationship with a man  in  poor  health  who  was
more  than  30  years  older  than  herself,  when  she  moved  in  with  Mr
Dehokenanan and a lack of consistency between the witnesses as to  when  the
relationship began. When read together with those  other  findings,  it  was
clearly open to Judge  Ruth  to  find  that  the  extent  of  Mr  Houlihan's
evidence, even if accepted to be his genuine belief, was not  sufficient  to
show that the appellant was in a relationship with Mr Dehokenanan.

The remaining grounds amounted only to disagreement. Judge  Ruth  took  into
account the relevant evidence, summarised  at  [16]  to  [18].  He  was  not
obliged to find it consistent or sufficient to show that the  appellant  was
in a relationship with Mr Dehokenanan. It was open to him at to conclude  at
[34] and [43] that it was inherently implausible that  the  appellant  would
have moved in with Mr Dehokenanan in either the sensitive role of  carer  or
as  a  partner  so  immediately,  reaching  this   conclusion   only   after
consideration of the other evidence, as shown in [35]. It did not appear  to
me that much could hang on Judge Ruth's assumption  at  [45]  that  hospital
staff  had  been  told  that  the  appellant  was  Mr  Dehokenanan's  niece,
particularly where the appellant and  Mr  Dehokenanan  accept  that  he  was
referred to at times as her "uncle", that they  did  not  inform  others  of
their relationship for some  time  and  there  are  therefore  a  number  of
documents referring to the appellant as only his carer. Paragraphs  [24]  to
[26] and [37] to [39] show that Judge Ruth  took  very  particular  care  to
ensure that matters were made as clear as possible for the appellant.

I also did not find that the Article 8  consideration  disclosed  an  error.
Given his sustainable findings about the appellant's  relationship  with  Mr
Dehokenanan, Judge Ruth could only conclude that she had not  established  a
family life in the UK. Where that was so, it is difficult  to  see  how  the
private life claim could succeed where Mr Dehokenanan could be  expected  to
seek support elsewhere, the respondent having already allowed the  appellant
to extend her visit visa in order to care for him temporarily.  The  grounds
are correct to indicate that Mr Dehokenanan may not be cared for as well  by
Social Services as he is by the appellant. There is no dispute  that  Social
Services would provide necessary care, however, and this  is  therefore  not
something  that  could  show  that  the   appellant's   removal   would   be
disproportionate. It did not appear to me that, even had Judge Ruth set  out
in more detail the weight he placed on  the  disruption  to  Mr  Dehokenanan
caused by the departure of the appellant, that factor, even at its  highest,
could have led to a different outcome of the Article 8 appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error  of  law.


DECISION

The Immigration Judge made no error on a  point  of  law  and  the  original
determination of the appeal shall stand.

Signed:                                 Date: 5 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
