
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20690/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th October 2016                  |On 26th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                            mr Azaharuddin gugad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim instructed by MA Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a national of India appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 22nd May 2015 refusing  to
    grant him leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McWilliams dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on  human  rights  grounds.   The  Appellant  now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to  this  appeal  is  that  on  6th  December  2010  the
    Appellant was granted leave to enter the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student until 28th March 2014. On 5th February 2014 the Appellant  made
    an application for leave to remain in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the points-based system.  The application was  to
    undertake a  diploma  in  healthcare  management  at  Kent  College  of
    Business and Computing. On 4th September 2014 the Home Office had  made
    a decision to revoke the  licence  of  Kent  College  of  Business  and
    Computing which meant that the Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies
    (CAS) submitted with the application was  no  longer  valid.   On  12th
    January 2015 the Home Office wrote to the Appellant pointing  out  that
    the CAS was no longer valid and  advising  that  consideration  of  the
    application was suspended for a period of 60 days to give the Appellant
    time to submit a fresh application or  to  leave  the  UK.  The  letter
    advised the Appellant that it was open to him to obtain a new CAS for a
    course of study at a fully licensed  Tier  4  educational  Sponsor  and
    submit an application to vary the grounds of his original  application.
    The Appellant failed to submit a fresh CAS.  The  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter states that on 22nd May 2015 the Secretary of State checked  the
    Tier 4 Sponsor Register but Kent College of Business and Computing  was
    not listed as of that date.  The Appellant  was  therefore  awarded  no
    points for a CAS and his application was refused.

 3. At the hearing of the appeal against that  refusal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the Appellant claimed that after he received the  Respondent's
    letter of 12th January 2015 he contacted other colleges but they wanted
    details of his study progress.   He  said  that  he  was  asked  for  a
    certified copy of his passport to take an SELT exam.   He  accepted  in
    cross-examination that his previous SELT  certificate  had  expired  in
    November 2015 and that he had not been in contact with Trinity  College
    (where he wished to study) before 20th November 2015.  He said that his
    family was supporting him financially and he did  not  want  to  return
    home to India without qualifications.

 4. In his findings the judge noted that the Appellant was given  a  period
    of 60 days in January 2015 to obtain a new CAS and Sponsor but  he  had
    not done so.  The judge noted that there was  no  independent  evidence
    from any college or any other source to indicate that the appellant had
    sought to obtain a CAS and fresh Sponsor college within the  period  of
    60 days. The judge noted  that  the  Appellant  had  contacted  Trinity
    College in London in November  2015,  a  considerable  time  after  the
    expiry of the 60 days.  The judge found that the Appellant  was  unable
    to obtain a CAS within the 60 days and had no valid CAS at the date  of
    decision.  The judge accordingly concluded that the Appellant's  appeal
    must fail under the Immigration Rules because he could  not  score  the
    requisite 30 points.  The judge went  on  to  consider  Article  8  and
    concluded that there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.   The
    judge accepted that the Appellant may  have  established  some  private
    life in the UK but considered the circumstances and decided that  there
    were no compelling reasons and wished to  establish  that  a  grant  of
    leave to remain was appropriate to  give  effect  to  the  Respondent's
    Article 8 obligations.  The judge considered the circumstances of  this
    case noting that no evidence had been  produced  by  the  Appellant  to
    indicate that he had attempted to obtain a new Sponsor and  CAS  during
    the 60 days when his SELT certificate was valid.  The Appellant had not
    sought to extend the period of  60  days  in  order  to  obtain  a  new
    Sponsor.  The judge considered all of the evidence and found  that  any
    interference with the Appellant's established  private  life  would  be
    proportionate to the lawful aim pursued by the Respondent.

 5. In his Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  Appellant  contends
    that the judge failed to  consider  and  accept  that  the  Appellant's
    passport is with the Home Office and the current Rules  state  that  to
    sit an SELT a valid passport is required.  He  contends  that,  despite
    requests being made for the return of his passport, it was not returned
    and he was therefore unable to sit the SELT.  It is submitted that  the
    Appellant was unable to obtain a CAS (the grounds refer  to  a  COS,  I
    assume this is an error) during the 60 day period as he had no passport
    and the colleges he approached were not willing to offer a CAS  without
    a valid passport.  It is further submitted that the judge  should  have
    remitted this case back to the Respondent so that the passport could be
    returned and the Appellant could sit the SELT and obtain  another  CAS.
    It is contended that the judge made a material error by not doing this.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    6th September 2016 on the basis  that  he  was  satisfied  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge made  a  material  error  of  law  as,  if  the
    Appellant's passport had been  retained  by  the  Respondent  and  this
    precluded him for applying for a further CAS, it may have been unlawful
    for the Respondent to rely on his not having obtained a further CAS  as
    a reason to refuse leave.

 7. In the Rule 24 notice it is pointed out on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    that the judge noted that the Appellant had a  valid  SELT  certificate
    during the 60 day period in which he had to obtain a  further  CAS  and
    there was no evidence that colleges refused his application because  he
    did not have a passport and in any event he had a certified copy of his
    passport.  It is noted that the Appellant took ten  months  to  contact
    Trinity College to obtain a CAS by which time the  60  days  which  had
    been extended by another 30 days had expired and the  findings  of  the
    judge were open to him on the evidence.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Karim submitted that the Appellant says the
    Respondent retained his passport which meant that he could not sit  the
    SELT.  Mr Karim looked at the Appellant's bundle and accepted that  the
    Appellant's requests to the Respondent for the return of  his  passport
    were made after the 60 days had expired.  Mr Karim then relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal without making any  further  submissions.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that there is no error in this case and that the  judge  took
    into account all of the evidence. He submitted that the judge took into
    account that the Respondent had sent a letter to the Appellant to  give
    him 60 days to obtain a further CAS and that the Appellant tried to get
    the passport back well after the 60 days whereas he could have obtained
    a new CAS within the 60 days.

 9. I accept the submissions of Mr Avery in the Rule 24 notice and  at  the
    hearing.  The Appellant had not obtained a new CAS within the  60  days
    he was given by the Respondent. He had a valid SELT during this period.
    The Appellant submitted no evidence to show that he had tried to get  a
    new CAS during the 60 day period. It appears that it was only after the
    expiry of the 60 days, when the SELT had expired,  that  the  Appellant
    sought the return of his passport. However he submitted little evidence
    to the First-tier Tribunal to show that any colleges had  rejected  his
    application for a  CAS  or  to  sit  the  SELT  exam.  Accordingly  the
    Appellant did not have a valid CAS at the time the Respondent made  the
    decision to refuse the application. It is clear from the decision  that
    the judge understood this situation. He made the only decision open  to
    him on the basis of the evidence.

10. The grounds of appeal are misleading in  implying  that  the  Appellant
    could not sit the SELT without a valid passport when there  was  little
    evidence before the judge to this effect and in any event this  relates
    to the Appellant's efforts after the 60 day period. The grounds  assert
    that the Appellant was unable to obtain a CAS during the 60 day  period
    as he had no passport however no evidence was submitted to support this
    assertion. It is asserted that  the  Appellant  made  every  effort  to
    obtain a CAS during the 60 day period  but  there  is  no  evidence  to
    support that assertion. The judge made no error of fact or law  in  his
    consideration of this issue.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


