
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20950/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reason Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2014                   |On 29th December 2014               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             MR EBRIMA S K GIBBA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGinty, promulgated on 11th August 2014, following a hearing  at
    Manchester on 28th July 2014.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeal of Ebrima S K Gibba.  The  Respondent  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.


The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Gambia,  who  was  born  on  14th
    April 1981.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    17th April 2014, refusing him his application for a residence card,  as
    his confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Regulation  17(1)(B)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has the marriage  certificate  showing
    his marriage taking place in Banjul in the Republic of Gambia,  in  the
    form of a proxy  marriage,  with  his  French  national  wife,  Mounina
    Traore, who was not present at the wedding in Gambia.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the fact that a marriage certificate  had  been
    produced from the Banjul Muslim Court of the Gambia, and it was  stated
    in the certificate that a late registration does not in any way nullify
    a  Muslim  marriage  (see  paragraph  8).   The  judge   accepted   the
    application for registration.  The judge allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law because he
    did not have regard to two Upper Tribunal decisions  in  recent  times,
    namely, Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  24,  and  TA
    (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.  The  first  of  these  was
    published on 23rd January 2014.  The second of these was  published  on
    14th July 2014.  Given that the judge heard the  appeal  on  28th  July
    2014, he should have been aware of both these determinations.

 6. On 24th October 2014, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that these cases established that the  Appellant  must  show  that  the
    country of which the claimed spouse is a national (in this case France)
    recognised as valid the proxy marriage.  Since this had not been  done,
    the judge erred in law.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 2nd December 2014, the Appellant was not in
    attendance.  Neither was there anyone  in  attendance  on  his  behalf.
    Nor, was there any explanation  offered  for  the  non-attendance.   Mr
    Armstrong, appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  submitted  that
    paragraph 16 of Kareem  makes  it  quite  clear  that  rights  of  free
    movement and residence stem directly  from  union  citizenship.   Given
    that this is the case, "the law that applies will be  the  law  of  the
    member state of nationality and not the host member state ...  this  is
    because nationality remains within the  competency  of  the  individual
    member states."



Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCA
    2001) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCA 2007).  It is quite clear  from  Kareem  that
    what is required is evidence from the member state of recognition of  a
    marriage by way of proxy.  Kareem makes it quite clear that, "a lack of
    evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean that the party with
    the burden of proving it will fail" (paragraph 14).

Remaking the Decision

 9. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons that  are  set  out
    above.  The onus is on the Appellant, who has chosen not to attend,  to
    provide  evidence  of  the  relevant  foreign  law  recognising   proxy
    marriages.  In the case of France, one knows it to be clear that France
    does not recognise marriages by way of proxy.

10. It is irrelevant that the Appellant has produced evidence  from  Gambia
    confirming his marriage as being valid in that state.   His  rights  to
    free movement do not accrue directly from his marriage in  the  Gambia.
    They accrue from his alleged wife's union citizenship the  law  of  the
    member state in France is the relevant law.  It is not the relevant law
    in either the host member state or the state of Gambia.  This appeal is
    dismissed.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.

12. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014
