
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2014                           |On 3 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLACK

                                   Between

                            Mr James Owusu Ansah
                       (anonymity direction Not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha, Resolve Immigration Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Hamilton) determined on the papers and promulgated on 18 July 2014,  in
    which the  Tribunal   dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse his application for a residence card as
    the spouse of an EEA national, or in the alternative on the basis of  a
    durable relationship, with reference to Regulations 7 &  8  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 .

 2. Permission to appeal was granted (Judge Coyler) on 24 September 2014 on
    the basis that  it  appeared  that  a  bundle  on  the  Tribunal  file,
    containing documents referred to  by  the  appellant's  representative,
    which was date-stamped as having arrived on 11 July 2014, may not  have
    been  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  time  of  the
    determination.

 3. The reason for the concern that  documents  may  have  been  overlooked
    emanates from paragraph 25 of the  determination  where  the  Tribunal,
    having found that there was insufficient evidence  that  the  appellant
    was married to a Dutch citizen working in the UK, was  considering  the
    alternative ground for his application, namely, whether  the  appellant
    and his sponsor were in a durable relationship. Paragraph 25 states  as
    follows:

         "There is no evidence before me of the appellant and sponsor  being
         in a durable relationship.  No evidence has been filed to show that
         they live together or have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.
         The only documents filed by the  appellant  are  bank  and  utility
         bills which show his address as 122 Liverpool Road, Reading but are
         addressed only to him.  There is no evidence that his sponsor lives
         with him.  There is no other evidence to help me  find  that  their
         relationship is durable or genuine or subsisting." [our emphasis]

 4. The Tribunal went on to state that there was an acknowledgement by  the
    appellant in his grounds of appeal that he did not provide evidence  of
    cohabitation to the respondent and he sought the opportunity to do  so.
    Despite this, he had filed no evidence to support his "bald claim" that
    the relationship was durable.  The appellant now  says:  "I  did  avail
    myself of the opportunity to supply such evidence to the Tribunal,  but
    the Tribunal  for  whatever  reason  either  did  not  receive  it,  or
    overlooked it."

 5. We should state at this juncture that we have had  the  opportunity  of
    looking through the bundle of documentation dated 9 July 2014 that  was
    served by the appellant and date stamped as received on 11  July  2014.
    It runs to 32 pages. Many of the documents within it are also exhibited
    in the respondent's bundle that was undoubtedly before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at the time of the determination. These include  the  Ghanaian
    customary marriage certificate and a statutory declaration of  marriage
    of the appellant and  his  sponsor;  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Ghanaian statute relating to the legality  of  such  marriages;  and  a
    Dutch certificate registering the sponsor's divorce from  her  previous
    husband.  However  some  of  the  documents  in  that  bundle  are  not
    duplicated in the respondent's bundle.

 6. There is also on the Tribunal file another much thinner bundle filed by
    the appellant which is dated 11 July 2014 and date stamped as  received
    on 14 July. That contains a letter addressed to the appellant from Sky,
    and some documentation from the Nationwide Building Society relating to
    his accounts with  them,  which  are  addressed  to  him  only  at  122
    Liverpool Road, Reading. It can be deduced that these are the "bank and
    utility bills" referred to in paragraph 25 of the determination.

 7. Paragraph 25 indicates that the documentation that was before the First-
    tier  Tribunal  did  not  include  any  documents  showing   that   the
    appellant's sponsor was cohabiting with him at that address. The  words
    "are addressed only to him" suggest that  the  Tribunal  thought  there
    were no documents produced by the appellant that were addressed to  the
    couple.

 8. Indeed those words could be  read  as  going  further  than  that,  and
    suggesting that there were no documents before the Tribunal  that  were
    addressed to the sponsor at that address. However  that  interpretation
    would plainly be wrong, because there were numerous documents  of  that
    type in the respondent's bundle. There was clear evidence that she  had
    been employed since  12  September  2012,  including  various  payslips
    relating to that employment from that date onwards, together with  bank
    statements and utility bills, all of which were addressed to her at 122
    Liverpool Road. As Mr Ngwuocha pointed out,  some  of  those  documents
    overlap with the period when the appellant  was  also  living  at  that
    address, as evidenced by the bank and utility bills addressed  only  to
    him.

 9. Therefore what the Tribunal must have meant in paragraph 25 was that no
    documents had been produced by the appellant  that  were  addressed  to
    both him and his sponsor at that address.  There were a small number of
    documents falling into that category towards the back of  the  32  page
    bundle filed by the appellant on  11  July,  namely,  a  few  BT  bills
    addressed to both the appellant and  the  sponsor  at  the  address  in
    Liverpool Road. These bills covered a short (and fairly recent)  period
    in 2014. The inference can  be  drawn,  therefore,  that  the  Tribunal
    either did not have those documents before it at the time when it  made
    the determination, or else that it mistakenly overlooked them.

10. We have to ask ourselves, on the assumption that  the  32  page  bundle
    referred to above was not before the First-tier  Tribunal,  whether  it
    would have made a difference if the Tribunal had taken all its contents
    into account. In other words, if there  was  a  procedural  error,  was
    there prejudice or unfairness to the appellant? If there was  an  error
    of law, was it material? This Tribunal can only interfere if any  error
    of law was a material one. Therefore if this appeal is to  succeed,  we
    have to be satisfied that any additional material in that  bundle  that
    was not seen or taken into account by the Tribunal would  have  made  a
    difference or at least arguably could have made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome of the determination.

11. Although we initially thought that the point about unseen or overlooked
    documents  was  confined  to  evidence  in  relation  to  the   durable
    relationship, it became apparent  on  further  consideration  that  the
    complaint went further than that, and related also to the appeal  based
    upon the Ghanaian customary marriage. As regards that, it appears  from
    a comparison between the respondent's bundle  and  the  appellant's  32
    page bundle that the only corroborative document in the  latter  bundle
    that may not have been before the Tribunal which had a bearing  on  the
    issue of the validity  of  the  proxy  marriage,  was  the  appellant's
    translated birth certificate.  There are also  two  witness  statements
    from the appellant and his sponsor, but they do  not  really  take  the
    matter much further.

12. The birth certificate, in and of itself, is unlikely to have taken  the
    matter much further either.  On the  information  before  it,  much  of
    which was duplicated in the 32 page bundle, the Tribunal found that the
    appellant had provided no evidence in the course of his appeal to  show
    that his Dutch sponsor was of Ghanaian descent and  therefore  able  to
    participate in a proxy  marriage  in  Ghana,  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence to show that they were represented  by  relatives  within  the
    relationship stated in the statutory declaration. The  appellant's  own
    birth certificate could only have assisted on the latter point.

13. We are not satisfied that the birth certificate, statutory  declaration
    or the witness statements or any other document in the  missing  bundle
    which was not duplicated elsewhere would have made up the  deficiencies
    in the evidence relating to the marriage identified  by  the  Tribunal.
    However,  even  if  they  would  have  done,  there  is   the   further
    insurmountable problem that the appellant had  failed  to  provide  any
    evidence of the legal recognition of the Ghanaian proxy marriage by the
    Netherlands authorities. Given that the sponsor is  a  Dutch  national,
    that requirement was mandatory. As a matter of  law,  consideration  of
    whether a person's marriage to an EEA national is valid has  always  to
    be undertaken in the context of the national  legislation  of  the  EEA
    country of the sponsor's nationality. There is nothing in the  32  page
    bundle that addresses or meets that requirement, which was spelled  out
    in the case of Kareem (Proxy Marriages- EU Law) UKUT  24  -  which  had
    been decided by the time of the appellant's application and before  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination. It has further been underlined  by
    the Upper Tribunal in the more recent case of  TA  and  others  (Kareem
    explained) [2014] UKUT 316.

14. Therefore even if the additional material in the  32  page  bundle  may
    have satisfied the First-tier Tribunal that there was  indeed  a  valid
    proxy marriage in Ghana, the application on grounds of  marriage  would
    inevitably have fallen at the next hurdle because there was no evidence
    before the Tribunal on the basis of which it could be satisfied of  the
    second of the requirements in Kareem that the  Netherlands  authorities
    would recognise the legality of that marriage. Therefore we cannot  say
    that there was a material error of  law  or  procedural  unfairness  in
    relation to the dismissal of the appeal based on marriage. The Tribunal
    did not need to consider Kareem because it was not satisfied that there
    was sufficient evidence that the couple were validly married in  Ghana,
    but if it had considered it, the appeal on grounds  of  marriage  would
    have failed come what may.

15. That means we have to turn again to the question whether the additional
    documents in the 32 page bundle provided  the  missing  evidence  of  a
    durable relationship.   In  relation  to  that  we  have  studied  very
    carefully  the  additional  evidence  and   the   evidence   that   was
    unquestionably before the First-tier Tribunal. There is precious little
    evidence of the applicant and his sponsor living together as a  couple.
    In particular, there is no evidence of the kind that one might normally
    see from third parties attesting to that fact.   There  is  simply  the
    evidence of the couple themselves. There is also the  oddity  that  the
    documents addressed to each of them individually  indicated  that  they
    were  both  living  at  122  Liverpool  Road  at  the  same  time,  but
    nevertheless they appeared to be  keeping  entirely  separate  bank  or
    building society accounts and, at least until recently, they  were  not
    even sharing any of the utility bills.

16. We regard as particularly significant  one  of  the  documents  in  the
    respondent's bundle. That document is a tenancy agreement in  the  name
    of the appellant.  It shows that he entered into a shorthold tenancy at
    the address in Liverpool Road as from 22 September 2013 for an  initial
    period of six months, renewable thereafter on a month to  month  basis.
    That tenancy is in his own name and not in joint names but,  even  more
    significantly, it states on its face that it is a tenancy of a room  on
    the top floor of that building. That suggests that the building is  one
    of multiple occupancy, and that he is renting a room within it from the
    landlord. In the light of that document, any evidence to show that  his
    sponsor is living at the same address would not in and of  itself  show
    that they are cohabiting together  there  in  a  durable  relationship.
    Even the recent BT bills addressed to them both would  not  necessarily
    prove co-habitation in that sense, as utility bills  could  be  jointly
    addressed to tenants in a building of multiple occupancy.  The  general
    point made in paragraph 25 of the determination  therefore  holds  good
    regardless of whether those utility bills are taken into account.

17. No specific mention is made of the tenancy agreement in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination, but the Tribunal has said in terms that there
    is no other evidence to help it to find  that  the  appellant  and  his
    sponsor's relationship is durable or genuine or subsisting.

18. In our judgment the Tribunal was entitled  to  make  that  finding  and
    would have been entitled to make  that  finding  even  if  it  had  had
    specific regard to all the additional documents that  were  in  the  32
    page bundle, including the BT bills addressed  to  the  couple  at  the
    Liverpool Road address. Even if those bills could be  treated  as  some
    evidence of co-habitation as a couple, nevertheless, when the  evidence
    is taken in the round it falls far short of establishing a relationship
    that was sufficiently long-term to qualify as "durable".


Notice of Decision

19. We find no material error of  law  in  the  determination  which  shall
    stand.

20. Therefore the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.
    [pic]
Signed                                  Date 4th November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

   [pic]

Signed                                  Date 4th November 2014


Mrs Justice Andrews
