
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20263/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th July 2015                    |On 10th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SEMA FENNICHE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 24th January 1972. Her appeal
    against the Respondent's decision of 27th April 2014 refusing leave  to
    enter was allowed under the Immigration Rules  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge G A Black in a decision dated 8th January 2015.

2.   The Appellant held  a  five-year  multi  visit  visa  valid  from  30th
    September 2010 to 2015. On 18th April 2014 she  was  refused  leave  to
    enter as a visitor because she had spent 32 out of the last  40  months
    in the UK. Her leave was cancelled on the basis that she was no  longer
    a visitor and was in fact seeking to reside in  the  UK.  She  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41(ii) of the Immigration  Rules.
    The Respondent was satisfied that the duration of her trips to  the  UK
    constituted a material change in circumstances  of  such  a  degree  to
    warrant a cancellation.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 13th March     2015 on the grounds that it was  arguable  the  Judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant was  not
    advised by the immigration authorities that she would have to  restrict
    the length and frequency of her visits, and in any event her appeal was
    limited to human rights grounds.

4.   In the Rule 24 response, the Appellant argued that the  matters  raised
    in the grant of permission were not advanced by the  Respondent  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    credible witness and she intended  to  live  in  Algeria.  The  Judge's
    findings were open to her on the evidence.

The Hearing

5.   The Appellant attended with her brother. She was unrepresented  because
    there had been some mistake and counsel had not been booked. A fax from
    her solicitor confirmed the situation. Since this was the  Respondent's
    appeal and the grounds were limited, the appeal proceeded on the  basis
    that if the Respondent persuaded me there was a  case  to  answer,  the
    matter would be adjourned to enable to the Appellant to be represented.

6.   There was some discussion on whether the appeal was limited to  Article
    8 grounds. Mr Clarke accepted that this was not pleaded in the  grounds
    and in any event the restriction on rights of  appeal  applied  to  the
    grant of entry clearance and not  the  cancellation  of  leave  or  the
    refusal of leave to enter.

7.   Mr Clarke submitted that given that the Appellant had remained  in  the
    UK for extended periods since 2011, the Judge's conclusion that she was
    a genuine visitor who satisfied  paragraph  41(ii)  was  perverse.  The
    Appellant had made frequent successive visits to the  UK  for  extended
    periods and in effect resided in the UK and visited Algeria.

Discussion and conclusions

8.   I did not need to hear from the Appellant to  decide  the  appeal.  The
    Judge had  accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  its  entirety  and
    concluded that although she had visited the UK for extended periods, it
    was understandable given her father's death and her divorce,  that  she
    intended to visit her siblings who provide her with emotional  support.
    She maintained strong links with Algeria and had a sabbatical from  her
    job.

9.   The Appellant had  never  breached  the  Immigration  Rules  and  never
    stayed longer than a period of months. It was  irrelevant  whether  she
    was advised by the immigration  authorities  that  she  would  have  to
    restrict the frequency and  length  of  her  visits.  This  was  not  a
    requirement of the Immigration Rules or a reason to cancel her leave.

10.  The Judge found that the Appellant had no intention to live in  the  UK
    and the Respondent had failed to show  any  material  change  or  other
    change in circumstances to justify the  cancellation  of  leave  and/or
    entry clearance. The circumstances at the time the Appellant was  given
    leave to visit her family still existed. These findings  were  open  to
    the Judge on the evidence before her.

11.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and the Secretary of State's appeal  is  dismissed.
    The decision of 8th January 2015 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 31st July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

