
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20273/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th November 2016                        |On 25th November 2016          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    L S E
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Sameh-Ebong (the Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Colyer  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 29th February 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The FtT found the Claimant to be a Swedish citizen,  and  her  date  of
    birth is 6th October 2008.  She is now 8 years of age, and was 7 years
    of age when the FtT hearing took  place.   I  have  made  an  anonymity
    direction because the Claimant is a minor.

 4. On 15th January 2015 an application was made on behalf of the Claimant,
    for confirmation that she had the right to reside  permanently  in  the
    UK.  She applied as  the  non-European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  national
    family member of the Sponsor, who is an EEA national.  The  application
    was made on the basis that  the  Sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK for a continuous period of five years.

 5. The application  was  refused  on  19th  May  2015  with  reference  to
    regulation  15(1)(b)  of  The  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).  The reason  for  refusal  was
    that it was not accepted that  the  Sponsor  had  proved  that  he  was
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

 6. The Claimant appealed to the FtT and the hearing  took  place  on  23rd
    February 2016.  The Claimant was represented by the Sponsor.

 7. The FtT found that although the Claimant had applied on the basis  that
    she is a citizen of Cameroon,  she  was  in  fact  a  Swedish  citizen.
    Therefore the FtT found that the Claimant had the ability  to  exercise
    treaty rights in the UK and the FtT found that she was  exercising  her
    treaty rights in the UK as a Swedish citizen on the basis that she  was
    in full-time education.  The FtT went on to allow the  appeal  on  that
    basis.  At the same hearing, the Claimant's mother had  an  application
    for permanent residence, which was not decided, but which was adjourned
    to another date.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the grounds are summarised below.

 9.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  failed  to  engage  with  the
    requirements of regulation 4(1)(d) which provides  a  definition  of  a
    'student'.  It was submitted that there was no  evidence  that,  taking
    into account the Claimant was only 7  years  of  age  at  the  date  of
    hearing, that she had been a student for a continuous  period  of  five
    years, and there was no evidence that she held  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance cover in the UK.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge E M Simpson of the FtT.

11. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Sponsor  attended  the  hearing  to  represent  the  Claimant.   He
    confirmed that he was content to proceed without legal  representation.
    Proceedings were conducted in English and there  was  no  need  for  an
    interpreter.

13. I explained to the Sponsor my independent role, and ascertained that he
    had seen the application for permission to appeal,  and  the  grant  of
    permission.  Copies of those documents were  provided  to  him  at  the
    hearing.

14. I explained to the Sponsor the procedure that would be adopted, in that
    I would listen to what was said on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,
    who contended that the FtT was wrong in law to allow the appeal, and  I
    would then hear from the Sponsor in response.

15. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal, suggesting that the FtT was wrong in  law  to
    allow the appeal on the basis that the Claimant was  exercising  treaty
    rights herself, and therefore was not entitled to be granted  permanent
    residence, and the decision should be set aside and re-made by  way  of
    remittal to the FtT.

16. I ensured that the Sponsor understood the  application  that  had  been
    made on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The Sponsor  explained  that
    the Claimant is his daughter, and completely dependent upon  him.   The
    Sponsor explained that he is a qualified person  and  that  his  wife's
    appeal to the FtT had now been  allowed  following  a  hearing  on  6th
    September 2016.

17. Mr Richards confirmed that the Secretary  of  State  had  not  appealed
    against the decision in relation to the Sponsor's wife, and had in fact
    granted permanent residence  to  the  Sponsor's  wife,  the  Claimant's
    mother.  Mr Richards indicated that this did not alter the position, in
    that the FtT had been wrong to allow the Claimant's appeal on the basis
    that she was exercising treaty rights in her own right.

18. The Sponsor stated that even if the FtT had been wrong,  it  was  clear
    that the Claimant was entitled to permanent residence.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I announced at the hearing that the FtT had materially erred in law and
    therefore the decision of the FtT was set aside.  My reasons  for  this
    conclusion are set out below.

20. The FtT allowed the appeal against refusal of  permanent  residence  on
    the basis that the Claimant  being  an  EEA  national,  was  exercising
    treaty rights as a qualified person in her own right.  The  application
    had been made on the basis that the Claimant  was  dependent  upon  her
    parents.

21. The FtT found that the Appellant at the date of hearing  was  in  full-
    time education, and therefore presumably found that the Appellant was a
    'qualified person' as a student, pursuant to regulation 6(1)(e).

22. To succeed with her appeal, the Claimant needed to prove she had been a
    student for a continuous period of five years, and that  she  satisfied
    regulation 15(1)(a) which requires an EEA national to have  resided  in
    the UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous  period
    of five years.

23. A definition of a 'student' is set out in regulation 4(1)(d)  which  is
    set out below;

         "(d) 'student' means a person who-

              (i) is enrolled, for the  principal  purpose  of  following  a
                  course of study  (including  vocational  training),  at  a
                  public or private  establishment  which  is-(aa)  financed
                  from public funds; or (bb)  otherwise  recognised  by  the
                  Secretary of State as  an  establishment  which  has  been
                  accredited for the purpose of providing  such  courses  or
                  training within the law or administrative practice of  the
                  part of the United Kingdom in which the  establishment  is
                  located;

              (ii)     has comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover  in  the
         United Kingdom; and

              (iii)    assures  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  means  of  a
                  declaration, or by such equivalent means as the person may
                  choose, that he has sufficient resources not to  become  a
                  burden on the  social  assistance  system  of  the  United
                  Kingdom during his period of residence."

24. I find that there was no evidence before the FtT that the Claimant  had
    been a student for a continuous period of five years  at  the  date  of
    hearing.  In addition there was  no  evidence  that  the  Claimant  had
    comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom.

25. Therefore, in the absence of such evidence, the FtT  erred  in  finding
    that the Claimant had been exercising treaty rights in her  own  right,
    as a student for a continuous period of five years.   The  decision  of
    the FtT is set aside with no findings preserved, save the finding  that
    the Claimant is a Swedish citizen.

26. I have considered paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FtT to be heard afresh.  The nature of judicial  fact-finding  that
    is required makes a remittal appropriate.

27. The appeal will be heard at the Nottingham Hearing Centre,  unless  the
    parties are advised in writing to the contrary, and the parties will be
    advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal is to be  heard
    by an FtT Judge other than Judge Colyer.

28. The Sponsor was advised at the Upper Tribunal hearing, to  ensure  that
    any documentary evidence to be relied upon should be submitted  to  the
    FtT and I direct that any documentation to be relied upon must be  sent
    to the FtT and the other party at least  fourteen  days  prior  to  the
    hearing.  It may be that some relevant evidence  is  contained  in  the
    file relating to the Appellant's mother, therefore the  Sponsor  should
    ensure that all relevant evidence is placed before the  FtT  when  this
    appeal is reconsidered.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.  This is because she is a  minor.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed   Date 18th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 18th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

