
IAC-tH-lw-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20096/2013
     IA/20099/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20th August 2014               |On 12th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                Rajib Debnath
                              mrs Esita Bhowmik
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr F Shibli (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 14th May  2013,  the  appellants,  who  are  husband  and  wife  and
    citizens of Bangladesh, received decisions from the Secretary of State,
    following their application  for  leave  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant (the first appellant) and as the partner of a  Tier  1  Migrant
    (the second appellant).  On that day, the Secretary of State decided to
    refuse to vary the appellants' leave and to remove them from the United
    Kingdom by way of directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   Their appeals against the adverse decisions were  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 3rd June 2014.

3.   The Secretary of State concluded that the requirements of  the  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) scheme were not met.  In particular, Table 4(d) required
    evidence of  registration  with  HMRC  as  a  self-employed  person  or
    registration of a new business or as a director of an existing business
    and evidence of business activity.  The appellants relied  upon  an  e-
    mail to the first appellant  from  HMRC  but  this  did  not  meet  the
    relevant criteria.  Moreover, one or more contracts showing trading was
    required to be  provided  with  the  application.   No  contracts  were
    submitted and there was nothing in the application for further leave to
    show that any existed.  As such a contract would not  form  part  of  a
    series of documents, the Secretary of State decided not to request  any
    additional evidence under paragraph 245AA of the Rules.

4.   Before the judge, reliance was placed upon a letter from the  Secretary
    of State dated 15th March  2013,  in  which  the  first  appellant  was
    advised that following changes to the rules  taking  effect  from  31st
    January 2013, and the introduction of a "genuine entrepreneur" test and
    a change to the minimum funds requirement, the UK Border  Agency  would
    contact him in the coming weeks to advise how the changes would  affect
    his application and what steps,  if  any,  would  be  needed  before  a
    decision were made.

5.   The judge found that specified documents were not  submitted  with  the
    application for further leave, as the first  appellant  admitted.   She
    found  that  the  letter  to  him  dated  15th  March  2013   did   not
    substantially advance his case and there was no duty on  the  Secretary
    of State to pursue that letter or advise  him  how  the  changes  might
    affect his application.  She took into  account  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Rodriguez, found that the Secretary of State was not
    obliged to offer the appellant a further opportunity to adduce evidence
    and that the March 2013 letter  did  not  give  rise  to  a  legitimate
    expectation that the application for leave  would  be  decided  in  any
    particular way.  In paragraph 14 of the  determination,  there  is  the
    following in this context: "The March 2013 letter  is  not  only  post-
    decision but I find does not raise a legitimate expectation on the part
    of the appellants in relation to the outcome  of  their  applications."
    The appeals were dismissed.

6.   The appellants applied for permission to appeal.   Reliance  was  again
    placed on the 15th March 2013 letter.  The first  appellant  understood
    that the Secretary of State would contact him  before  a  decision  was
    made and waited for such contact to occur,  before  submitting  further
    documents.   The  judge  erred  in  describing  the  letter  as  "post-
    decision".  In a second ground, it was contended that the Secretary  of
    State's procedure was unfair and procedurally flawed, in the  light  of
    Thakur [2011] UKUT  00151.   The  respondent  had  promised  the  first
    appellant that he would be allowed to make "further points  before  any
    decision was made".  The first appellant was told that he would have an
    opportunity to do provide further documents.

7.   In a third ground, it was contended that the judge erred in  concluding
    that the 15th March 2013 letter did  not  give  rise  to  a  legitimate
    expectation.  The author of the grounds stated  that  the  letter  gave
    rise to an expectation that the  first  appellant  would  be  consulted
    before a decision was made, that he would be  able  to  put  right  any
    deficiencies in his application, that he relied upon this "promise" and
    that he "chose not to submit any further  documents".    He  was  in  a
    position  to  make  good  any  deficiency  contained  in  his   initial
    application.  In this part of the grounds, reliance was placed upon  AA
    & Others [2008] UKAIT 0003, in relation to highly skilled migrants.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted on 23rd  June  2014.   In  a  rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State, made on 8th July 2014, the appeal
    was opposed.  The Secretary of State submitted that the judge  directed
    herself appropriately.  The first appellant did not submit the  correct
    or required documents with his application and  the  letter  about  the
    Tier 1 scheme, dated 15th March 2013, created no legitimate expectation
    that the Secretary of State would advise him of any deficiency  in  his
    application.  The first appellant could not succeed in his  application
    (nor could the second appellant succeed in hers) and  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law.

Submissions on Error of Law

9.   Mr Shibli said that there was a misrecording of fact, at  paragraph  11
    and paragraph 14, where the judge described the March  2013  letter  as
    postdating the decision.  The letter and a legitimate expectation  were
    linked.  It was  accepted  that  the  appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules and the letter from the first appellant which
    accompanied the application, dated 24th October 2012, showed that  this
    was  so.   He  candidly  admitted  there  that  he  had   applied   for
    registration as a self-employed person, his application was in  process
    and he would commence his business as an entrepreneur once he had  "the
    switch".  However, given the contents of the letter from the  Secretary
    of State dated 15th March 2013, the Secretary of  State  ought  not  to
    have made her decision when she did.  There was an unqualified  promise
    that she would revert to the first appellant.  The  bundle  before  the
    judge included an HMRC registration document dated November  2012.   If
    the first appellant had been invited to provide  this,  he  could  have
    done so.

10.  So far as contracts are concerned,  it  was  accepted  that  none  were
    available when the application was made but at page 160 of  the  bundle
    was a receipt showing the purchase of goods from a  company  in  Dhaka.
    If the Secretary of State had made contact with the first appellant, he
    might have been able to provide supporting evidence.   The  March  2013
    letter raised a legitimate  expectation  that  he  would  be  given  an
    opportunity to do so.

11.  Mr Walker said that paragraph 15 of the determination was  clear.   The
    judge was entitled to find, as was conceded  by  the  first  appellant,
    that the requirements of the rules were simply  not  met.   The  letter
    from the Secretary of State dated 15th March 2013 did not give rise  to
    a legitimate expectation as the first  appellant  knew  perfectly  well
    that his application was bound to fail  as  he  had  not  provided  the
    specified documents required under the rules.

12.  In a brief response, Mr Shibli said that  the  judge's  findings  could
    not be relied upon as she had made  a  fundamental  mistake  about  the
    letter and whether it followed the decision or not.  A  material  error
    of fact had been made.  Again, the 15th March 2013 letter contained  an
    unqualified promise of contact which was not followed up.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13.  At the heart of the challenge to the judge's dismissal  of  the  appeal
    is the contention that the letter from the  Secretary  of  State  dated
    15th March 2013 gave rise to a legitimate expectation  that  she  would
    make contact with the first appellant  and  allow  him  to  remedy  any
    deficiencies in his application.  I have no  hesitation  in  concluding
    that this contention has no merit and is not made out.

14.  The judge correctly found  that  the  application  made  by  the  first
    appellant and his wife was one which did not meet the  requirements  of
    the rules.  The judge recorded the first  appellant's  candid  evidence
    that this was so and the letter he wrote on 24  October  2012,  to  the
    respondent's Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  team,  clearly  revealed  that  the
    application could not succeed.  It is apparent from  that  letter  that
    the first appellant intended to commence in business as an entrepreneur
    at a later date.  As at the date of application, he was  simply  unable
    to provide, for example, contracts showing business  activity.   As  he
    had merely applied for registration as a self-employed person,  he  was
    unable to show completed registration in that  capacity  or  as  a  new
    business or as a director of an existing business at the required time,
    prior to the date of application.

15.  Those deficiencies in the application were not capable of  being  cured
    by a further opportunity to submit documents.  The first appellant  was
    in a similar position to the appellants in Raju &  Others  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ  754.   The  rules  required  certain  evidence  to  accompany  the
    application but that evidence was not available at the  relevant  time.
    Again, submission of the evidence at a later date could  not  cure  the
    deficiency.

16.  The copy receipt from a  company  in  Dhaka,  purporting  to  show  the
    purchase of several handbags and similar items, dated 3rd November 2012
    falls woefully short as evidence of a contract  or  business  activity,
    sufficient to meet the requirements of the rules, even if that evidence
    had accompanied the application (which, of course, it had not).

17.  Turning to the 15th March 2013 letter, Mr Shibli maintained  that  this
    document gave rise to a legitimate  expectation.   The  author  of  the
    grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    suggested that the letter amounted to a  reliable  representation  that
    the first appellant would be consulted before any decision was made and
    that he would be able to remedy any deficiencies  in  his  application.
    I find that the letter cannot sensibly or reasonably  be  construed  in
    this way.

18.  The content of any representation that the  Secretary  of  State  would
    make contact is severely  limited  to  advice  about  the  new  changes
    introduced with effect from 31st January 2013 and what steps,  if  any,
    would be needed  before  a  decision  were  made  on  the  application.
    Neither of those changes bore directly on the deficiencies in the first
    appellant's application.  The letter manifestly  did  not  contain  any
    promise that the first appellant would be "consulted" before a decision
    or that he would be  able  to  put  right  "any  deficiencies"  in  his
    application.

19.  The application was doomed to failure for  reasons  wholly  unconnected
    with the introduction of a genuine entrepreneur test and a  requirement
    for applicants to hold funds on an ongoing basis rather than solely  at
    the time of the application.  No response  that  the  appellants  might
    have made to those changes to the Tier  1  scheme  could  have  made  a
    difference.  The Secretary of State did not  act  in  any  procedurally
    unfair way in refusing the application, in May 2013,  for  the  reasons
    she gave.   The  letter  gave  rise  to  no  legitimate  or  reasonable
    expectation that the appellants would be  invited  to  provide  further
    evidence which, at best, might have shown that the requirements of  the
    rules were met long after the date  of  application  in  October  2012,
    still less that the Secretary of State would overlook or  ignore  their
    failure to meet the requirements of the rules.

20.  The judge undoubtedly made a factual mistake in  describing  the  March
    2013 letter as postdating the decision, in paragraphs 11 and 14 of  the
    determination.  She might perhaps have  meant  that  it  postdated  the
    application, which was made in October 2012.  That factual error  falls
    very far short of showing any  error  of  law  in  the  decision.   Her
    conclusion that the requirements of the rules were not met was  clearly
    open to her, as was her finding that the March 2013 letter did not give
    rise to any legitimate expectation or  an  opportunity  to  remedy  the
    deficiencies in the application for leave.

21.  Overall, I conclude that the decision contains  no  material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.



Signed        Date 12th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


