
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Numbers:
IA/20930/2013

                                          IA/20937/2013

                                          IA/20946/2013

                                          IA/20951/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 9 December 2013                       |On 11 July 2014           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                           Mr HARPREET SINGH SOKHI
                           Mrs PRABHJOT KAUR SOKHI
                        MASTER KHUSHDEEP SINGH SOKHI
                         MASTER SUKHDEEP SINGH SOKHI
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants     Mr B Singh, Solicitor
      (HSBS Law UK Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    The Appellants appealed with permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  on  11  November   2013   against   the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maciel  who  had
           dismissed the Immigration Rules long lawful residence element of
           the Appellants' linked appeals, but had  allowed  their  appeals
           under Article 8 ECHR, in determination promulgated on 21 October
           2013.   The  Appellants  are  nationals  of  India,  father  and
           dependant wife and children, who had claimed ILR on the basis of
           10 years' continuous lawful residence.

      2.    The judge had found that the Appellants had not shown 10  years'
           continuous lawful residence as at the date of  the  Respondent's
           decisions, i.e., 20 May 2013.  There had been a  period  without
           leave between April and August 2003, such that  the  Appellants'
           10 years  was  not  completed  until  August  2013,  i.e.,  post
           decision.


      3.    In the grounds of onwards appeal it was asserted that by  virtue
           of section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the  Appellants'
           existing leave to remain was  extended  from  the  date  of  the
           refusal  decision(s)  to  the  determination  of  their   linked
           appeals, which were, of course, heard  on  7  October  2013,  by
           which date  10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  had  been
           completed, notwithstanding  the  Secretary  of  State's  initial
           refusal.  This was in effect by operation of law.


      4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules
           in the form of a letter dated 28 November 2013,  the  Respondent
           conceded that the judge had fallen  into  error  by  failing  to
           factor in the section 3C  leave  to  calculation  of  continuous
           residence, so that the appeals should have  been  allowed  under
           the Immigration Rules as well as  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The
           tribunal did not need to call further upon Mr Whitwell  for  the
           Respondent, nor was there any matter  which  Mr  Singh  for  the
           Appellants wished to raise.


      5.    The  tribunal  agreed  with  both  parties.   The  judge  in  an
           otherwise careful determination had  overlooked  the  effect  of
           section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971.   In  fairness  to  the
           judge, the appeals ought to have been conceded by the Respondent
           in the First-tier Tribunal. In view of  the  material  error  of
           law, the determination must be remade and the appeals under  the
           Immigration Rules are allowed.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous  decision(s)  involved  the  making  of  an
error on    a point of law.  The decision(s) are remade as follows:

      The original appeals are ALLOWED under the Immigration Rules  as  well
as under Article 8 ECHR.



      Signed                                  Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


      TO THE RESPONDENT

      FEE AWARDS

      The tribunal makes no fee  awards  as  the  Appellants  succeeded  for
reasons     other than in their applications to the Secretary of State

      Signed                                  Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
