
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20727/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            FOLUKE ADEOLA ADETONA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms P Young, Counsel instructed by Natado Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24th December 1971.  This
    appeal arises from the decision of the respondent, dated  1  May  2014,
    whereby the appellant's application for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of private and family life under  Article  8  ECHR
    was refused. The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Wiseman who, in a decision  promulgated  on
    19 March 2015, dismissed the appeal.

 2. At the outset of the error of law hearing the parties stated that  that
    they were in agreement that the FtT had made an error of law  and  that
    the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  FtT.  I  agree  with  their
    assessment.

 3. As the parties are in agreement I will give only brief reasons  for  my
    decision to find an error of law and remit the appeal to the FtT.

 4. The error of law in respect of which  the  parties  were  in  agreement
    concerns the FtT's approach to paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5.  Paragraph  EX.1  is  not  freestanding  and  a  prerequisite  to   its
    consideration is that certain eligibility and suitability  requirements
    are met. These differ depending on whether the  applicant  is  applying
    under the "partner route" or "parent route".

 6. The FtT correctly recognised that the  appellant  met  the  eligibility
    requirements as a "partner" but not as a  "parent".   Accordingly,  the
    only route open to her was that of a "partner".

 7. Section R-LTRP 1.1(d) of Appendix FM states that the requirement to  be
    met for limited leave to remain as a partner are (i) the applicant must
    not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR (the appellant  did  not  fall
    for  refusal  under  this  section);  (ii)  the  applicant  meets   the
    requirements of paragraphs  E-LTEP.1.2-1.12  (the  applicant  did  meet
    these requirements); and (iii) paragraph EX.1 applies.

 8. EX.1 is divided into two parts: sub paragraph EX.1(a) which concerns an
    applicant's relationship with a   child;  and  sub  paragraph   EX.1(b)
    which concerns a relationship with a partner.

 9. The FtT's error was to find that because  the  appellant  reached  EX.1
    through the partner route and not the parent route only  EX.1(b)  could
    be considered. However, as recognised by the parties before me, that is
    not the case. Section R-LTRP 1.1(d) does not state  that  only  EX.1(b)
    applies where EX.1 is reached through the partner  route;  rather,   it
    provides that EX.1 applies. And EX.1 is satisfied if either EX.1(a)  or
    EX.1(b) is satisfied. By finding that EX.1(a) could not be  considered,
    the FtT made an error of law.

10. Both Mr Whitwell and Ms Young considered this error to be material such
    that the decision of the FtT should  be  set  aside  and  the  decision
    remade by a differently constituted FtT.  They did not agree,  however,
    on the extent to which the FtT's findings of fact should be preserved.

11. Mr Whitwell argued that the findings of fact should be preserved  apart
    from those relating to the length of time the appellant's children have
    resided in the UK, which he accepted should be considered  afresh.   Ms
    Young argued that the appeal should heard de novo.

12. In my view, the issue of when the appellant's children entered  the  UK
    is not a  discrete  one  that  can  be  separated  from  other  factual
    findings. The FtT's finding that they entered the UK  in  2011,  rather
    than 2006 as claimed by the appellant, is related  to  its  conclusions
    more generally about the appellant's lack of credibility.  Accordingly,
    in order for the matter of when the  children  entered  the  UK  to  be
    properly reconsidered, the FtT will need to consider  the  entirety  of
    the evidence that concerns the appellant's  credibility  and  therefore
    none of the FtT's findings should be preserved.

13. Having regard to section 7.2(b) of the President's Practice  Statement,
    this appeal shall be remitted to the First tier Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh by a judge other than Judge Wiseman with no findings from  Judge
    Wiseman's decision being preserved.

Decision

 a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    heard afresh.

 b. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 23 February 2016              |

