
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20507/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th November 2016                 |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JANU LAKHAN PAL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of India who was born on 11th July 1988. His appeal against the refusal
    of leave to remain under Appendix FM and Article 8 was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan in a  decision  promulgated  on  20th  May
    2016.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  student  on  22nd
    October 2010. He was granted further  leave  as  a  student  which  was
    eventually curtailed because his sponsor lost his licence.  Whilst  his
    Tier 4 student appeal was pending,  he  met  his  wife  and  they  were
    married. He accordingly applied for leave to remain on the basis of his
    family  and  private  life  in  the  UK.  The  Respondent  refused  the
    Appellant's application on 5th May 2015.

3.   The Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  summary  the
    judge made the following findings:

         "34. I find that the appellant has established family life with his
         wife in the UK.  If he is removed to India and his wife has to join
         him in that country I find that it will create greater imbalance in
         her life and which I find amounts to insurmountable  obstacles  for
         her to settle with her husband in India. I therefore find  that  in
         evidence that Lord Bingham's principle 2 is engaged and her Article
         8  of  the  ECHR  rights  are  breached  to  the  extent  that  the
         interference will be disproportionate to the legitimate aims.


         35.  There is the option for the appellant to return  to  India  on
         his own and make an application for entry clearance as a spouse. It
         is not clear has [sic] to how long the waiting  process  will  take
         for him to rejoin his wife in the UK. This will create a period  of
         separation between them. Both the appellant  and  his  wife  stated
         that she will visit him while in India but she would have to  leave
         her employment to do  that.   If  the  wife  has  to  give  up  her
         employment, this would in return affect the appellant's chances  of
         obtaining his entry clearance.  The  respondent  accepts  that  the
         appellant and his wife are in a genuine and sincere relationship. I
         find on the evidence before [sic] that the  appellant's  return  to
         India to merely obtain an entry clearance to  the  UK  will  create
         insurmountable  obstacles  for  this  couple.   I  find  that   the
         appellant's and his wife's family/private life rights under Article
         8 of the ECHR will be breached and will be disproportionate to  the
         legitimate aims."

4.   The judge then went on  to  consider  Section  117B  and  concluded  at
    paragraph 39:


         "The appellant's [sic] has  established  a  relationship  with  his
         British  wife  under  section  117B(4)(b)  of  the  2014  Act.  The
         Appellant is not a burden on the tax payer and  he  has  integrated
         into society. I find that the Appellant meets the  requirements  of
         the 2014 Act and the Immigration Rules encompassing  Article  8  of
         the ECHR."

5.   The Secretary of State appealed on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for his findings on a material fact and
    the judge had made a material misdirection in  law.  It  was  submitted
    that it was not clear from the decision whether the judge  had  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules or on Article 8 grounds and  the
    conclusions were equally confusing.
6.   Secondly, the judge had failed to consider the  situation  that  family
    and private life had been started when the immigration  status  of  the
    Appellant was  unclear.  The  judge  should  have  considered,  in  the
    proportionality assessment, that the Appellant could return to make  an
    entry clearance application. The judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    Section 117B(5) [sic]. Had the judge  done  he  would  have  reached  a
    different conclusion.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the decision was unclear as to whether it was  allowed  under  the
    Rules or Article 8 and that the judge failed to  understand  the  legal
    background to spouse/partner cases. The Sponsor had met  the  Appellant
    when he had an outstanding appeal. The judge  failed  to  consider  the
    possibility of an application  for  entry  clearance  from  abroad  and
    failed to have proper regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.


Submissions

8.   Mr Melvin submitted written submissions stating  that  it  was  unclear
    whether the judge had found there were insurmountable obstacles to  the
    spouse and Appellant enjoying family life in India under EX.1(b) and to
    firstly consider an appeal in relation to the Immigration Rules and, if
    they  could  not  be  met,  consider  whether  there  were   compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules. If the Immigration Rules could not  be
    met then the  judge  should  consider  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances that were not covered by  the  Rules  before  considering
    proportionality  following  Singh  and  Khalid  [2014]  EWCA  Civ   74.
    Accordingly, the judge had misdirected himself.

9.   Further, the judge should have been aware of the guiding principles  in
    Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 and confirmed in Wasif [2016] EWCA Civ  82.
    The Court of Appeal in Agyarko sets out the principles to be considered
    in precarious family  life  appeals  when  assessing  the  question  of
    insurmountable obstacles. It is a stringent test or high hurdle and the
    mere fact that the spouse has lived in the UK all their  life  and  was
    reluctant to leave was not an insurmountable obstacle. It is  submitted
    that had the judge applied the ratio of  Agyarko  then  he  would  have
    found that there were no insurmountable obstacles in this case.

10.  In oral submissions, Mr Melvin stated that the decision was  confusing.
    The judge had failed to give adequate reasoning for finding that  there
    were 'insurmountable obstacles'. He had failed to follow relevant  case
    law and his conclusions were not open to him  on  the  evidence  before
    him. The facts in this case  fell  far  short  of  the  'insurmountable
    obstacles' test in Agyarko. The judge's decision was irrational on  the
    facts as he found them. The threshold was a high one and the judge  had
    failed to apply the test set out by the Court of Appeal.


11.  Mr Pal submitted that he had not broken any rules and had not  remained
    in the UK illegally.  He had married two and a  half  years  ago.   His
    wife would go to India for a holiday, but not to live. He could make an
    application from India, but it would make no difference if  he  applied
    in India or in the UK. It was a waste of time and money.   If  he  went
    back he would be refused on the same basis and he and his wife would be
    separated forever.


Discussion and Conclusion

12.  The following facts were found by the judge.  The Appellant would  have
    no problem reintegrating in India. However, his wife did  not  want  to
    live in India, she did not want to give up her job, all her family were
    in the UK and her grandmother had cancer. The Appellant's wife did  not
    speak the language and did not understand the culture  there.  She  was
    aware of the Appellant's immigration status before they married. If  he
    returned to India, she would sponsor him to come back to the UK.

13.  I confirmed the relevant facts with both the Appellant and his wife  at
    the appeal  hearing.  The  Appellant  could  return  and  obtain  entry
    clearance and his wife would support him. There would be  a  separation
    and the Appellant's  wife  would  visit  him  in  India.  However,  the
    Appellant was concerned that the  separation  could  be  prolonged  and
    might indeed be permanent if he was unable to satisfy the Rules.

14.  Paragraph EX.2 of the Immigration Rules  sets  out  the  definition  of
    'insurmountable   obstacles'   for   the   purposes   of    EX    1(b):
    "[I]insurmountable obstacles means the  very  significant  difficulties
    which would be faced by the applicant or their  partner  in  continuing
    their family life together outside  the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for  the  applicant  or
    their partner."


15.   On  the  facts  found  by  the  judge,  applying  the  'insurmountable
    obstacles' test in the Immigration Rules and in Agyarko it could not be
    said that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing
    outside the UK. It is understandable that the  Appellant's  wife  as  a
    British citizen does not want to leave the UK and wants to remain here,
    but the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  show
    very significant difficulties which would entail very serious hardship.




16.  I find  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his  application  of  the
    'insurmountable obstacles' test to the facts  as  he  found  them.  His
    conclusion at paragraph 34 that there were insurmountable obstacles was
    irrational given the definition in the Rules and the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Agyarko. The judge's finding  at  paragraph  35  was
    also irrational. Requiring the Appellant to return to India  to  obtain
    entry clearance did not  amount  to  an  insurmountable  obstacle.  The
    Appellant was willing and able to do so and his wife would support  him
    and visit him.



17.  Further,  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his  application  of  section
    117B(4)(b) of the 2002 Act which states that little  weight  should  be
    given to a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious. The Appellant met his partner at a time when his  appeal
    against the refusal of leave to remain as a student  was  pending.  His
    immigration status was precarious. The judge failed to properly  direct
    himself and his conclusion at  paragraph  39  was  one  which  was  not
    reasonably open to him on the evidence before him.

18.  I find that the judge erred in law in his assessment of  insurmountable
    obstacles.  The  Appellant  could  return  to  India  to  obtain  entry
    clearance  and  his  wife  would  visit,  that  cannot  amount  to   an
    insurmountable obstacle to  family  life  continuing  outside  the  UK.
    Further,  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his  application  of  section
    117B(4)(b). Accordingly, I set aside his decision, dated 20th May 2016,
    and I re-make it as follows.

19.  There are no insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    returning to India and continuing family life there. The Appellant  has
    lived in India for the majority of his life. It is understandable  that
    his wife does not want to relocate to India permanently because she has
    a job and family here. However, that does not amount to  insurmountable
    obstacles under paragraph EX.2. On the facts of this case,  there  were
    no very significant difficulties which would entail  serious  hardship.
    Accordingly, the Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

20.  In assessing Article 8, I take into account that the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed under the Immigration Rules and I attach little weight  to  his
    relationship which was formed at a time when his immigration status was
    precarious. The Appellant's  wife  was  aware  of  the  situation.  The
    Appellant could return to India and obtain entry  clearance.  His  wife
    will support him and visit him. There were no exceptional circumstances
    in this case to warrant a conclusion that leave to  remain  be  granted
    outside the Immigration Rules (paragraph 31 Agyarko).

21.  It would not be disproportionate to require the Appellant to return  to
    Indian and obtain entry clearance given that separation would  only  be
    temporary provided  he  can  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    perfectly proportionate for the Respondent to require those wishing  to
    enter the UK to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  It does not appear from
    what the Appellant told me at the  appeal  hearing  that  he  would  be
    unable to satisfy the requirements for entry clearance, although he  is
    naturally worried that he would be refused  again  and  the  separation
    would be lengthy. However, even if that was  the  case,  the  situation
    would not amount to a disproportionate interference with family life on
    the particular  facts  of  this  case,  given  that  no  insurmountable
    obstacles or exceptional circumstances have been shown. Accordingly,  I
    dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  Article  8
    grounds.

22.  I allow the Respondent's appeal and  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dated 20th May 2016. I re-make it as  follows.  The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of leave to remain  is  dismissed
under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 11th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 11th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
