


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/20094/2014




|At  Field House                           |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated|
|on 17th April 2015                        |On 26th June 2015                |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MRS TAHERA BEGUM JHORNA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                  Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms C Bexson, Counsel instructed by Novells Legal
Practice.
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


1. I refer to the parties as they were in the First tier Tribunal though it
   is the respondent who is appealing in the present proceedings.

2. The appellant, born on the 10th March 1984, is a national of Bangladesh.
   She came to the United Kingdom on 10 January 2007.She had a six-month
   visit Visa valid until 9 July 2007. She was accompanied by her son,
   Master Nahin Munker Rafid, who is also a Bangladeshi national. He was
   born on 7 November 2004 which means he was just less than three years of
   age when he arrived and is now ten years old.

3. The appellant and her child lived with her sister, Mrs Mazed Khanom and
   her family in London. Her sister holds British nationality. She has other
   family members in the country, including a brother.

4. The appellant did not leave before her visit Visa expired. Instead, she
   made a series of applications to remain, all of which were unsuccessful.
   Time passed and on 18 December 2013 application was made for her to
   remain on the basis of article 8.

5. On 9 April 2004 June the respondent considered the immigration rules
   relating to private life and family life and concluded these were not met
   and that there were no exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of
   leave outside the rules. The respondent had regard to section 55 of the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration act 2009 as well as freestanding
   article 8 rights.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

6. Her appeal against the decision was heard by Immigration Judge Pears at
   Richmond on 18 December 2014. In a decision promulgated on 6 January 2015
   her appeal was allowed. It was allowed under both the immigration rules,
   namely paragraph 276 ADE and appendix FM, as well as under article 8.

7. In  the decision the First-tier Judge said:

         31. Looking at the Appellant alone I conclude that she cannot meet
         the requirements of the immigration rules as she has been here
         neither long enough, nor a sufficient proportion of her life and
         she has not shown that she has lost all her ties with Bangladesh...


         36    I would have no hesitation therefore in concluding that she
         alone has not met the requirements of the immigration rules and an
         arguable basis for the exercise of discretion has not been put
         forward and the decision of the Respondent was proportionate.


         37. It is the appellant with her son that makes a difference...


         39. I find that the consequences of that are that the Appellant
         meets the requirements of the immigration rules.


         46. I find in consequence that as his mother on the basis set out
         above meets  the immigration rules or alternatively it would be
         disproportionate to remove her, her appeal must be allowed.


8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
   there was an apparent contradiction in the First-tier Judge concluding
   the appellant could not meet the immigration rules and the statement at
   paragraph 46 that she does. No explanation was provided as to the basis
   for the conclusion the rules were met. A further issue was whether the
   judge gave proper consideration to the position of the appellant's child.



9. At hearing, Ms Everett relied upon the contradictory statements in the
   decision as to whether the immigration rules were met or not. She also
   submitted that the immigration judge failed to properly explain what was
   compelling about the situation of the appellant's child that would result
   in the appeal being allowed. In response, Ms Bexson submitted that the
   decision should be upheld and that the judge was clearly influenced by
   the position of the appellant child bearing in mind the length of time
   they had been in this country.

Error of law.

10.  It is my conclusion that the decision contains material errors of law
   and cannot stand. It is patently contradictory, with the judge saying at
   one point the appellant cannot meet the immigration rules nor is she
   assisted by article 8 and then concluding she meets the requirements of
   the rules and in the alternative, succeeds on human rights grounds.

11.  It may be that the immigration judge meant to convey that the
   appellant succeeded under the rules as a parent and that EX 1 applied in
   respect of him.Similar considerations apply in respect of paragraph
   276ADE(1)(iv). That being so, it is not apparent why the judge then went
   on to consider article 8.

12. The decision is muddled because it does not clearly distinguish when
   the immigration rules are being dealt with and what rule is being dealt
   with. This is compounded by not making it clear when or why the matter is
   being considered outside the rules on traditional article 8 grounds.

13. Furthermore, the judge does not adequately explain why EX1 or 276ADE
   (1) (iv) applied in relation to the appellant's child. The child is from
   Bangladesh. He lives with his mother who would be returned with him. She
   can help him with any linguistic and cultural adjustment. The judge
   referred to paragraphs 20, 23 and 25 of the determination. This consists
   of generalities applicable to any child that has lived here for a number
   of years. Reference is made to linguistic issues arising on return to
   Bangladesh; the benefits for the child of living in Britain; his
   friendship with his cousins here and his progress at school. The judge
   does not adequately set out why it would not be reasonable to expect her
   child to leave the United Kingdom. The respondent had made the point that
   there are schools in Bangladesh and the appellant's siblings could
   provide financial support.

14. The decision also fails to adequately explain what it is about the
   family dynamics which have resulted in the appeal being allowed on
   traditional article 8 grounds. The judge relies upon the decision of ZH
   Tanzania but does not allude to the fact that the child in that case was
   a British national. The advantages of British nationality which would be
   lost by removal were highlighted in Lord Kerr's judgement. The child in
   the present appeal is a Bangladeshi national.

15. ZH Tanzania highlighted the child's interest being a primary
   consideration. However, it is not the only consideration and the judge
   does not adequately explain how the public interest in immigration
   control is outweighed. His mother always had a precarious, and according
   to the judge, unlawful immigration status. Her original status was as a
   visitor and she then overstayed.

16. I had considered remaking the decision but on reflection have decided
   against this. I have borne in mind the material provided before the First-
   tier tribunal and the findings of fact which will have to be made.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law and
cannot stand. The appeal is to be re-heard afresh in the First-tier with
none of the facts preserved.

FJ Farrelly
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
