
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/20234/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 21 June 2017                       |          On 4 July 2017              |
|                                      |                                      |


                                                       EX -TEMPORE JUDGEMENT

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                             Ms Desanka Begovic
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Komusanac, Igor & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Serbia and her date of birth is  11  July
    1950.  She came to the UK as a visitor on 16 November 2013.  Her  leave
    expired on 15 May 2014.  On 11 February 2015 she applied for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her medical condition and  her  application  was
    refused, by the Secretary of State, in a decision of 18 May 2015.   The
    Appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal  was  dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S Iqbal in  a  decision  which  was
    promulgated on 3 November 2016 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    11 August 2016.  Permission was  granted  to  the  Appellant  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin on 15 May 2017.

2.   At the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  both  parties  were
    represented.  The judge set out the reasons why the Respondent  refused
    the application. This decision engaged with paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the
    Rules and the Immigration Rules relating to adult dependent  relatives.
    The judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  the  Appellant's
    daughter.  The Appellant was, at the date of the hearing, aged  66  and
    had been living with her only biological daughter and grandson  in  the
    UK since she arrived had arrived here as a visitor on 16 November 2016.
    She has been visiting the UK since 2001.

3.   The judge made the following findings:

         "18. I have considered all of the documentary  evidence  before  me
             submitted by the Appellant and the Respondent.   It  is  clear
             that the Appellant cannot meet either Appendix FM or paragraph
             276 ADE of the rules.


         21.  The obvious issue in this case is the fact that the  Appellant
             is now 66  years  old  and  has  been  living  with  her  only
             biological daughter in the United Kingdom since her arrival on
             the 16th November 2013.  She has been visiting  the  UK  since
             2001 and has no close family in Serbia, save for  two  sisters
             who live in different cities, about 100km away  from  her  and
             were about 80 years old.


         27.  The evidence, I have heard from the Appellant in  relation  to
             her circumstances is that she has been visiting  her  daughter
             in the United Kingdom since 2001.  She came at  least  once  a
             year.  She was a paediatric nurse until her retirement in 1999
             when she was classified as disabled  and  given  a  disability
             pension following early retirement due to  a  worsening  heart
             and thyroid condition diagnosed in 1994/1995.  She states that
             her condition has made her less capable of  doing  the  things
             she could do on her own without  depending  on  neighbours  or
             assistance from friends.  She states that she  began  to  feel
             very weak during her last visit  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
             sought  medical  treatment  privately  and  had  remained   on
             medication for her condition.  She stated she was  now  having
             bad dizzy spells with fatigue, lack of air in  her  chest  and
             she would feel the pressure rising  and  she  would  have  bad
             headaches.


         28.  She was asked what assistance she required and  she  said  she
             could not get up on certain days as she had problems with  her
             spine, she had problems washing her hair  and  she  could  not
             look after  herself  or  dress  herself.   She  confirmed  her
             daughter helped her.  She further confirmed she owned  a  flat
             in Belgrade in Serbia.  She relied on  help  from  neighbours.
             Insofar as her pension was concerned she stated that  she  had
             given authority to a neighbour to collect her pension  on  her
             behalf and she would give it to her on return.  She had  known
             her neighbour since 1992, when she started to live there.  Her
             last attack before she came to the United Kingdom was  in  the
             winter and she had  had  therapy  for  blood  pressure,  heart
             condition and hypertension.  She  confirmed  neighbour  helped
             her and she stated that other neighbours helped  her  all  the
             time.  She confirmed that her daughter had last  come  to  see
             her in approximately 2012/2013 when she had submitted her visa
             application form.  She  stated  when  she  did  not  have  any
             attacks she was able  to  deal  with  herself  and  do  things
             without any difficulty.  She stated she had  accessed  medical
             help in the UK and her daughter had paid privately  for  this.
             Her daughter's husband was also working, however, he worked in
             the evenings and therefore looked after  her  grandson  during
             the day as she was unable to care for him by herself given her
             own medical conditions.


         29.  The Appellant's daughter also gave  evidence  that  there  had
             been a change in her mother's condition since  2013,  she  was
             weaker, she had attacks on a daily basis and problems with her
             heart and blood pressure where she could not see or could  not
             cook.  Her daughter also stated that the neighbour who usually
             helped her was really sick and she was the only  one  who  she
             could rely on when her mother suffered with  an  attack.   She
             said she often helped her in the toilet and to brush her teeth
             but she had never researched whether any help was available in
             Serbia itself.


         30.  I find having considered the totality of the evidence  that  I
             have  not  got  any  medical  evidence  in  relation  to   the
             Appellant's  attacks,  their  seriousness  or  the  level   of
             occurrence of them.  In addition the evidence of the Appellant
             and her daughter with reference to the help  of  those  around
             her in  Serbia  has  not  been  consistent.   The  Appellant's
             daughter states the neighbour who helped previously  was  very
             ill and the Appellant was unable to obtain assistance however,
             the Appellant  in  her  evidence  was  quite  clear  that  her
             neighbour continued to collect her pension for her as she  had
             given her the authority.  She stated her neighbours were  very
             helpful and reliable especially in relation to the last attack
             she had before coming to the United Kingdom.


         31.  Her daughter had previously visited her at the  time  she  had
             had her baby who was three months old  and  was  now  back  at
             work.   It  is  understandable  that  the  Appellant  and  her
             daughter wish to be together, especially during this  time  as
             the  Appellant  is  getting  older,  however  I  find  it   is
             unfortunate that there is insufficient evidence  to  show  the
             level  of  the  Appellant's  incapacity,  which  requires  her
             daughter to assist her.


         32.  I have also given consideration to the statutory matters under
             Section 117 of the Immigration Act 2014 and I note that given,
             the Appellant would be exempt from the English language  test,
             given she is 66 years of age and  appears  to  be  financially
             supported by her daughter and son-in-law such that  she  would
             be adequately maintained without  recourse  to  public  funds.
             However, in considering the  totality  of  the  circumstances,
             given that there is a  lack  of  any  supporting  evidence  in
             relation to the assertions made about the Appellant's  health,
             I find on balance  that  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
             demonstrate that it would not be  disproportionate  to  remove
             the Appellant or in the alternative for her to return back and
             obtain the relevant evidence to demonstrate that  she  was  an
             adult dependent relative under the Immigration  Rules  as  set
             out in detail above.


         33.  I have every sympathy with the circumstances of the  Appellant
             however, as I have set above it is open for the  Appellant  to
             make an appropriate application from abroad or indeed a  fresh
             application with evidence to support her circumstances in  the
             United Kingdom."


4.   The grounds of appeal raise a number of issues, but the ground  pursued
    by Mr Komusanac is that the judge erred because  she  did  not  make  a
    finding in respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). It is on this basis that
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin. Mr Komusanac did
    not argue before me that the judge made insufficient findings  of  fact
    or that the findings of fact were not open to the judge.  The argument,
    as advanced by Mr Komusanac, was that the judge "did not  consider  the
    cumulative effect of the findings" and that proportionality involved an
    assessment  of  the  public  interest,  which  is  not  material   when
    considering very significant obstacles.

5.   I conclude that the judge did not make a discrete  finding  in  respect
    of very significant obstacles.  She briefly dealt with paragraph 276ADE
    at paragraph 18, stating that it was clear that the Appellant she could
    not meet the requirements of the Rules, and she set  out  the  previous
    version of paragraph 276ADE at  paragraph  14  of  the  decision.  This
    refers to ties as opposed to very significant obstacles.  This  amounts
    to an error of law, but one that is not material.

6.   It is of significance that the Appellant's case  was  not  advanced  on
    the basis of very significant  obstacles.  The  test  under  276ADE  is
    different to a proportionality assessment. There is no weighing of  the
    public interest.  However, the judge  made  comprehensive  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant and her circumstances.  I was not referred  to
    any matter on which the judge failed to make  findings  and  ultimately
    the grounds, as argued by Mr Komusanac, do not challenge  the  findings
    made. In assessing very significant obstacles  it  is  incumbent  on  a
    judge  to  conduct  a  broad  evaluative  judgment  as  to  whether  an
    individual would be able to operate on a day-to-day basis.  Considering
    the lawful and sustainable findings made by the judge it is  unarguable
    that she would have reached a different  conclusion,  had  she  made  a
    discrete assessment under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  It  is  unarguable
    that  the  evidence  before  the  judge  established  very  significant
    obstacles.

7.   The Appellant lived in Serbia until 2013.  The judge accepted that  she
    receives a disability pension in Serbia.  She has her  own  flat  there
    and she has no close relatives, save two sisters who are  aged  80  and
    live about 100 kilometres from the Appellant. She is aged  66  and  her
    only biological daughter and grandson reside in the UK.

8.   The judge made comprehensive findings in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    medical condition.  The medical evidence before the judge was a  letter
    from Dr Pattapola of  20  March  2015.  Dr  Pattapola  stated  that  he
    recently saw the Appellant, who had requested that information  was  to
    be forwarded.

9.   The doctor set out that the Appellant has been suffering from  moderate
    to severe hypertension, intermittent palpitations, occasional  atypical
    chest  pain,  recurrent  headaches  and   cervical   spondylosis   with
    radiculopathy.  He set  out  her  medication  and  indicates  that  the
    Appellant is stable on such medication.  The doctor concluded that  the
    Appellant's condition is satisfactory apart from that she feels anxious
    and has intermittent headaches and palpitations.  The  doctor  reported
    that the Appellant has stiffness in  her  neck  muscles  and  secondary
    spondylosis, but that there  was  no  evidence  of  wasting  of  distal
    muscles. The doctor concluded that her " vital signs are within  normal
    range".

10.  Having properly considered this  evidence,  the  judge  concluded  that
    there  was  no  medical  evidence  of  the  attacks  about  which   the
    Appellant's daughter gave  evidence,  their  seriousness  or  level  of
    occurrence.  This finding is not challenged and was open to  the  judge
    on the evidence before him.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    evidence from the Appellant and her daughter,  with  reference  to  the
    help given by those in Serbia, was consistent. The Appellant's evidence
    was that her neighbours are helpful and reliable and that  a  neighbour
    helped her when she had suffered an attack.

11.  The judge concluded that the evidence  was  insufficient  to  show  the
    Appellant's level of incapacity. This is a finding that the  judge  was
    entitled to reach on the evidence. Mr Komusanac submitted  that  should
    the matter be reheard he  would  intend  to  present  further  evidence
    (there was no further evidence  before  me  and  fairness  was  not  an
    issue), but that does not assist me in determining  whether  the  judge
    materially erred. It was unclear why such evidence was not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

12.  The judge considered all the evidence which could  potentially  support
    a  case  advanced  on  the  basis  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration  and  made  lawful  and  sustainable  findings.  Considered
    cumulatively  the  evidence  was  not  capable  of  establishing   very
    significant obstacles in the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

13.  There is no challenge to the  proportionality  assessment.   The  judge
    accepted family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  and
    grandson and that the decision  would  interfere  with  this;  however,
    concluded that the interference would be  proportionate.  Mr  Komusanac
    did not pursue the ground relating to Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and this
    was sensible, bearing  in  mind  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  relating  to
    adult dependent relatives, contrary to the assertion  in  the  grounds.
    The evidence and the findings made do not support the contention in the
    grounds that the Appellant would satisfy the  substantive  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules relating to adult dependent relatives.

14.  Mr Komusanac did not pursue the ground that the judge did not  consider
    the evidence of Dr Pattapola of 20 March 2015 and this, in my view, was
    sensible. The ground is wholly unarguable.

15.      The argument pursued and the only ground relied on was the  failure
    to determine the appeal under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  but  for  the
    above reasons I conclude that there is no material error of  law.   The
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the   appeal   is
    maintained.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam









