
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20724/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th October 2015, 15th December 2015 |On 8 April 2016                    |
|and                                      |                                   |
|29th February 2016                       |                                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between
                             Attaullah Shinwari
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Brookes instructed by Malik Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (20th October 2015)
     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (15th December 2015
                    and 29th February 2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The background to this appeal is set out in my decision on error of law
    made following the hearing on 20th October 2015 and promulgated on 28th
    October 2015, which is annexed, and which is to be read as incorporated
    into this decision.  One point requires clarification; in  the  initial
    version of the decision on error of law the Appellant  was,  in  error,
    referred to as coming from Pakistan.  It is now accepted by all parties
    that he comes from Afghanistan.

 2. As was clear from the decision on error of law it was anticipated  that
    the remaking of the decision would  take  place  at  or  following  the
    hearing  on  15th  December  2015.  However,  on  that   occasion   the
    proceedings took an unexpected turn.  Mr Mills, who was  now  appearing
    on behalf of the Secretary of State, asked me to revise my decision  on
    error of law.  He said that there was express authority on the point as
    to whether the relevant form of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration
    Rules to be addressed by the First-tier Tribunal was that  incorporated
    following the changes in the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules
    HC 532 which came into effect on 28th July 2014.  The case in point  he
    said was a judgment of the Court of Appeal namely YM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.  He regretted that this had not been  brought  to
    my attention at the error of law hearing.  He said that the judgment in
    YM (Uganda) concerned a deportation  appeal  but  the  wording  of  the
    relevant section of HC 532 was the same as regards  the  implementation
    of the changes to paragraph 276ADE.   The  same  statement  of  changes
    applied to both types of decision.  In any case he said any remaking of
    the decision should incorporate paragraph 276ADE in its later form.

 3. Unsurprisingly Mr Brookes was not prepared for this argument  and  said
    that he needed time to consider the matter.  I also raised the point as
    to whether, having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I
    had at this stage  jurisdiction  to  review  my  earlier  decision.   I
    considered putting the matter back for further argument but I also bore
    in mind that although one  had  been  requested  there  was  no  Pushtu
    interpreter available and the hearing to remake the decision could  not
    have gone ahead in any event.   I accordingly  adjourned  the  hearing,
    making  further  directions.  These  were  in   particular   that   the
    Respondent's representative should serve a  skeleton  argument  setting
    out the basis on which it was claimed that the Tribunal might revise an
    error of law finding and set that finding aside once made and as to why
    it was contended that the error of law finding might require  revision.
    There was provision for a skeleton argument  in  response  also  to  be
    served.  The hearing was adjourned until 29th February 2016.

 4. At the resumed hearing I had the opportunity to consider  the  skeleton
    arguments submitted.  In his skeleton  argument,  having  reviewed  the
    authorities, Mr Mills accepted that the decision already  made  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal could not be  challenged.
    However he went on to say that the second  issue,  namely  whether  the
    Tribunal was bound to consider the version of paragraph 276ADE(vi) that
    existed at the date of the Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  still
    highly relevant.  If the Tribunal was persuaded that  YM  (Uganda)  was
    express authority for the contrary position and that the version of the
    Rules as at the date of hearing was applicable then, he submitted,  the
    Tribunal was bound to dismiss the appeal in the light of  the  findings
    made by Judge Thomas.  In that context he relied in particular upon the
    comments of Lord Justice Aikens at paragraph 39  of  YM  (Uganda).   He
    contended that whilst the Court of Appeal was dealing with changes to a
    different paragraph the interpretation given by the Court of Appeal was
    equally applicable to the change to paragraph 276ADE(vi) given that the
    wording was, he said, identical.  The Tribunal he  therefore  contended
    should dismiss the appeal on the basis of the unchallenged finding made
    by the First-tier Tribunal.   He  also  submitted  that  there  was  no
    compelling case to go  beyond  the  Immigration  Rules  in  considering
    Article 8 issues.

 5. Mr Brookes for his part also accepted in his skeleton that the Tribunal
    had no power to review the decision on error of law already  made.   As
    to the remaking of the  decision  he  contended  that  the  version  of
    paragraph 276ADE applicable prior to 28th July 2014  was  the  relevant
    form to be considered.  He  pointed  out  that  YM  (Uganda)  concerned
    foreign criminals.  The Appellant was not a foreign  criminal  and  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 532 differentiated between
    the implementation of the amendment to paragraph 276ADE(vi) as compared
    with the implementation of the  amendments  for  Article  8  claims  by
    foreign criminals.  Different wording had been used.  The Secretary  of
    State had specifically referred to "applications" being  decided  after
    HC 532 came into force with regard to matters  under  paragraph  276ADE
    but to "claims" with regard to foreign criminals.  As  the  Appellant's
    application had been decided by  the  Secretary  of  State  before  the
    implementation date of HC 532 he submitted that the earlier version was
    that applicable.  He then went to address the merits of the Appellant's
    case and  the  earlier  version  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi),  noting  in
    particular that the Secretary of State had earlier  asserted  that  the
    Appellant was not from Afghanistan at all.  By contrast  the  Secretary
    of State now accepted that the Respondent was from Afghanistan.  It was
    necessary, he said, to reconsider matters already  decided  insofar  as
    they had an impact on the current claim.

 6. Having retired to consider those skeleton arguments I confirmed that  I
    agreed that there was no power for me to review the earlier decision to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  With regard to  the
    applicable form of paragraph 276ADE(vi) I remained  of  the  view  that
    this was the wording in place prior to the implementation  of  HC  532.
    The two forms of the sub-paragraph are set out in my  earlier  decision
    promulgated on 28th October 2015, which is annexed, and I therefore  do
    repeat them at this point but I refer to them.

 7. I found that there was force in the argument put forward by Mr  Brookes
    that in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in YM  (Uganda)  the  court
    was dealing with the amendment to the revisions relating to deportation
    of  foreign  prisoners.   It  is  correct  that  the  wording  of   the
    implementation provisions for the two amendments  is  different.   That
    relating to paragraph 276ADE reads as follows:

         "The changes set out in paragraphs 4 to 12 and 49  to  64  of  this
         statement  take  effect  on  28th  July  2014  and  apply  to   all
         applications to which paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH  and  Appendix  FM
         apply (or can be applied by virtue of the Immigration Rules) and to
         any other ECHR Article 8 claims (save those from foreign criminals)
         and which are decided on or after that date."

    The implementation provision relating to  deportation  cases  reads  as
    follows:

         "The changes set out in paragraphs 14 to 30 of this statement  take
         effect on 28th July 2014 and apply to all  ECHR  Article  8  claims
         from foreign criminals which are decided on or after that date."

    There is to my mind a difference between the situation where  a  person
    in this country seeks leave from the Secretary of  State  in  order  to
    remain, and is therefore the prime mover in that circumstance, and  the
    situation where the Secretary of State makes a  decision  to  remove  a
    foreign criminal and the party it is proposed to deport  prays  in  aid
    Article 8 in order to resist that deportation decision.   At  paragraph
    39 of YM (Uganda) Lord Justice  Aikens  referred  specifically  to  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192.  However that judgment also refers to deportation  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The traditional view has been that the form  of
    the Rules which should be considered by a Tribunal at the appeal  stage
    is that applicable as at the date of the decision made by the Secretary
    of State (or other deciding authority).  Whilst I accept that this  has
    been displaced in the case of deportation of foreign criminals,  as  is
    made clear in the judgment in YM (Uganda), I am not persuaded that this
    also applies to the situation of persons who are not foreign  criminals
    facing deportation and who are simply seeking leave to remain under the
    Rules.  There is some support for this view in Macdonald's  Immigration
    Law & Practice (Ninth Edition) at paragraph 20.15 where  the  following
    is stated:

         "The  Rules  to  be  considered  by  the   Tribunal   are   (absent
         transitional  provisions  or  a  properly  established   legitimate
         expectation to the contrary) those applicable at the  time  of  the
         decision appealed against, not those applicable  at  the  time  the
         application was made  or  those  applicable  at  the  time  of  the
         hearing.  However at least in  respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         intended to  codify  Article  8  ECHR  as  applied  to  deportation
         decisions, the Rules to be applied are those in force at  the  time
         that the Tribunal considers the matter even if  they  were  not  in
         force at the time of the decision.  ...."

    The authority for  that  view,  referred  to  in  a  footnote,  was  YM
    (Uganda).  Thus after consideration the view I take is that the form of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) with which I am concerned in the remaking  of  the
    decision in this appeal is the form extant prior to 28th July 2014.

 8. I then heard evidence from the Appellant, who spoke  through  a  Pushtu
    interpreter.  He first adopted his two  statements  dated  respectively
    18th June 2014 (which had been prepared  for  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal), and 28th November 2015.  In the  first  of  those
    statements he referred to  his  father  having  been  employed  in  the
    intelligence service of the communist regime under  President  Mohammad
    Najibullah which had resulted in a split in the  family,  his  paternal
    uncle Mumtaz being involved with the Hezbat  Islami  group.   When  the
    government changed in 1992 his father had been put into prison and  his
    paternal uncle had taken the family's land.  On his release his  father
    was killed.  Following the fall of  the  Taliban  regime,  under  which
    there  had  been  some  relief,  he  claimed  the  family  again  faced
    difficulties.  He was a target because he was the son of his father who
    had  been  connected  with  the  communist  government.   He  had  left
    Afghanistan in 2002 for his own safety.  In March 2004 he became  aware
    that his wife and two children had been killed in a  bomb  blast.   His
    paternal uncle Darjan told him that someone had thrown a bomb into  the
    Appellant's house at night.  The Appellant subsequently  suffered  from
    depression.

 9. The Appellant stated that he later met, in this country, Kauser Parveen
    whom he married in 2009 in an Islamic ceremony  and  then  in  a  civil
    ceremony in 2010.   He had been granted discretionary leave  to  remain
    on this basis but in 2012 he and Kauser Parveen broke up and they  were
    divorced.  In March 2014 he applied for an extension of his visa but it
    was refused.  He stated he could not return to Afghanistan because  his
    life was still in danger.  His paternal uncle had influence.   His wife
    and children have been killed and he felt that he would be killed also.
     He was suffering from depression.  He had established a life  in  this
    country, had friends here and was making a positive contribution.

10. In his second statement, dated 28th November 2015, the  Appellant  said
    that he had lived in the UK since his arrival in February 2003  and  he
    now had no connections with any family members in Afghanistan, his wife
    and children having been killed in a bomb blast in March  2004.   After
    that he had not spoken to any relative in Afghanistan as there  was  no
    need to do so and no-one had tried to contact him from Afghanistan.  He
    had no family members in this country but  he  did  have  good  friends
    here.  When he was granted the right to work he did so as a  chef.   He
    was  friendly  with  other  workers.   He  had  received  support  when
    depressed.  He did some voluntary work for local charities and  mosques
    to provide food for visitors.  He was currently attending South &  City
    College, Birmingham studying for an English language and  social  media
    qualification and he had many friends at  the  college.   He  had  been
    attending a local mosque for over ten years but he also helped  prepare
    food for a local church.  He had  been  suffering  from  a  variety  of
    medical issues linked to the stress caused by the death of his wife and
    children and uncertainty with regard to his  immigration  status.   The
    thought of going back to Afghanistan caused him extreme stress.

11. He continued in his oral evidence that he had  no  relatives  alive  in
    Afghanistan and his last contact had been in 2004 when he had  received
    a death certificate for his wife and children from his  maternal  uncle
    Darjan.  He had received no news since of his  maternal  uncle  or  his
    family as that uncle had told him not to make contact any  more  as  he
    did not want to put his own family at risk.  That uncle had six sons as
    well as his wife.  He had previously only been in touch with him  every
    six or eight months whilst in Afghanistan.  It was the  maternal  uncle
    who had sent the death  certificates.   It  was  his  father's  brother
    Mumtaz who had taken the family's land.  Prior to leaving the Appellant
    he had been living in his own house in Jalalabad district but that  had
    been sold in order for him to go to somewhere  safe.   His  father  had
    received money from his work in the intelligence agency but  after  his
    father's death the Appellant had worked  selling  vegetables  and  milk
    which he obtained from his agricultural land where he had  some  goats.
    That land had been sold to a powerful person after he  had  experienced
    problems and had to flee.  He continued that he had not told  the  Home
    Office earlier of the termination of his marriage but had  referred  to
    it when he applied for further leave.  He thought that  was  in  order.
    Asked why he had not shown photographs which had been produced  at  the
    hearing in 2014 he said that if he had produced  them  earlier  he  was
    afraid that he might be sent back.  The Home Office had not accepted he
    was from Afghanistan.   He had received the photographs with the  death
    certificates in 2004.  The cause of  the  family's  death  was  a  bomb
    thrown at the house which he understood from  his  maternal  uncle  was
    because the family were associated with the  communist  regime  through
    his father.  His maternal uncle had found a  place  for  his  wife  and
    children to live and another place for the Appellant when he came under
    threat.

12. Cross-examined the Appellant said he  had  been  in  this  country  for
    thirteen years.   He  was  attending  English  classes.   He  had  been
    suffering from depression and a heart condition but he was working hard
    at learning English and he thought that he could be something like  70%
    fluent.  Where he lived there were many Pushtu  speakers  but  he  also
    spoke to other persons.  He was still working in a restaurant.

13.  Following  the  oral  evidence   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant could not  meet
    the test demonstrating that  he  had  no  ties  with  Afghanistan.   He
    referred to the guidance in YM (Uganda).  The test was an exacting  one
    and a rounded  assessment  was  required.   He  referred  also  to  the
    reported decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new
    rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60   (IAC)   and   Bossade   (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC).   The  possibility
    of remaking contacts was a relevant issue.  The claim that there was no
    current contact was not necessarily the answer to the test even  if  it
    was believed.

14. However, he continued, the Appellant had not been believed.  The  first
    judge (Adjudicator Gurung-Thapa) did not find him to  be  credible  and
    did not accept that the Appellant's father had been killed or that  the
    Appellant would be targeted.  Mr Brookes at this stage interposed  that
    it was also the case that at that stage the Appellant was not  believed
    to be from Afghanistan.  Mr Mills continued that Miss Gurung-Thapa  had
    also considered the Appellant's claim on its face and had found it  not
    credible.  Even if he were from Afghanistan, what he  claimed  had  not
    been accepted to have occurred.  Judge Thomas' findings were  preserved
    and there had been no application to challenge them.   The challenge to
    her decision was expressed with regard to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).   At
    paragraph  16  of  her  decision  Judge  Thomas  concluded   that   the
    Appellant's account was fabricated.  She found the  death  certificates
    said to be for the wife and children not to be reliable.   Her  primary
    finding was that the wife and children were not in fact deceased.   The
    starting point was therefore that that the Appellant's family  were  in
    Afghanistan and therefore the family land would  be  there  also.   The
    Appellant had work experience.   On his own account he had worked as  a
    farmer in Afghanistan.  He had the  ability  to  support  himself.   Mr
    Mills also pointed out that although the Appellant  had  been  in  this
    country for thirteen years he still needed to use an interpreter and he
    was  culturally  and  socially  acclimatised  to  life  in  the  Afghan
    community.   With regard to any claim under Article 8 outside the Rules
    the Appellant had been in this country unlawfully for the long part  of
    the period of his stay although he had subsequently  had  a  period  of
    discretionary leave.  Nonetheless his leave  had  been  precarious  and
    thus his private life carried little weight.  Following the judgment in
    SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 there  was  a  lack  of  anything
    compelling requiring consideration outside the Rules and there  was  no
    basis, he said, to go beyond paragraph 276ADE.

15. In response Mr Brookes said that the Presenting Officer was seeking  to
    state that the Appellant was living in Afghan society in the UK but the
    UK was a multicultural society and the Appellant  was  integrated.   He
    was part of UK society.   He  had  ties  with  individuals  and  had  a
    private life.  Medical care  was  part  of  private  life  and  he  had
    friends.

16. With regard to preserved findings in paragraph 19 of her decision Judge
    Thomas had said the Appellant was not at risk  of  persecution  but  in
    making that finding she was looking back through glasses informed by  a
    finding that he was not from Afghanistan at all.  In the  circumstances
    he submitted that I could find  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  could
    reverse that earlier finding.  The preserved findings did not say  that
    his father was still alive and only that the wife and children could be
    alive.  That was merely hypothetical.  Whether the Appellant could seek
    support in Afghanistan was predicated on whether the family were alive.
     As was clear from Ogundimu more than  abstract  links  were  required.
    The Appellant's case was that he  had  no  subsisting  connections,  no
    family, no property, only negative ties in the  form  of  his  paternal
    uncle who was seeking to do him harm.

17. With regard to Article 8 outside the Rules he  said,  paragraph  276ADE
    looked to the Appellant's ties in Afghanistan but  failed  to  consider
    the  position  as  to  the  Appellant's  life  in  this  country.    In
    Afghanistan  he  had  no   support   mechanism.    Removal   would   be
    disproportionate.

18. In considering the merits of this appeal I bear in mind that the burden
    of proof  is  upon  the  Appellant  to  establish  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), that the standard of proof  is
    the balance of probabilities and that I may take account of evidence up
    to and including the date of the hearing  before  me.   As  Mr  Brookes
    acknowledged the Appellant is faced with the hurdle of various previous
    findings.  I specifically preserved in my decision on error of law made
    following the hearing on 20th October 2015 the findings of Judge Thomas
    at paragraphs 15 to 19 inclusive of her  determination  promulgated  on
    22nd October 2014.  Paragraph 15 of that decision recites something  of
    the history of the Appellant's application.  Judge Thomas  went  on  to
    state as follows:

         "16. The Appellant claims that the decision  put  him  at  risk  of
             persecution under  the  Refugee  Convention.   As  stated  his
             asylum appeal was dismissed in 2003.  In  line  with  case  of
             Devaseelan the  determination  of  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  is  my
             starting  point  on  this  issue.   She  had  considered   the
             Appellant's account of events  that  he  claimed  happened  in
             Afghanistan prior to his departure.   She  did  not  find  the
             Appellant to be credible and found that he  had  invented  the
             'whole story of his father working for  a  previous  communist
             regime and the problems he encountered from his paternal uncle
             called Mumtaz.'   She  considered  the  photographs  that  the
             Appellant claimed were of his father with  Dr  Najibullah  and
             did not find them to be reliable.

         17.  The Appellant has now produced further  photographs  which  he
             claims show him as a child with his father.  However given the
             previous findings of the previous judge there  is  no  further
             evidence to establish that the Appellant is related to the man
             he says is his father.  Further there is no evidence  to  show
             that the Appellant is  the  child  in  the  later  photograph.
             There is no evidence to explain why they were not available to
             the Tribunal in 2003 or to explain how the Appellant has since
             got possession of them.  Given these  matters  and  given  the
             findings  of  the  previous  judge  there  is  no   reasonable
             explanation for  the  Appellant's  failure  to  produce  these
             photos  sooner.   Given  the  previous  credibility   findings
             against him and applying the case of Tanveer Ahmed I find that
             these photos are not reliable evidence and that I am  able  to
             take account of them now.

         18.  The Appellant seeks to argue that his  circumstances  worsened
             since his arrival into the United Kingdom in that his wife and
             children were killed in a bomb blast in Afghanistan  in  2004.
             He seeks to rely on a death certificate dated 25th March 2004.
              His explanation for not  producing  the  certificate  sooner,
             because he was afraid of being deported, is not reasonable  or
             credible.  Given previous  credibility  findings  against  the
             Appellant and my findings in paragraph 17 above I do not  find
             this document to be reliable.  However in the event that I  am
             wrong and the Appellant's wife and children were killed  in  a
             bomb blast there is no evidence  to  suggest  that  they  were
             specifically targeted because of the Appellant.

         19.  Given all of my findings in paragraphs 16 to 18 above there is
             no evidence to cause me to come to a different  conclusion  on
             the matters that were before  the  Tribunal  in  2003  in  the
             Appellant's asylum appeal, and there is no evidence  to  prove
             that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  in
             Afghanistan  now.   It  follows  that  I  do  find  that   the
             Appellant's removal now  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
             obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention."

19. Mr Brookes sought to persuade me  that  notwithstanding  their  express
    preservation those findings were unsafe as in the earlier  decision  in
    2003 Miss Gurung-Thapa had not been satisfied that the Appellant was in
    fact from Afghanistan.  However it is the case that from  paragraph  33
    onwards  of  her  determination  Miss   Gurung-Thapa   considered   the
    Appellant's account on the basis  that  he  was  from  Afghanistan  and
    maintained her view that his account was not credible.  I found nothing
    in the Appellant's evidence which would persuade me to depart from  the
    findings made by Judge Thomas which I had expressly preserved and which
    was based in part upon the findings of Miss Gurung-Thapa.  The position
    is therefore that the Appellant has not established on the  balance  of
    probabilities that his wife and children have been killed or that he is
    without land or connections in Afghanistan, even if  those  connections
    were  not  recently  being  pursued.   The  likelihood  is   that   the
    Appellant's maternal uncle and his family are also  still  resident  in
    Afghanistan  and  would  be  available  to  assist  the  Appellant   in
    reintegration.

20. The Appellant has lived in this country for thirteen years his  English
    is not fluent and he made use of a Pushtu interpreter at  the  hearing.
    Although he has  given  some  assistance  in  food  distribution  at  a
    Christian Church he remains  an  active  Muslim  attending  mosque  and
    regularly praying.  In my  view  he  is  still  culturally  attuned  to
    Afghanistan.   In  Afghanistan  he  made  a  living  selling  milk  and
    vegetables.  He has shown that he is able  to  work  in  this  country,
    where he had has employment as a  chef.   In  considering  whether  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  in  the  form
    mentioned I have borne in mind all of the authorities to which  I  have
    been referred and also the recent judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    The Queen on the Application of Akpan v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1266.
    Making the "rounded assessment" required I  find  that  this  Appellant
    does have cultural, family  and  social  ties  with  Afghanistan.    He
    remains essentially rooted in Afghan society.  He has not shown that he
    can meet the requirements of  the  paragraph.    His  appeal  therefore
    falls to be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

21. He states that he is suffering from depression but there was no  recent
    medical evidence before me to that effect and he stated that one of the
    reasons that he felt depressed was because of the  uncertainty  of  his
    immigration status, which will of course be resolved if he is returned.
     In considering whether Article 8 outside  the  Rules  can  assist  the
    Appellant I have borne in mind the guidance in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  I do not consider that the Appellant  has  a  reasonably
    arguable case under Article 8 not sufficiently dealt with already under
    the substantive provisions of  the  Rules  but  I  would  add  for  the
    avoidance of doubt that the only basis upon which the  Appellant  could
    succeed would be his private life.   That private life he has built  up
    at times when he either had  limited  leave  or  was  in  this  country
    unlawfully.  In considering the matter I am bound by  the  requirements
    of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    By sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) I am required to ascribe little weight to
    private life developed in such  circumstances.   Given  such  mandatory
    guidance it would be inevitable that  having  regard  to  the  need  to
    maintain effective immigration controls the Appellant's  removal  would
    be proportionate.  His appeal therefore fails.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.  I  have  remade
the decision and the appeal of the Appellant stands dismissed.

There was no application for an anonymity order and none is made.


As the appeal has been dismissed no fee award is appropriate.



Signed                              Date 15 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20724/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20th October 2015                     |                                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                             ATTAULLAH SHINWARI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks instructed by Malik Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The Appellant comes from Afghanistan.  He arrived in the United Kingdom
    in February 2003 and claimed asylum.  That claim  was  refused  and  an
    appeal dismissed following a hearing in  June  2003.   He  subsequently
    remained and was in 2011 granted discretionary leave for  a  period  of
    three years on the basis of marriage to a  British  citizen,  but  that
    marriage has since broken down.   Through  solicitors  he  applied  for
    further discretionary leave which was refused on 22nd April 2014 and  a
    decision made to remove him  to  Afghanistan.   It  was  noted  in  the
    refusal letter that the Appellant's relationship with his spouse was no
    longer subsisting.  The  application  was  considered  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules  and  it  was  considered  that  the
    Appellant did  not  satisfy  any  of  the  criteria  set  out  in  that
    paragraph.  With regard to sub-paragraph (vi), which  was  recited  and
    which I set out below, it was said:

         "Having spent 21 years in your home country and in the  absence  of
         any evidence to the contrary, it is not accepted that in the period
         of time that you have been in the UK you have  lost  ties  to  your
         home country and therefore the Secretary of State is not  satisfied
         that you can meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(vi)".

    It was also considered that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    arising as a result of his medical condition or otherwise  which  might
    require consideration under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard before Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Thomas at the Birmingham Hearing Centre on 24th
    September 2014, following which the appeal was  dismissed.   The  judge
    relied upon the findings made by the Adjudicator who decided the asylum
    claim in 2003.  She did not accept that there was any basis for a claim
    founded on asylum or Article 3 ECHR now to be reopened and did not find
    that the Appellant's medical condition was of  sufficient  severity  to
    militate against removal.  The judge then went on to state as follows:

         "21. In determining the Appellant's appeal under Article 8  I  have
             taken full  account  of  the  Respondent's  obligations  under
             Article 8 ECHR as set out in paragraph 276ADE of  HC  395  and
             Section 19 Part 5 of the Immigration Act 2014 and the cases of
             Amjad Mahmood [2000] EWCA Civ  385,  EB  Kosovo  [2008]  UKHL,
             Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 and Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]
             UKHL 40.

         22.   The  Immigration  Rules  contain  provision  for  appropriate
             applications to be made on the basis  of  family  and  private
             life.  The Appellant's relationship with his wife  has  broken
             down and he has no family in the United Kingdom.  He  has  not
             been in the United Kingdom for twenty years and there  are  no
             significant  obstacles  to  him  establishing   private   life
             elsewhere.  He does not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM
             or paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.

         23.  In determining whether or not I should  consider  private  and
             family life outside the Immigration Rules I follow  principles
             in the case of MM [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin), Nagre [2013]  EWHC
             720  (Admin),  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
             approach) [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  and  Shahzad  (Article  8:
             legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).  After  consideration
             of all the evidence  I  find  that  there  are  no  compelling
             circumstances or specific reasons to justify consideration  of
             the proportionality of the Respondent's decision  outside  the
             Immigration Rules".

 3. In the application for permission to appeal it was contended  that  the
    judge had applied the wrong version of paragraph 276ADE(vi) and had she
    applied the correct version would  have  had  regard  to  the  reported
    decision of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  00060
    (IAC), which gave guidance as to the meaning of the word  "ties".   The
    judge had misdirected herself in  applying  a  "significant  obstacles"
    test.  The grounds went on to suggest that  she  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for certain findings including with regard to Article 3 ECHR.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kelly on 3rd December 2014 only with regard to the issue arising  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In a response  under  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rule 24 the Secretary of State  contended  that  any
    error on the part of the judge was not material.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Brooks on behalf of the
    Appellant  accepted  that  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal   was
    restricted to the issues which arose under  paragraph  276ADE(vi).   Mr
    Smart for his part said that the test of "no ties" had been used in the
    refusal letter.  He produced a copy of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules HC 532 and referred  to  the  implementation  section
    which specified that the relevant changes (which I will refer to below)
    took effect on 28th July 2014 and applied to applications decided on or
    after that date.  He said that having regard also  to  the  explanatory
    memorandum annexed to the Statement of Changes (at Section 2.1),  which
    referred to the changes aligning the Immigration  Rules  with  Sections
    117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which
    also came into force on 28th July  2014,  the  judge  might  have  been
    entitled to consider the new form of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  Mr
    Brooks said that he considered it was clear that the  amended  form  of
    the Rules applied only to decisions made on or after 28th July 2014.

 6. In the interests of clarity I  set  out  here  the  two  forms  of  the
    relevant paragraph of the Rules.  Prior to 28th July 2014 sub-paragraph
    (vi) read as follows:

         "Subject to sub-paragraph (2) is aged 18 years or above, has  lived
         continuously in the UK for less than twenty years (discounting  any
         period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural
         or family) with the country  to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK".

    With effect from 28th July 2014 sub-Section (vi) reads as follows:

         "Subject to sub-paragraph (2) is aged 18 years or above, has  lived
         continuously in the UK for less than twenty years (discounting  any
         period  of  imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

    Having heard the submissions as to the correct  form  of  the  relevant
    paragraph which should have been applied by the judge  I  came  to  the
    view, having regard to the guidance given by  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Odelola v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  308,  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the form of the paragraph as it existed prior to  28th  July
    2014.  The Statement of Changes referred to "decisions" made after that
    date but in the absence of express authority that it  should  apply  to
    the Tribunal I took that to mean decisions by the Secretary  of  State.
    The explanatory memorandum does not form a part  of  the  Statement  of
    Changes and indeed at paragraph  4.5  of  that  explanatory  memorandum
    simply repeats that the changes in 276ADE apply to applications decided
    on or after 28th July 2014.

 7. Mr Brooks then addressed me further saying that the error made  by  the
    judge was material as she had applied the wrong test.  There  had  been
    some mention as to whether the Appellant was from  Afghanistan  at  all
    but the Appellant  said  he  was  from  Afghanistan,  the  Home  Office
    accepted he was from  Afghanistan  and  the  proposed  removal  was  to
    Afghanistan.  It was agreed that there was no subsisting issue on  that
    point.  I also noted that at  the  commencement  of  her  determination
    Judge Thomas had accepted that the Appellant was from Afghanistan.

 8. Mr Smart said that in  the  Appellant's  submissions  at  the  original
    hearing there had been no reference to the Appellant having no ties and
    he appeared to have been able to contact an uncle.  The  thrust  of  Mr
    Smart's argument was that it had not been necessary to go on to make  a
    formal finding of whether the Appellant had ties.

 9. In response Mr Brooks said that the relevant  paragraph  quite  clearly
    referred to whether there were no ties and  Ogundimu  had  set  out  an
    exacting test.  There must be meaningful ties.   The  Appellant's  case
    was that he had  had  no  contact  with  his  uncle  since  2004.   The
    existence of some ties would not be sufficient.  The characteristics of
    any ties needed to be explored.  The Grounds of  Appeal  had  expressly
    referred to the correct version of the Immigration Rules.  He continued
    that the no ties test looked at the country of removal whereas  Article
    8 proper was concerned with interference with private or family life in
    this country also.  It was arguable, he said,  that  Article  8  should
    have been looked at beyond the Rules.

10. Having heard all of those submissions I came to the view that the judge
    had made an error of law.  The fact that she had considered  the  wrong
    form of the relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules and had made no
    express  findings  on  whether  the  Appellant  did  or  did  not  have
    continuing ties with Afghanistan rendered her  error  material  to  the
    possible outcome.  There was no continuing challenge to her findings in
    respect of other issues.  Mr Brooks requested remittal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but I did not think that appropriate in the light of  the
    preserved findings.  I was not in a position  to  proceed  immediately,
    partly through lack of time  but  also  as  Mr  Brooks  said  that  the
    Appellant would wish to give evidence as to the current  situation  and
    there was no Pushtu interpreter available.




Notice of Decision

There was a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and that decision is set aside.
No anonymity order was requested and none is made.

In accordance with Upper Tribunal Practice Statement  7.2  and  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007,
there will be a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal to decide the  outcome
of the appeal in accordance with the following directions:

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside but  the  findings
    made  by  Judge  Thomas  at  paragraphs  15  to  19  inclusive  of  her
    determination promulgated on 22nd October 2014 are preserved.

 2) The issues to be decided at the renewed hearing will be under paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules in the form existing prior to  28th
    July 2014 and, if appropriate following argument, under Article 8  ECHR
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 3) Each party shall serve upon the Tribunal and upon the other  party  any
    statement or other document upon  which  reliance  is  intended  to  be
    placed (subject to the requirements of Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rule
    15(2A)) at least seven days before the resumed hearing.

 4) The resumed hearing will take place before me  at  Birmingham  on  15th
    December 2015 or upon such other date as shall be notified.

 5) The estimated time required for the hearing is two hours and  a  Pushtu
    interpreter will be required.



Signed                              Date 27 October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

