
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20882/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 August 2016                             |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                  MS. S A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Syed, Legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") with the  permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker.  On 17 February 2016 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Wilson ("the Immigration Judge") dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  on  22  May
    2015 to refuse the appellant leave to remain in the  UK.   On  27  July
    2016 Judge Scott-Baker considered that there may have been  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT)  so  that
    it disclosed a material error of law.  Accordingly, she gave permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 12 April 1981.

3.   The appellant entered the UK illegally in October 2001  using  a  false
    passport.  There is therefore no record  of  her  entry  into  the  UK.
    Under the alias Stella Ayobami Coker the appellant was  served  with  a
    form IS151A on 26 August 2009.  The  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain under the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  but  that
    application was refused on 11 December 2009.  On 22  October  2010  she
    applied for leave to remain a second time under the ECHR but  this  was
    also refused on 8 August 2011.  On 11 December 2014 the appellant  made
    a further application for leave to remain on the basis of  private  and
    family life.  It was decided that the appellant did not  qualify  under
    the "parent route" (Appendix FM R-LTRPT 1.1(d)).   In  particular,  the
    appellant had to show that she had "sole  parental  responsibility  for
    (her) children, who lived with (her)".  The  appellant  was  unable  to
    show this.  However, it  was  accepted  that  she  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a child.  It was  not  accepted  that  the
    "parent route" was met either.  EX.1 was not met because the  appellant
    had to show a "genuine and subsisting relationship with a child who  is
    under the age of 18, is in the UK and is a British citizen or  who  has
    lived in the UK continuously for  seven  years  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK".  The respondent  noted
    that the two youngest children had not lived in the UK continuously for
    at least seven years immediately preceding the date of the application.
     Her eldest child (Daniel) may have been living continuously in the  UK
    since his birth in October 2006 but it was not considered  unreasonable
    to expect him to leave the UK with the rest of the family as it was  in
    the interests of the whole family  unit  to  return  to  Nigeria.   The
    application  was  refused  under  D-LTRPT.1.3  with  reference  to   R-
    KTRPT.1.1(d).

4.   As far as the appellant's private life was concerned, it was  noted  by
    the  respondent  that  the  requirements  that  must  be  met  for   an
    application following on or after 9 July  2012  were  contained  within
    paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  particular,  the
    appellant had to show that at the date of the application she had lived
    continuously in the UK for  at  least  twenty  years  (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment), or was under the age of 18 years and had lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period
    of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the appellant
    to leave the UK.  Ostensibly, the appellant must show that she is above
    18 but under 25 but had spent at least half her  life  continuously  in
    the UK or that she had lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty
    years but there would be "very significant obstacles to the applicant's
    integration into the country to which she would have to go if  required
    to leave the UK".

5.   The appellant had lived in the UK for thirteen years  but  it  was  not
    accepted that she had lived continuously in the UK for at least  twenty
    years.  She therefore failed to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii).  Nor were subparagraphs (iv)  or  (v)  engaged  on  the
    facts of this case.  In order to meet  the  requirements  of  (vi)  the
    applicant had to show "very significant obstacles  to  her  integration
    into the country into which she had to go" but she had not  established
    such obstacles.  The appellant had spent the majority of  her  life  in
    Nigeria, a country to which she had close ties.

6.   The respondent had also considered whether there  were  any  particular
    circumstances in the appellant's case  which  constituted  "exceptional
    circumstances" which it was necessary for her to consider.  This  might
    warrant the grant of leave to remain in the UK outside the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant had drawn to the  respondent's
    attention that the appellant had stated that she had suffered  violence
    over an inheritance  dispute  with  the  family  of  Olawale  Adelusi's
    family.  She claims that  if  she  returned  to  Nigeria  her  deceased
    partner's family would attempt to find the appellant  with  a  view  to
    punishing her in the manner that her deceased partner's first wife  and
    child  had  been  treated  (they  had  been  murdered).   Her  deceased
    partner's family were of a different religion and did  not  approve  of
    the relationship between the appellant and her deceased partner.

7.   The respondent pointed out that no evidence had been  supplied  to  the
    respondent to support the alleged fear on return but it was open to her
    to make an application for asylum.  At the date of the decision (22 May
    2015) she had not done so.

8.   A number of additional points had  been  urged  on  the  respondent  in
    support of the claim that the appellant qualified for leave  to  remain
    in the UK on exceptional grounds that Article 8 of the ECHR was engaged
    in her case.  In particular, it was suggested that  the  appellant  had
    been the victim of domestic trafficking as a worker who had been forced
    to work for exceedingly  long  hours  and  not  allowed  to  leave  her
    accommodation and that the welfare of  her  children  was  a  paramount
    concern, having regard to the provisions of Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the 2009 Act").   The  appellant
    had three children, all of whom were being educated in the UK. However,
    the respondent pointed out that Nigeria  has  a  functioning  education
    system which they would be able  to  utilise  if  the  family  returned
    there.  English is the official language in Nigeria, a country to which
    the respondent maintains the appellant had close ties.   The  appellant
    also claimed to the respondent that she had relatives in the UK to whom
    she was close.  However, the respondent  considered  that  no  adequate
    evidence had been supplied to merit the  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules  on  this  or  the  other   bases   contended   for.
    Furthermore, her continuing relationship with these individuals was not
    contingent on her remaining in the UK.  The appellant  also  relied  on
    the fact that her  eldest  child,  Daniel,  suffered  from  eczema  and
    asthma.  He required medication and the management  of  his  conditions
    would be more difficult in Nigeria.   Again,  the  respondent  did  not
    accept that these constituted exceptional circumstances  The  appellant
    could return as a family unit to Nigeria  with  Daniel  and  the  other
    children and could utilise health service provision there  rather  than
    being dependent upon  the  National  Health  Service.   The  respondent
    considered Daniel's welfare, pointing out that he did not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules and that, although he was under the age of 18
    the respondent was not  satisfied  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  276ADE  (1).   The  same  applied  to  the  other  children,
    Daniella, born 20 August 2008 or Destin, born 11 April 2010.

The Decision of the FTT

9.   The Immigration  Judge  adopted  a  "two-stage  approach",  considering
    first whether the Rules were met and, if  they  were  not,  considering
    whether there were "arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  enter
    or remain outside them"  on  the  basis  that  there  were  "compelling
    circumstances not recognised by (those Rules)".  The Immigration  Judge
    considered that a number of the  claims  made  by  the  appellant  were
    confusing or inconsistent, he concluded that she  did  have  family  in
    Nigeria and that the account of having been people trafficked  had  not
    been truthful.  the children's welfare was  a  paramount  consideration
    having regard to Section 55 of the 2009 Act and  the  case  law  quoted
    extensively by the Immigration Judge.  However, the  Immigration  Judge
    considered that there was no need for the children to  continue  to  be
    educated at the expense of the  UK  taxpayer.   The  respondent's  view
    should be given "considerable weight". The appellant could successfully
    reintegrate into Nigerian society with her  children.  The  Immigration
    Judge accepted that the interference with the appellants' human  rights
    constituted a necessary interference in a  democratic  society  in  the
    interests of the wellbeing of the country and  the  protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others.  The Immigration Judge did not have  the
    slightest doubt that the appeal should  be  dismissed  on  all  grounds
    argued.

The Grounds of Appeal

10.  These are set out in a "cover letter" rather than included in  the  box
    C of the relevant form (IAFT-4) as should have been the case.  They are
    dated 2 March 2016.  The letter from the Taylor Partnership  criticises
    the Immigration Judge for failing to adjourn the hearing to  await  the
    outcome of a forthcoming inquest into the appellant's spouse's  alleged
    suicide whilst in detention.  Secondly, the grounds  set  out  in  that
    letter criticise the Immigration Judge for identifying discrepancies in
    the appellant's oral evidence as compared with her earlier applications
    and other evidence.  Immigration Judge Wilson is said to  have  carried
    out an inadequate assessment of the children's best interests  for  the
    purposes of Section 55 and having failed to explain how  he  feels  the
    appellant and her children could make an application to re-enter the UK
    in the future.  The effect of her exclusion would be to  ban  her  from
    coming to the UK for twelve months.  In any event, the appellant  would
    be unlikely to obtain a visit visa for  the  foreseeable  future.   The
    Immigration Judge was also criticised for  failing  to  appreciate  the
    "traumatic period of the children's lives and for forcing them to leave
    the UK never being able to visit  the  grave  of  their  father".   The
    children only knew the UK as their  home,  had  lost  their  father  in
    difficult circumstances and would find it unsettling and detrimental to
    "all aspects of their lives" to remove to Nigeria.  They should not  be
    "penalised" for the actions of their parents.

Reasons for Permission to Appeal

11.  The reasons for giving permission to appeal were set out in  detail  by
    Judge Scott-Baker on 27 July 2016.  Having summarised the  grounds  set
    out above the Immigration Judge was found not to have been  subject  to
    legitimate criticism for failing to grant an adjournment.  However, the
    Immigration Judge was criticised by Judge Scott-Baker  for  not  making
    "discrete  findings  with  reference  to  Section  117B  (6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act")  having
    regard to the case of AM (Malawi) [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC).   What  was
    required  was  a  "rigorous  balancing  exercise  with  regard  to  the
    proportionality" of removal.  The lack of critical appraisal gave  rise
    to an arguable error of law which arguably undermined the finding  that
    it was reasonable to expect Daniel and the other children to leave  the
    UK.  Daniel and the others would clearly lose the life which  they  had
    developed here which was a weighty factor.  Accordingly,  an  error  of
    law had been identified which required permission to be granted.

The Hearing

12.   The  hearing  lasted  approximately  one  hour.   Both  parties   were
    represented.  The appellant said he was not  relying  on  any  evidence
    from the inquest.  Mr Syed said that there  were  no  adequate  reasons
    given for concluding that the children could safely return to  Nigeria.
    I was referred to a bundle of cases and other material produced on  the
    appellant's behalf including the case of JO [2014] UKUT  100517  (IAC).
    There  was  a  statutory  duty  on  the  respondent  to  carry  out  an
    assessment.  The Immigration Judge's assessment here was flawed.  I was
    also referred to AM (Malawi)  and  I  was  urged  to  accept  that  the
    appellants should not be required to leave an  environment  where  they
    were well looked after and have to return to all the uncertainty  of  a
    new country which they did not know.  The children of the appellant had
    a father who had been detained at "the airport" where  he  is  said  to
    have "hung himself".  It was clearly desirable for the children  to  be
    able to visit their father's grave but  unfortunately  they  would  not
    even be given permission to do so.  It was argued that they  would  not
    settle in their new (African) environment.

13.  The respondent relied on the Rule 24 response  filed  on  his  client's
    behalf.

14.  I was invited to have regard to that response.  This  states  that  the
    Immigration Judge plainly considered the best interests of the children
    as a primary consideration at paragraphs 14 - 23 of his  decision.   He
    also cited several cases, including EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874.  The appellant was said to have seriously lacked  credibility  and
    the claim over the need for her and her children to visit the grave  of
    her late partner was not accepted by the Immigration Judge.   He  found
    (at paragraph 27 of his decision) that she was not able  to  visit  the
    grave as frequently as she claimed but could do so in the future.   The
    respondent noted that the appellant  had  been  granted  permission  to
    appeal on grounds additional  or  further  to  those  advanced  in  her
    grounds.  But in any event, it was asserted that  the  appellant  could
    safely return to Nigeria with her  children  as  a  family  unit.   The
    impact on that unit was not considered to be significant.

15.  In oral submissions, Mrs Pettersen argued that Mr Syed's  criticism  of
    her client's decision was not justified.   The  Immigration  Judge  had
    rightly  concluded  that  the  children's  welfare  was   a   paramount
    consideration and he fully took  account  of  those  considerations  in
    reaching his decision.  Any criticisms of the Immigration Judge related
    to peripheral matters rather than to the main points.  The decision was
    clearly in accordance with the Immigration Judge's wider discretion.

16.  By way of reply the appellant pointed to  the  children's  achievements
    in the UK, pointing out that they  are  settled  in  the  UK  education
    system.  It was not necessary or appropriate for the children to face a
    new environment.  In the  event  that  I  was  satisfied  there  was  a
    material error of law I was invited  to  set  aside  the  decision  and
    substitute my own decision which ought to be, in Mr Syed's  submission,
    to allow the appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse further
    leave to remain.

17.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision  which  I  will  later
    give.

Discussion

18.  The appellant has raised every possible basis for remaining in the  UK.
     Having arrived here  illegally,  she  says,  in  2001,  she  has  made
    numerous attempts to stay, in  apparent  contravention  of  immigration
    law.  These have included a number of applications under the ECHR,  all
    of which have been rejected.  Having  failed  in  no  less  than  three
    attempts to remain in the UK she has also  raised  issues  relating  to
    asylum and an alleged fear of her former partner's family.  These  have
    not been pursued by her but she has attempted to argue before  the  FTT
    "people trafficking, the need to protect and safeguard the  welfare  of
    her children" and has relied  on  the  medical  condition  of  her  son
    Daniel.

19.  Realistically, Mr Syed has not pursued any appeal  on  the  basis  that
    the appellant was people trafficked or would  fear  serious  harm  from
    family members in Nigeria.  Nor, it should be recorded,  is  there  any
    present appeal on the permission given by Judge Scott-Baker against the
    dismissal of the appeal by the Immigration  Judge  on  grounds  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is only  if  the  appellant  can  bring  herself
    within the ECHR on a so-called  "freestanding  basis"  that  her  claim
    could succeed.

20.  The appellant would be returning with her three  children  as  part  of
    one family unit to the richest  country  in  Africa  where  English  is
    widely spoken.  The Immigration Judge found that the appellant did have
    family members in Nigeria, a country where she has spent more than half
    her life, and also found that it had a  highly  functioning  system  of
    education.   The  Immigration  Judge  noted   at   paragraph   23   the
    achievements of  the  appellant's  children  within  the  UK  education
    system.  He also had regard to Daniel's medical condition.  However, it
    may be that the appellant will need to pay for some of  these  services
    if she returns to Nigeria rather than depend upon the UK  taxpayer  for
    support.

21.  I now turn to consider Article 8 of the ECHR and its relationship  with
    the  Immigration  Rules  (Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE).  These
    provisions are currently the subject of some debate  and  there  are  a
    number of cases before the Supreme  Court  which  may  cast  additional
    light on this difficult area.  However, in this case the appellant does
    not contend that she satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and all recent authorities emphasise the  need  to  consider  the
    framework provided by those Rules as an appropriate starting point  for
    the  consideration  of  the   appellant's   protected   human   rights.
    Furthermore, the Immigration Rules are  now  supplemented  by  Sections
    117A - 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act").  Section 117B (1) provides that when considering Article  8
    the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  Section 117B (6) provides, however, the public interest does
    not require a person's removal where that  person  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
    be reasonable (and in the child's best interests) to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK.  A "qualifying child" includes "a person who is  under
    the age of 18 and who ... has lived in the UK for a  continuous  period
    of seven years or more".  The authorities, including  those  quoted  by
    the  Immigration  Judge,  emphasise  the  need  to  appraise  the  best
    interests of the qualifying child or children as part  of  the  overall
    Article 8 assessment. A qualifying child is not to be punished for  the
    conduct of  his  parent  or  parents.   However,  the  exercise  is  an
    intensely fact-specific one.  Provided the tribunal  takes  account  of
    the best interests of the child and  carries  out  a  proper  balancing
    exercise the appellate court or tribunal will not interfere  with  that
    assessment.

Conclusions

22.  Although the Immigration Judge did  not  explicitly  refer  to  Section
    117B (6) in his decision, he clearly understood where the  burden  lay,
    the need for a two-stage approach and the need to balance the interests
    of the appellant and her family who have been enjoying  a  private  and
    family life in the UK, with those of the wider  community.   The  wider
    community considerations include the need  to  safeguard  the  economic
    interests of the UK and the  need  to  protect  the  UK  taxpayer  from
    unnecessary and unwarranted demands of paying for foreign nationals  to
    be educated at state expense.   These  public  interest  concerns  were
    balanced in the decision  against  the  substantial  interests  of  the
    children in  enjoying  a  settled  family  life  in  the  UK  with  the
    appellant.  The Immigration Judge referred at  several  points  in  his
    decision to the requirement in Section 55 of the  2009  Act  to  ensure
    that the child's  interests  were  a  primary  consideration  (see  for
    example paragraph 21).  He also referred  expressly  to  Section  117B,
    although he may not have referred explicitly to  subsection  6.   I  am
    satisfied that the Immigration Judge took account of all the  facts  of
    this case and balanced them against the need for effective  immigration
    control.  I am satisfied that the  Immigration  Judge  attached  proper
    weight to the factors that were relevant in  the  case  and  reached  a
    decision which was open to him on the facts as presented to  him.   The
    appellant did herself few favours by advancing a number  of  irrelevant
    matters before  the  Immigration  Judge,  which  she  herself  has  not
    pursued, such as the allegation of people  trafficking.   However,  the
    Immigration Judge properly focused on the issues before him and reached
    a conclusion that it would not  be  proper  or  right  for  the  UT  to
    interfere with.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  FTT  to  dismiss  the
appeal on all grounds is dismissed.

The decision of the respondent to refuse the application for  further  leave
to remain stands.

The Immigration Judge made an anonymity direction,  which  is  continued  by
the UT.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made  in  this  case  and  there  is  appeal  against  that
decision.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

