
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20023/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th February 2014                         |On 4th March 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                                UMAIR MAQBOOL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  was  born  on  9th  April,
    1988, and who first entered the United  Kingdom  at  Heathrow  on  16th
    March, 2001, with entry clearance confirming  leave  until  7th  April,
    2013, as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   On  15th  March,  2013,  the
    appellant applied for further leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the points-based system.

2.   The respondent's decision of 16th May, 2013, noted that  the  appellant
    had claimed 30 points for Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies,  but
    the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant was  either
    competent in English at a minimum level of B2 of  the  Common  European
    Framework for Reference for Languages, or that he was a person who  met
    an alternative requirement.  The Secretary of State was not  satisfied,
    therefore, that he should be awarded 30 points under Appendix A  and  O
    of the Immigration Rules.

3.   The Secretary of State noted that the  appellant  had  submitted  TOEIC
    certificates of the Educational Testing Service documents  which  state
    that  the  appellant  has  obtained  scores  below  in  the   following
    categories:

     Listening    -    465
     Reading  -   440
     Speaking -   140
     Writing  -   160

     B2 requires the appellant to have scored a minimum of  400  points  for
    listening 385 points for reading 150 points for writing and 160  points
    for speaking.  Since the appellant  had  not  met  that  requirement  0
    points had been awarded.

4.   The Secretary of State did not  accept  a  TOECI  certificate  of  19th
    February, 2013 which only showed a speaking score and  not  a  reading,
    listening and writing score.

5.   Dissatisfied with the Secretary  of  State's  decision,  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was  heard  on  30th
    September  last,  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burnett  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 14th October, 2013, dismissed  his  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

6.   The judge found at paragraph 21 that the relevant Immigration Rule  did
    not require that the appellant should achieve the necessary scores  and
    the same time and therefore in one test Certificate. He concluded  that
    the respondent was wrong to exclude consideration  of  the  test  score
    report.  However, he went on to note that in respect of that test score
    report of 19th February, 2013, the appellant's  birth  certificate  was
    recorded as being 9th April, 1987, whereas in fact his birth took place
    on 9th April, 1988.  He noted that the appellant's score  reports  were
    two months apart but he was not persuaded that the appellant had  shown
    that reliance could be placed upon the score report of  19th  February,
    2013 and dismissed the appeal, suggesting that the appellant had failed
    to meet the requirements of the Rules.  The appellant was  dissatisfied
    with the decision and sought permission to appeal.

7.   Unfortunately  the  document  in  which  the  appellant  sets  out  his
    grievance is not at all clear.  It was dated 20th September  2013,  and
    points out that the appellant was  sponsored  by  Mancunia  College,  a
    highly trusted college, but a non-HEI sponsor and  that  the  appellant
    was following a course of QCF level.  Reference is made to the guidance
    and the appellant points out that he passed a TOEIC test.  TOEIC  which
    was one of the awarding bodies acceptable to the  UK   Borders  Agency.
    He referred to a City and Guilds result, which he  said  comes  on  one
    certificate, providing a result in  respect  of  reading,  writing  and
    listening and that a speaking result  is  given  separately  and  in  a
    separate certificate. The same, he said, was true for TOEIC, which  was
    accepted as an awarding body by the UK Borders Agency.  So  he  asserts
    that it was not correct that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department insisted that the necessary marks for each of  the  elements
    in the English test had to be included in one Certificate.

8.   Permission was granted on, it appears,  an  entirely  different  basis.
    Permission was granted on the basis that the appellant had  suffered  a
    procedural  unfairness,  because  he  did  not  know  that   the   test
    certificate of 19th February, 2013, would be  questioned  and  did  not
    have an opportunity to produce evidence to seek to show that it  was  a
    genuine and reliable document, because the  appeal  was  heard  by  the
    judge without an oral hearing.

9.   The appellant has chosen on to attend the  hearing  before  me.   I  am
    satisfied by an examination of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  file  that  the
    appellant was sent Notice of the date, time and  place  fixed  for  the
    hearing of the appeal on 3rd February.  It was set  to  his  last  know
    address and he has given no  explanation  for  his  non-attendance.   I
    concluded that I should proceed to hear the appeal in his absence.

10.  At paragraph 20 of  the  determination  the  judge  has  extracted  the
    Immigration Rules as they were at the date of the  decision,  and  says
    this:

         "The following is an extract of the Rules in place at the  date  of
         application taken from the archived version of the UKBA website and
         from paragraph 118:-

         "(4)  The applicant provides  an  original  English  language  test
             certificate  from an English language test  provider  approved
             by the Secretary of State for  these  purposes  as  listed  in
             Appendix O, which is within its  validity  date,  and  clearly
             shows:


              (i)      the applicant's name,


             (ii)     that the applicant has achieved or exceeded level  B2
                  of the Council of Europe's Common European  Framework  for
                  Language Learning in all four components (reading, writing
                  speaking and listening) unless  exempted  from  sitting  a
                  component on the basis of the applicant's disability, and


         or


              (iii)    the date of the award"

11.  Then at paragraph 22 he said that the Rules did not  specify  that  the
    score reports must only be two reports and must provide  a  test  score
    for either speaking and writing  or  listening  and  reading  together.
    That in my view was an error on his part. The Rule  as  quoted  by  him
    clearly does require the test certificate to show  that  the  applicant
    has achieved or exceeded level B2 in  all  four  components;  in  other
    words, in all four components on one certificate and at the  same  time
    time.

12.  The challenge of the appellant disclosed no error of law  on  the  part
    of the judge. However, permission was granted,  because,  it  was  said
    that there was procedural unfairness, because the judge suggested  that
    the test report of 19 February 2013 could not be relied  upon,  because
    the date of birth for the appellant  is  incorrectly  recorded  on  it.
    That was not, however, something that was challenged by the  appellant.
    The unfairness, as I understand it, is because the  judge  decided  the
    appeal  without  a  hearing  and,  therefore,  the  appellant  had   no
    opportunity of commenting on the test  score  report  for  13  February
    2013, and since  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  found  it  to  be
    unreliable, it was wrong of the judge  to  do  so  without  giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to comment.

13.   To  that  extent,  there  was  an  error  of  law   in   the   judge's
    determination. The judge was also in my view wrong in  suggesting  that
    the test score result could be shown on more than one certificate.  The
    Rule  clearly  required  that  the  appellant   must   demonstrate   an
    achievement at level B2 in all four components,  unless  exempted  from
    sitting a component on the basis of disability. There  is  no  evidence
    that the appellant was exempted on the basis  of  any  disability.   He
    should therefore have provided one  certificate  showing  that  he  had
    achieved or exceed the required level for  reading,  writing,  speaking
    and listening and not several certificates, issued at different  times,
    showing that at various times he had exceeded the  necessary  level  in
    each of the four components, but not all at the same time.   The  judge
    was wrong to make a finding in respect  of  the  test  report  of  19th
    February without adjourning and giving the appellant an opportunity  of
    commenting upon the apparent discrepancy. It may well  have  been  that
    the error was simply a typing error.

14.  I set aside the determination and remake it myself. For reasons I  have
    given the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
