
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20167/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th November 2016                          |On 8th December 2016           |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     MI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Worrall of Counsel, instructed by Deane &
Bolton Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As this appeal involves the interests of children I make the  following
    direction:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. In a renewed application Upper Tribunal Judge Blum gave  permission  to
    the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal S Lloyd who dismissed the appeal against the decision  of  the
    respondent taken on 14th May 2015  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner applying the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds of application to the Upper  Tribunal  contended  that  the
    judge was wrong to conclude that the appellant's spouse  (the  sponsor)
    had only limited contact with her own children when she  had  continued
    such contact at school and also at  a  play  group.   Although  it  was
    acknowledged that the former spouse of the sponsor being uncooperative,
    the issue of contact was to be heard by the Family  Court.   The  judge
    also failed to take into consideration that, although  the  appellant's
    spouse was continuing to engage with legal proceedings to  enhance  her
    level of access, this could not be achieved without the support of  the
    appellant.  The grounds also took issue  with  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the sponsor would have access to  medical  treatment  in  Pakistan
    when this was only available in larger cities such as  Islamabad  which
    is five miles' drive from the appellant's family home.   The  level  of
    healthcare would also be lower than that available in UK.  It was wrong
    for the judge to suggest that the sponsor could re-locate  to  Pakistan
    to enjoy family life which would compromise  her  own  health  and  the
    facilities which she enjoys as a British citizen.

 4. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Blum thought there to be no
    merit in the ground concerning the availability  of  medical  treatment
    for the sponsor as the First-tier Judge  had  carefully  evaluated  the
    evidence relating to that matter.  However, it was considered that  the
    judge had erred because, having acknowledged that the appellant's  wife
    had contact with her three youngest children, albeit on a limited basis
    it was arguably wrong to conclude that there  would  be  no  breach  of
    Article 8 because  the  sponsor  had  previously  spent  six  weeks  in
    Pakistan where the appellant also has children and  because  the  judge
    (paragraph 39):

         "attached no more weight to the  Sponsor's  family  life  with  her
         children than I attach to the Appellant's  family  life  with  his,
         because of this I find the Sponsor's family life with her  children
         to be of neutral weight".

Submissions

 5. Mr Worrall drew attention to the copy of  the  contact  order  for  the
    appellant's  wife  and  letters  from   her   children   submitted   by
    representatives on 27th October 2016.  However,  he  properly  conceded
    that these documents post-dated the hearing of the appeal in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  He added that the evidence showed that the sponsor  was
    continuing to establish herself more fully with those of  her  children
    living in the United Kingdom.

 6. Mr McVeety emphasised that the appeal had fallen outside the provisions
    of the Rules.  The judge was entitled to consider the issue of  whether
    or not the sponsor could  go  to  Pakistan  with  him  and  the  latest
    evidence relating to contact was not before the judge as it  post-dated
    the date of hearing.  The sponsor is a British citizen and so,  if  she
    went to Pakistan, she could return at any stage to visit her  children.
    Further, there was  nothing  to  stop  a  further  application  if  the
    circumstances were to change.  As to the comment in  paragraph  39,  he
    argued that this was not  material  as  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant, his partner and  her  children  had  been  fully  considered
    before the comment was made and the decision was not based upon it.

 7. In conclusion Mr Worrall emphasised that the  appellant's  partner  had
    children with whom she as a strong bond which would be damaged  if  she
    were to move to Pakistan.

Conclusions

 8. The basis upon which permission was granted in the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    that the comment of the judge, in paragraph 39 of the decision, that:

         "I attach no more weight to the  Sponsor's  family  life  with  her
         children than I attach to the Appellant's  family  life  with  his.
         Because of this, I find the Sponsor's family life with her children
         to be of neutral weight".

     was arguably the wrong  approach  because  there  is  no  authority  to
    support the contention that the appellant having children  in  Pakistan
    cancels out the sponsor's family life with her children in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. It is my conclusion that the judge's comments in paragraph 39 cannot be
    seen in isolation.  Nor can they be  said  to  establish  an  erroneous
    principle upon which the human rights claim was decided.

10. From paragraph 22 onwards of the decision the judge gives comprehensive
    consideration to Article 8 issues on the basis that it had already been
    conceded (paragraph 21) by the appellant's representative that he could
    not succeed under paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Although the judge does not specifically set  out  to  identify
    compelling circumstances which might not be covered by the  Immigration
    Rules and which could lead to a grant of leave to remain, the  analysis
    of Article 8 issues outside the Immigration  Rules  is  comprehensively
    considered within the framework of the five  stage  tests  set  out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge fairly accepts that the parties  have
    been  in  a  genuine  matrimonial  relationship  since  2012  but,   in
    considering the appellant's  relationship  with  the  children  of  the
    sponsor, reaches the cogently reasoned conclusion that he is not  in  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with those  children.   In
    doing so the judge also reaches the conclusion, open to him,  that  the
    sponsor herself only had very limited contact with those  children  and
    that, at the time of the hearing, the terms of a limited contact  order
    were not being complied with.

11. In examining the issue of proportionality the judge properly had regard
    to the provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 taking into consideration an inability of  the  parties
    to meet the financial requirements of the Rules in  the  absence  of  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the sponsor's  children.   The
    judge also refers specifically to the provision in sub-Section (iv)  of
    Section 117B that little weight  should  be  given  to  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner that is established by a person  at  a
    time when the person is in the UK unlawfully.  The judge emphasises the
    illegal status of the appellant when the relationship  commenced.   The
    judge then gives full consideration  to  the  issue  of  the  sponsor's
    potential relocation to Pakistan and the presence of  her  children  in
    the United Kingdom.  It was not wrong for the  judge  to  consider  the
    "insurmountable obstacles" test.  In doing so the  judge  was  able  to
    conclude that there was nothing in particular that  would  prevent  the
    appellant from returning to Pakistan.  The sponsor's medical and family
    position is considered acknowledging that  there  are  ongoing  contact
    issues.  The judge properly concludes that the  sponsor  has  a  family
    life link with her children in the United  Kingdom  but  qualifies  the
    effect of this (paragraph 38) by referring to evidence that the sponsor
    was able to visit Pakistan and had done so in the  previous  year.   He
    was entitled to conclude that the sponsor was  capable  of  travel,  or
    extended visits to Pakistan which, I infer, would enable the Article  8
    family life to be maintained.

12. It was only after consideration of all of the above  matters  that  the
    judge made the comment in paragraph 39 which suggests that there may be
    a comparison to be drawn between the family  life  situation  for  both
    appellant and sponsor  who  each  had  children  in  Pakistan.   It  is
    certainly not the case, in my conclusion,  that  the  judge  based  the
    decision that the respondent's decision was proportionate,  because  he
    was unable to attach anymore weight to the sponsor's family  life  with
    her children and the appellant's family life with his in  Pakistan.  It
    was simply a comment about the split family nature  of  the  respective
    family relationships.  Even if those comments can be regarded as unwise
    they are not material to  the  cogently  reasoned  conclusions  in  the
    preceding sixteen paragraphs of the decision involved  with  Article  8
    considerations.  Thus, I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Judge does not show a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

As this appeal has involved the interests of children I make  the  anonymity
order which appears at the beginning of this decision.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

