
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20977/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2017                             |On 8 February 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            Mr EMMANUEL EFE AGHO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Oremuyima (Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Specialist Appeals Team)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing his appeal against the decision by the Secretary of State to
    refuse to issue him with a Residence Card as confirmation of his  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty Rights here.

 2. The sole ground for  refusal  was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    sufficient evidence to believe that the marriage undertaken by  him  on
    11 January 2014 to Lenka Tokarova was one of convenience for  the  sole
    purpose of him remaining here in the United Kingdom.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction  in  the
    Appellant's favour, and I do not consider that the  Appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. On 10 November 2016, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "1.  It is arguable that the Judge should have  set  out  a  fuller
             analysis as to the switching of the evidential burden  in  the
             context of the issue  of  the  marriage  of  convenience.   At
             paragraph 5 the Judge is referred to not  believing  that  the
             Appellant and his wife were in a  genuine  relationship  as  a
             married couple and on the totality of the  evidence  believing
             that  this  was  a  relationship  entered  into  as   one   of
             convenience.

          2.  It is arguable that the Judge  should  have  referred  to  the
             burden and standard of proof in this context."

Relevant Background Facts

 5. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria,  whose  date  of  birth  is  28
    January 1981.  On 4 February 2014 he applied for a  Residence  Card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    community treaties.

 6. On 13 December 2014, a visit was undertaken to the address which he had
    given as the home address of himself and his EEA national spouse.  This
    was an  address  in  Dagenham.   In  the  meantime,  according  to  the
    Appellant, the Respondent had sent him a  letter  dated  17  July  2014
    asking him for further information about his marriage in the form of  a
    questionnaire.  The Appellant says that he and his spouse had completed
    the questionnaire to the best of their ability.

 7. As evidenced by a report at  D1  of  the  Home  Office  bundle,  on  13
    December 2014 a named member of the sham marriage team wrote an account
    of the marriage visit which had been  conducted  earlier  that  day  in
    order to verify the relationship between the Appellant  and  his  Czech
    partner.

 8. They had arrived at the scene at 08.35am.  Entry was gained via a  male
    occupant after them identifying themselves  by  showing  their  warrant
    card and explaining the reason for their  visit  today.   The  occupant
    stated that he and his wife had moved into  the  address  seven  months
    ago.  He stated he had never met the Appellant since he moved out  from
    the address 7 to 8 months ago.  He showed them post addressed  to  both
    the Appellant and his claimed partner.  He said  he  kept  sending  the
    post back, but was still receiving "them".  The team left  the  address
    at 08.45am.

 9. In a letter dated 27 April  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her
    reasons for refusing the Appellant's application.   A  visit  had  been
    undertaken to his declared home address to establish  the  validity  of
    his application and to see if his relationship to  Lenka  Tokarova  was
    subsisting.  The visit findings by Immigration Officers showed that  he
    and his Sponsor were not residing at the  above  address.   Information
    was gained stating that he and his Sponsor  had  never  lived  at  this
    address.  He had not given the  Home  Office  any  further  address  to
    contact or to visit.  So based  on  the  information  detailed  in  the
    immigration report and the fact that he did not reside at  the  address
    he had given to the Home Office, the Secretary of State had  sufficient
    evidence to believe that the marriage undertaken to Lenka Tokarova  was
    one of convenience for the sole purpose of him remaining  here  in  the
    United Kingdom.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The Appellant's appeal came before Judge  Andonian  sitting  at  Taylor
    House in the First-tier Tribunal on 10 June 2016.   Both  parties  were
    legally represented.  The Judge received evidence  from  the  Appellant
    and a friend, Mr Taiwo Oduwole.

11. The Appellant said he had left the address  given  in  the  application
    form in March 2014 and had gone to live with Mr Oduwole.   He  admitted
    he had not given the Home Office his correct address.  His friend  said
    that he had known the Appellant for the last 10 years and that  he  had
    accommodated his friend and his spouse in his front room.  He had a one-
    bedroom flat.

12. In his subsequent decision, Judge Andonian gave his reasons for finding
    against the Appellant in paragraphs [2] to [6].   He  referred  to  the
    admission by the Appellant that he had not given the Home  Office  "his
    correct address".  He found that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
    individual therefore in that respect.  He noted  the  evidence  of  the
    friend that, although he had known the Appellant for a very  long  time
    and wanted to assist him, he was not prepared to have letters addressed
    to the Appellant sent to his address.  The  Judge  did  not  find  this
    credible, especially as the Appellant had been a friend of his  for  so
    many years.

13. There was no appearance by the Appellant's wife, which the Judge  found
    most concerning.  The Appellant said his wife was in Manchester as  her
    mother was sick.  When asked what was wrong with her  mother,  after  a
    pause the Appellant came out with the statement that  she  had  cancer.
    There was no medical report,  and  there  was  no  statement  from  the
    Appellant's wife to the effect that she could not  attend  the  hearing
    because  she  was  with  her  mother  in  Manchester.   There  was   no
    information when the wife had left for Manchester, or the  address  she
    had gone to in Manchester, or when she was going to return  to  London.
    It was put to the Appellant that she must have known  the  significance
    of her attendance at his appeal, and he replied that she did  know  its
    significance, but she had to go to Manchester.  The Judge did not  find
    this to be a credible.

14. The Judge observed that there was in fact no evidence that  his  spouse
    was in the UK at all.  The  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  [6]  that  the
    Appellant's wife had signed a statement on 30 May 2016  supporting  the
    appeal, but he held that she ought to have been present to  answer  the
    most crucial questions about this appeal since she was one of the  main
    protagonists.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Oremuyima developed the arguments advanced in  the  application
    for permission.

16. Ground 1 was  that  the  Judge's  decision  was  erroneous  as  he  had
    misdirected himself at paragraph 5 of his decision in not applying  the
    test in TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.  This
    stated that:

         "The determination of whether there is a marital  relationship  for
         the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must  always
         be examined in accordance with the laws of the  Member  State  from
         which the Union citizen derives nationality."

17. Ground 2 was that the Judge had misdirected himself on  the  definition
    of a marriage of convenience.  The marriage could not be considered  as
    a marriage of convenience simply  because  it  brought  an  immigration
    advantage.   The  quality   of   the   relationship   was   immaterial.
    Cohabitation was not a legal requirement under EU law.   There  was  no
    requirement in the EU law that couples must reside together at the same
    address.  The sole requirement was for the marriage to  be  valid;  and
    following the authority  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem  explained),  the
    Appellant's marriage was valid.

18. Ground 3 was that the burden of proof was on  the  Respondent  to  show
    reasonable suspicion as regards  her  allegation  of  the  marriage  of
    convenience.  This burden had not been discharged  by  the  Respondent,
    and therefore the Judge  could  not  find  that  the  burden  had  been
    discharged.  In so finding, he had erred in law.

Discussion

19. Mr Oremuyima did not settle the application for permission  to  appeal,
    and he focused his submissions on the  arguable  errors  identified  by
    Judge Hollingworth in granting permission.

20. Mr Oremuyima correctly identified  a  factual  error  in  the  decision
    letter which was carried forward into the Judge's decision.  It is  not
    in fact the case that the Immigration  Officers  established  that  the
    Appellant and his spouse had never resided at the address given in  the
    application form.  The evidence gathered by  the  Immigration  Officers
    was that the claimant and his wife had resided at the  address  in  the
    past, but they had left the address some seven or eight months ago.

21. However, I do not consider that this factual error is material  as  the
    other findings made by the Judge hold good.  As the Appellant admitted,
    he had not notified the Home Office of a change  of  address  in  March
    2014, which was shortly after he had made his application.   There  was
    direct evidence from the current occupier of the premises that  he  had
    not seen the Appellant since he moved out seven or  eight  months  ago,
    and that no arrangement had been put in place to forward correspondence
    addressed to him and his spouse at a new  address.   It  also  followed
    from what the occupier had said  that  the  Appellant  was  not  coming
    around to the old address to pick up his correspondence.

22. So the behaviour of the Appellant was not consistent with there being a
    genuine marital relationship between him and  his  spouse.   There  was
    also, as the Judge found, no supporting documentary  evidence  to  show
    that the Appellant and his spouse had been cohabiting since March  2014
    in the front room of the one-bedroom flat of the Appellant's friend.

23.  It  is  of  course  right  that  cohabitation  is  not  an   essential
    prerequisite  of  a  marriage  being  subsisting;  and  it   does   not
    necessarily follow from the fact that a marriage is  not  shown  to  be
    genuine and subsisting at the date of assessment that the marriage  was
    one of convenience from the outset.  However, the information  garnered
    on the visit to the claimed home address on 13 December 2013 engendered
    reasonable suspicion that the marriage had been entered  into  for  the
    predominant purposes of securing residence rights, and accordingly  the
    evidential burden shifted to the Appellant to provide credible evidence
    allaying such a reasonable suspicion.

24. The Judge did not conduct his analysis in line with the guidance  given
    in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT
    00038 (IAC), but I do not  consider  that  this  discloses  a  material
    error.  The Judge was entitled to attach  considerable  weight  to  the
    absence of the spouse, and to take the view that her  absence  was  not
    satisfactorily explained.  It was open to him to find on  the  totality
    of the evidence that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving on the balance of probabilities that the marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

25. Ms Brokesby-Weller sought to defend  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the additional grounds that the Appellant's purported proxy
    marriage in Ghana to a Czech national was not shown to  be  valid,  and
    accordingly the appeal fell to be  dismissed  on  that  ground  in  any
    event.  It was not shown to be valid because the guidance given  in  TA
    and Others had not been  followed.   The  Appellant  had  not  produced
    evidence to show that his marriage to his Czech  national  Sponsor  was
    recognised by the laws of the Czech Republic.  So the appeal fell to be
    dismissed on that ground in any event.

26. Mr Oremuyima submitted that it was not open to the Secretary  of  State
    to take this point, as it had not been taken below or by way of a cross
    appeal.  However, as previously noted, the  issue  was  raised  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors in the application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    Since the Appellant's solicitors have contended by way of  appeal  that
    the Judge ought to  have  applied  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in TA and Others, I do not consider that  it  is  procedurally
    unfair to uphold the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  this
    additional and alternative ground.

27. In summary, I consider that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal on the ground that the Appellant is a party to  a
    marriage of convenience does not contain an error of law.  But even  if
    I am wrong about that, I find that the error is not  material,  as  the
    appeal fell to be dismissed in any event on the alternative ground that
    the Appellant  did  not  discharge  the  burden  of  proving  that  his
    purported  proxy  marriage  to  his  EEA  national  Sponsor  was  valid
    according to the laws of the Czech Republic.

Notice of decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and so  I  make
no anonymity direction for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.




Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

