
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20947/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 December 2016                  |              On 8 February 2017     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                               BALWINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                            Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Visa Expert Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Background to the Appeal and Issues under appeal

1.    This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 10 March 2016,
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly (hereinafter referred to as the
    FTTJ).

2.    The Appellant is a national of  India.  He  married  and  subsequently
    divorced an EEA national. He sought a Permanent Residence Card (PRC) on
    the basis that he had retained  a  right  of  residence  following  his
    divorce. In refusing his application on 18 May 2015, the  Secretary  of
    State concluded that the  Appellant  was  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience, owing to the responses he gave during an  interview  on  7
    May 2015. Further, it was said that there was insufficient evidence  of
    the former spouse's economic activity in the UK. She thereby refused to
    issue a PRC and a decision was made to revoke the Appellant's Residence
    Card which was valid until 14 January 2016. The Appellant duly appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Decision of the FFTJ

3.    The FTTJ heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant.  She  set  out  the
      applicable regulations pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006,  and  made  reference  to  relevant  case  law
      including  Papajorgi  [2012]  UKUT  00038.  The  FFTJ  considered  the
      responses provided by the Appellant at interview and his  written  and
      oral testimony and concluded that he demonstrably lacked knowledge  of
      his former spouse's circumstances, such that, she  did  "not  consider
      there was a real marriage between the sponsor and the appellant" [35].
      Further, the FFTJ  was  not  satisfied  that  the  former  spouse  was
      exercising Treaty rights between 14 May 2009 and 5 April 2010 due to a
      gap in the evidence covering that period.

The Grounds of Application and Permission to Appeal

4.    The grounds of  application  argue:  (i)  that  the  FTTJ  misdirected
      herself in law in failing  to  recognise  that  the  legal  burden  of
      proving the marriage was one of convenience rested on the  Respondent,
      and the evidential burden had not been discharged and; (ii)  the  FTTJ
      wrongly found that there was a gap in the evidence in respect  of  the
      former spouse's employment.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on  14
      November 2016.

6.    The Respondent filed and served a Rule 24 reply inviting the  Tribunal
      to uphold the FTTJ's decision.

Error of Law

7.    At the hearing I heard brief  submissions  from  both  representatives
      following which I announced my decision that I was satisfied that  the
      FFTJ erred in law. My reasons are as follows.

8.    Ground 1 argues that the FTTJ erred in her application of  the  burden
      of proof. There is no  dispute  between  the  parties  that  when  the
      Respondent asserts that the marriage is one of  convenience  that  she
      bears the legal  burden  of  proof  (see:  Rosa  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  14
      upholding the Upper Tribunal's approach in Papajorgji (supra)).

9.    While the FTTJ referred to Papajorgji and  stated  at  [12]  that  the
      evidential burden fell on the Appellant once there  were  grounds  for
      reasonable suspicion that the marriage is one of convenience, she does
      not set out in a clear and structured way why the evidence adduced  by
      the Respondent was sufficient grounds for  reasonable  suspicion,  and
      nor does she direct herself either at  this  stage  or  later  in  her
      decision that the legal burden rests on the Respondent. I  thus  agree
      with Ms Brocklesby-Weller that the FFTJ's  decision  lacks  structure,
      but it also lacks the necessary clarity required in  a  case  of  this
      kind. To say, as the FFTJ did at [8] that  the  "burden  of  proof  is
      generally upon the appellant to establish  the  facts  he  relies  on,
      proving his case on the balance  of  probabilities  and  I  judge  the
      evidence as at the date of hearing" clearly misstates the  burden  and
      cannot stand.

10.    Ground  2,  which  asserts  that  the  FTTJ's  conclusion  that   the
      Appellant's former spouse was not exercising Treaty rights between May
      2009-April 2010 at [36], is also made out as rightly  conceded  by  Ms
      Brocklesby-Weller. There was some financial evidence before  the  FTTJ
      relating to that period in the form  of  HMRC  self-assessment  return
      forms. In view of this evidence the reasoning at  [36]  was  in  plain
      error.

11.      The FFTJ thus materially erred in  law  and  her  decision  is  set
aside.

Decision



12.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. No findings  are
      to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  Practice
      Statement  7.2,  the  nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
      necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate
      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  judge
      other than FTTJ Solly.

13.   There is no justification for making an anonymity direction in this
matter.






             Signed:   Date:






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

