
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20214/2015
     IA/20233/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 September 2017                 |On 22 September 2017                  |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                     A B
                                    B K F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Sesay, Solicitor, Amnesty Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are mother and  daughter,  both  nationals  of  Jamaica.
    The first appellant was born on [ ] 1997 and the daughter on [ ] 2007.

2.   The appeals under consideration arise from a human  rights  application
    made on 9 February  2015  in  which  the  first  appellant,  using  the
    application form FLR(O), cited the second appellant as  her  dependant.
    One application fee was paid to the respondent.   The  respondent  then
    made one decision citing the second appellant as the first  appellant's
    dependant.  Notwithstanding the fact that there was  one  decision  the
    appellants lodged separate notices of appeal and each paid  the  appeal
    hearing fee of �140.  As no separate decision was made insofar  as  the
    second appellant was concerned, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Callow  said
    there was no need for her to lodge an appeal and which should not  have
    been accepted by the Tribunal.  In those circumstances, it  was  agreed
    by Mr Jaufurally, who was representing the appellants at the hearing on
    26 August 2016, that there was only appeal before the Tribunal.

3.   Judge Callow dismissed the appeal  of  the  appellants  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 October 2016.

4.   On 3 February 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  refused  the
    appellants  permission  to  appeal  Judge   Callow's   decision.    The
    appellants lodged an appeal for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 16 February 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum refused their
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5.    The  appellants  lodged  an  application  to  the  High  Court  for  a
    judicially review of the Upper Tribunal Judge's decision.   On  25  May
    2017, The Honourable Mr Justice Mostyn granted permission as follows:

         "Although this is a stringent test I  have  concluded  that  it  is
         arguably satisfied in this case and  that  there  is  an  important
         point of principle at  large,  namely  whether  proper  regard,  in
         accordance with binding authority, was paid to the  best  interests
         of the second claimant.


         The judgment of the First-tier Tribunal has all the hallmarks of  a
         priori reasoning.  It seems to go  like  this:  the  mother  should
         leave; all children are better off with  their  mothers;  therefore
         the child should leave.  But it is elementary that judging requires
         the application of a posteriori  reasoning,  that  is  to  say  the
         analysis of empirical evidence in order to reach a conclusion.  The
         analysis of the evidence concerning the best interests of the child
         was virtually non-existent.  Apart from a passing reference to  her
         grandparents there was virtually no  analysis  of  the  undoubtedly
         deep interpersonal relationships, and the  societal  and  educative
         networks, that had been formed by this child throughout  her  life.
         It seems to me to be distinctly arguable that the importance of the
         best interests of the child has been in this case  relegated  to  a
         position  of  subservience  to  the  perceived  public  benefit  in
         removing  her  mother.   The   child's   best   interest   deserved
         independent, scrupulous, evidence-based analysis, which seems to me
         to  be  singularly  lacking  in  the  judgment  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal."

6.   On 18 July 2017 Mr  C  M  G  Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, granted permission in the light of the decision made  by  the
    High Court Judge.  He stated that the parties  are  reminded  that  the
    Upper Tribunal's task is that set out in s.12  of  the  2007  Act.   In
    other words, the task of the Tribunal is to consider whether the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law in his decision.

7.   The facts of this case are that the first appellant arrived in  the  UK
    as a visitor on 13 September 2001.  On 3 April  2002  she  applied  for
    leave to remain as a student which was granted until 30 November  2002.
    This was twice thereafter extended until 31 August 2004.   On  24  July
    2004 the appellant married [SI],  a  British  citizen.   Thereafter  on
    application she was granted limited leave to remain as a  spouse  until
    23 September 2006.  Prior to the expiry of that leave The appellant  in
    oral evidence told the First-tier Judge that prior  to  the  expiry  of
    that  leave,  her  husband  instructed  solicitors  to  apply  for  her
    indefinite leave to remain.  Nonetheless  she  instructed  her  current
    solicitors  in  2009  to  make  enquiry  of  the  result  of  the  said
    application made for ILR.  At that time the first appellant  could  not
    locate the solicitors and discovered that their offices from which they
    had operated were being used as a restaurant.  Notwithstanding numerous
    reminders it was only on 23  May  2011  that  the  respondent  replied,
    advising that they had no record of  any  such  application.   At  some
    point the relationship between the appellant and [SI] broke  down.   In
    the interim the second appellant was born in the  UK.   Her  father  is
    [BF], a  Jamaican  citizen.   However,  following  his  conviction  and
    sentence of four years' imprisonment, contact has been lost  with  him.
    His whereabouts are unknown  to  all  concerned  including  the  second
    appellant's paternal grandmother.  On 8 June 2011  the  appellant  made
    another application for leave to remain, which was refused  on  7  July
    2011.   On  21  July  2011  the  appellants  were  encountered  by   an
    Immigration Enforcement Team and served with overstayer notices.  On  9
    February 2015 the appellants again applied for leave to  remain,  which
    was refused without a right of appeal.  Subsequent to the receipt of  a
    pre-action Protocol letter, the respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the
    application, which was finally refused on 19 May 2015 with a  right  of
    appeal.

8.   Judge Callow stated at paragraph 4 of his decision that  the  facts  in
    this matter appear from the bundles  of  documents  submitted  for  the
    purposes of appeal by the respondent and the appellants  and  from  the
    oral evidence of the first  appellant,  [JP]  (the  second  appellant's
    grandmother), [OD] (the second appellant's uncle) and [WB]  (the  first
    appellant's boyfriend) at the hearing of the appeal.  The judge did not
    record the oral evidence that was given by each of  the  witnesses.   I
    note that the grounds do not raise this as an issue.  It was alleged in
    paragraph 5  of  the  grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    consideration the second appellant's relationship with her  grandmother
    and uncle as per their oral evidence on 26 August 2016.   However,  the
    grounds did not identify the oral evidence of  the  second  appellant's
    grandmother and uncle and what they said about their relationship  with
    the second appellant.

9.   At paragraph 6 of the decision, under  "Appellants'  Case",  the  judge
    stated  that  "further  to  the  immigration  history  and   background
    described above, the appellant was in a  relationship  with  [WB],  her
    boyfriend.  They did not live together but  he  regularly  visited  the
    appellants at least twice a week.  In the future  they  hoped  to  live
    together as a family unit.  As the first appellant was not  allowed  to
    work, she was financially dependent on her boyfriend and members of her
    family who also financially assisted her from time to time.  The second
    appellant has lived continuously in the UK since  birth.   She  attends
    school and has numerous friends.  She has a close relationship with her
    paternal grandmother and uncle.  For her part the first  appellant  has
    no friends in Jamaica and has  no  home  to  go  back  to.   The  first
    appellant is particularly concerned for the  welfare  of  her  daughter
    should they be removed to Jamaica." I find that this was a  summary  of
    the oral evidence given by the second appellant's grandmother and uncle
    and the evidence of the first appellant's boyfriend.

10.   At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Callow,  there  was  no  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The appellants were represented by Mr  Jaufurally.
    He relied  on  his  skeleton  argument,  asserting  that  the  relevant
    provisions  to  be  addressed  in  the   appeal   concerned   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules - the second appellant "is under the age  of
    18 years and has lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at  least
    seven years ... and it would not be reasonable to expect the  appellant
    to leave the United Kingdom", Section 55 of BCIA 2009 and Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

11.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  first  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the second appellant, who is in the UK and
    has lived in the UK continuously for at least seven  years  immediately
    preceding the date of the application.

12.  The judge stated at [14] that whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the
    second appellant to leave the UK, he must of necessity be  bound  by  a
    duty regarding the welfare of children enacted in s.55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, which  enjoins  the  safeguarding
    and promotion of the welfare of children in the UK.  The  judge  stated
    that he respectfully  acknowledged  also  and  applied  the  principles
    enunciated in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA.  The judge  also  noted  that  in  applying  EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 and in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4, it was shown that  the  question  of
    what was encompassed in "the best interests of the child"  and  whether
    these necessarily  entailed  protection  from  removal,  "will  involve
    asking the question whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    live in another country."

13.  The judge also relied on the decision in MK (India) (best interests  of
    child) [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC), approved in EV (Philippines), which  he
    said shows that the question of the best interests of a  child  is  not
    the single decisive issue in considering whether the child or a  parent
    should be removed from the UK, but is one of many relevant  factors  to
    be considered in an examination of proportionality of removal.

14.  With these principles in mind, the judge held that the evidence  showed
    that the second appellant has been in the UK since birth, that is  over
    seven years.  She has  spent  her  life  to  date  here.   She  has  no
    knowledge  of  life  in  Jamaica.   It  is  likely  that  she  will  be
    disadvantaged in Jamaica,  not  least  in  that  she  might  not  enjoy
    comparable facilities in schooling.   Whilst  it  was  not  clear  what
    prospects the first appellant would enjoy in Jamaica, it is likely that
    there would be some period of hardship  and  readjustment.   The  judge
    thought that these factors might show that it ought to be considered in
    their interests to remain in the UK.

15.  The judge went on to say that he was, however, bound to consider  their
    position on the basis of the facts "as they are in the real world".  At
    the core of the matter, the first appellant does not have  a  right  to
    remain in this country.  She has long been an  overstayer.   There  are
    friends and the first appellant has relatives in the UK.   Family  ties
    in Jamaica are said to be  non-existent.   The  judge  found  that  the
    education of the second appellant is not at a crucial stage.  She is  a
    primary school pupil.  The first appellant is not without skills.   She
    has contrived to support  herself  with  the  assistance  of  at  least
    provided accommodation.  In the real world, the appellants  are  liable
    to removal and could have no expectation,  absent  any  rights  of  the
    daughter, to remain.  The judge emphasised that  in  this  context  the
    child's best interests would be to remain in the care  of  the  mother,
    benefiting from her support, guidance and affection.

16.  In considering whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  be
    removed with her mother to Jamaica, or whether her best  interests  are
    in favour of remaining in the UK as to outweigh the due enforcement  of
    immigration control, the judge had in mind the evidence of a  potential
    educational  disadvantage  in  Jamaica  and  the  threat  of   corporal
    punishment.  Against this, however, the judge considered that the child
    would be removed with her mother as a  family  unit.   The  mother  can
    reasonably be expected to be able to provide a home and support for the
    child in Jamaica.  The judge also considered the fact that defiance  by
    the mother of immigration  control  gave  rise  to  public  demand  for
    enforcement and deterrence.  The judge considered the evidence and held
    that the circumstances of the second appellant were no more  compelling
    than those of the affected minor children in EV (Philippines), who,  it
    was considered, ought to be removed with their parents, notwithstanding
    that it was considered to be in their best interests to remain  in  the
    UK.  Therefore, the judge held that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    the second appellant to live with her mother in Jamaica.

17.  This meant  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Sections 276ADE.

18.  The judge went on to consider the case under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    The judge drew on  the  guidance  in  R  (Sunassee)  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2015] EWHC 1604 (Admin), which
    considered the issue of the approach to such  cases.   The  judge  also
    relied on SS (Congo) & Ors where the Court of Appeal adopted a  nuanced
    approach to the consideration of Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    approach was that in cases involving entry clearance  or  a  claim  for
    leave to remain, an applicant must show that "compelling circumstances"
    exist.  The judge held in this case that  no  compelling  circumstances
    had been identified or established for the grant of leave  outside  the
    Rules.

19.  The judge found that no evidence of any  weight  beyond  disruption  to
    the education of the second appellant has been given that it  would  be
    unduly harsh to return to Jamaica or that there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances.  The judge again noted  that  the  first  appellant  was
    born, bred and had lived most of her life in Jamaica.  For the majority
    of her life she has been exposed to the  cultural  norms  of  her  home
    country.  She is able to work.  She is  not  a  stranger  to  her  home
    country, its people and way of life.  It cannot be said that  it  would
    be in any  way  unreasonable  or  unjustifiably  harsh  for  the  first
    appellant to be returned to her home country.   The  judge  also  found
    that there are no obstacles, let alone  any  which  are  impossible  to
    surmount in returning her and the second appellant to Jamaica.

20.  With the second appellant, the judge noted that her  status  is  linked
    to that of her mother, the first appellant.  As she was  cited  as  her
    mother's dependant and no separate immigration decision was made by the
    respondent, she had no extant appeal before the Tribunal.

21.  Mr Sesay submitted that the core facts are not in  dispute.  The  first
    appellant and her daughter, the second appellant, enjoy a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.  At the date  of  their  application,
    the second appellant had been living in the UK for 7 years.

22.  Mr Sesay submitted that the judge erred in his approach to  the  public
    interest considerations in this case which involved the  assessment  of
    the best interest of the child as deportation was not  in  issue  here.
    He submitted that the at the  date  of  the  hearing  the  respondent's
    policy guidance in such a cases is that she would not  normally  remove
    where the exceptions to the requirement in  the  immigration  rules  in
    respect of family life are not met and a child  has  lived  in  the  UK
    continuously for 7 years.  He submitted that the judge  ought  to  have
    accorded considerable weight to the respondent's policy on the 7 years'
    residence as observed by the Supreme Court in Hersham Ali v SSHD [2016]
    UKSC.

23.  Mr Sesay submitted that the judge failed to have regard to  the  weight
    to be accorded to the child's 7 years' residence, the best interests of
    the child and failed to  assess  these  factors  in  isolation  of  the
    mother's conduct.  He said the judge  failed  to  conduct  a  balancing
    assessment of the proportionality of removal of  the  second  appellant
    and disregarded the 7-year rule as a strong factor in her favour.

24.  Mr Jarvis relied on MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705.   He  submitted
    that Mr Sesay's criticism of the approach of the judge  does  not  bear
    any reality with the judge's decision.   He  said  there  was  no  Home
    Office Presenting Officer at the hearing in August 2016.  Therefore  MA
    (Pakistan) was not drawn to the judge's attention.  He  submitted  that
    at paragraph 14 the judge relied on the  principles  enunciated  in  EV
    (Philippines) on the approach to be adopted where the child has been in
    the UK for seven years or more.  The approach in EV  (Philippines)  was
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan).

25.  Mr Jarvis submitted that at paragraph 15 the judge  subscribed  to  the
    reasonableness test and what is  required  in  the  assessment  of  the
    child's best interest.  At paragraph 16 the judge applied  MK  (India),
    which was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) at paragraph
    42.  The Court of Appeal held that this was  the  right  approach.   Mr
    Jarvis submitted that the judge addressed  the  issues  concerning  the
    second appellant separately.

26.  He submitted that the rest of Mr  Sesay's  complaints  were  more  form
    over substance.  Because the judge did not refer to the grandmother did
    not mean that the decision was wrong.  There must be strong reasons why
    a child has to leave.  At paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan), the  Court  of
    Appeal held that the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for  over
    seven  years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in   the
    proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of its
    relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the  child's  best
    interests; and second, because it establishes as a starting point  that
    leave should be granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge  engaged  with  the  fact
    that the second appellant has been in the UK for seven years  or  more.
    The judge considered that the second appellant would be able to  adjust
    to life in Jamaica as  would  the  first  appellant,  who  has  a  poor
    immigration history.  That should be weighed against her and the child.

27.   In  reply  Mr  Sesay  submitted  that  the   judge's   findings   were
    inconsistent with paragraph 42 of ZH (Tanzania).   The  judge  did  not
    consider separately Section 55 and Section 117B(6).  The judge did  not
    take a balanced approach.  He submitted that the factual  premise  does
    not require  revisiting  nor  is  new  evidence  required.   The  Upper
    Tribunal is therefore requested to remake  the  decision  upon  finding
    material errors of law have been established.

Findings

28.  I agree with Mr Jarvis that Mr Sesay's complaints  were  of  form  over
    substance.  The judge was not provided with a copy of MA (Pakistan) and
    therefore did not refer to it.   It  is,  however,  apparent  from  the
    determination that the judge relied  on  other  case  law  such  as  EV
    (Philippines) and  MK  (India),  the  principles  of  which  have  been
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan).  Indeed at  paragraph
    48 the Court of Appeal cited paragraphs 34 to 37 of  EV  (Philippines).
    At paragraph 49 of MA the Court of Appeal stated as follows:

         "Although this was not in fact a seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
         construction of Section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case.  However, the fact that the child has been in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

29.  I find that the judge  emphasised  throughout  his  decision  that  the
    child has been in the UK since birth, that is over  seven  years.   She
    has spent her life to date here.  She  has  no  knowledge  of  life  in
    Jamaica.  The judge considered that she was being educated in  the  UK.
    He found that the education of  the  second  appellant  was  not  at  a
    crucial stage.  She is a  primary  school  pupil.   I  find  that  this
    evidence was based on the documentary evidence submitted in support  of
    the appeal.  The evidence at F1, F2 and F3 of the  respondent's  bundle
    showed that the second appellant was at Beechwood Primary School.   She
    had joined the school on 10 September 2012.  The evidence at F2 date 13
    February 2015 stated that the  second  appellant  had  been  awarded  a
    certificate for being mentioned in celebration assembly that week.  She
    was awarded similar certificates on 11 October 2013 and 7  April  2014.
    That was the sum total of the  evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    second appellant.

30.  At paragraph 6 the judge summarised the evidence he received  from  the
    various witnesses.  The judge noted that the second appellant has lived
    continuously in the  UK  since  birth.   She  attends  school  and  has
    numerous friends.  She has  a  close  relationship  with  her  maternal
    grandmother and uncle.  I note that a lot of letters were submitted  by
    the first appellant's friends and family  in  support  of  her  appeal.
    These letters are at H1 to H10 of the respondent's  bundle.   I  accept
    that the judge did not specifically mention these letters but  that  of
    itself does not mean that the  judge  materially  erred  in  law.   The
    second appellant's grandmother, [JP], gave evidence to the judge  which
    I have said is recorded at paragraph 6.  In her letter at H9 she stated
    that the second appellant has been spending time with her  every  other
    week from when she was a baby, and when she was in  reception  she  had
    her once a month and now she comes to spend time with  her  during  the
    school holidays.  She  contributes  financially  to  her  clothing  and
    leisure activities.  I accept that the  judge  did  not  give  specific
    mention to the financial contribution made by the  grandmother  to  the
    second appellant.  Nevertheless, it is my considered opinion that  even
    if the judge had taken this into account  he  is  not  likely  to  have
    reached a different conclusion.  The relationship between  grandparents
    and grandchildren generally call for a lesser degree of protection than
    that between  natural  parents  and  their  children  (G.H.  B.  v.  UK
    Application no. 42455/98).

31.  I find that the judge applied the approach in MA (Pakistan), which  had
    in turn relied on the principles set out in  EV  (Philippines)  and  MK
    (India), in his assessment of the  best  interests  of  the  child  and
    Section 117B(6).

32.  I find that the judge considered all the evidence that was before  him.
     I find that the judge considered Section 55 that is the best interests
    of the child. I find that the assessment is incorporated throughout his
    determination in different paragraphs.  Consequently, I find  that  the
    judge did not materially err in law in his decision.

33.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellants' appeal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 22 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun





















