
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20972/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2016                   |On 2 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                mohsin iqbal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Iqbal against the respondent's decision of  27
    May 2015 refusing his application for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He appealed that  decision  to  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal who dismissed the appeal.  He sought permission to appeal  and
    permission was granted by a  First-tier  Judge  on  1  September  2016.
    There is no appearance by, or on behalf of Mr Iqbal today.  There is  a
    fax from the previous representatives dated  6  December  2016  stating
    that they were unable to get further instructions and asked to come off
    the record and that was acknowledged the same day.  I am satisfied from
    the notice of hearing that notice of the date, time and  place  of  the
    hearing was sent to the appellant and  as  a  consequence  that  it  is
    appropriate to proceed to hear the appeal.

2.   I will start with the decision of the respondent.  This was a  decision
    on the basis that he had applied for indefinite leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of the compassionate circumstances  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The matter was nevertheless  considered  within
    the Rules and outside and  the  decision  was  reached  to  refuse  the
    application.

3.   The case is complicated by the fact that  various  accounts  have  been
    given by Mr Iqbal at different times.  There was a statement which  was
    the basis of the application that his family had arranged his  marriage
    to a woman who was the daughter of a well-known local gangster  and  he
    had a fear of them and it was said that the claim raised  issues  which
    might properly be considered as a  claim  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection  rather  than  application  outside  the   Rules   and   the
    appropriate procedure for applying  for  asylum  was  set  out  in  the
    decision but it was said that he had provided no  evidence  to  support
    the written statement.  He did not meet the requirements of the Rules.

4.   At the first hearing of Mr Iqbal's appeal he denied being  at  risk  of
    being killed and implied at least and indeed expressed  the  view  that
    the matter had been fabricated by the then representatives who I should
    add were not the representatives who came  off  the  record  yesterday.
    There was an adjournment because of these allegations  and  the  matter
    was re-listed, as I say and heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  that
    day.  That was an appeal which was determined on the papers  and  there
    was a statement from Mr Iqbal who spoke about a  risk  that  he  feared
    from a land mafia group as he described it who  had  attacked  him  and
    threatened him and said that he should get his mother's property signed
    over to their names and he said that he could not relocate elsewhere in
    Pakistan.  There was no  other  documentary  evidence  submitted.   The
    judge considered that these facts amounted to a  protection  claim  and
    went on to consider the merits of  that  claim  and  found  a  lack  of
    credibility in  the  failure  to  mention  it  previously,  a  lack  of
    supporting evidence and  a  number  of  other  significant  unexplained
    issues in the delay for example having taken place and the judge  as  a
    consequence  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and Articles 2 and 3.  No attempt had been  made  to
    show that he could succeed under paragraph 276ADE  or  Appendix  FM  or
    Article 8 outside the  Rules  and  as  a  consequence  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

5.   The grounds of appeal express disagreement  with  the  refusal  of  the
    claim for international protection and an error of law was claimed on a
    not very coherent basis.  It was interpreted by the judge  who  granted
    permission as a challenge to the jurisdiction of the judge to  consider
    the appeal under the Qualification Directive when the appeal was lodged
    against the refusal of the application under Article 8.   I  will  come
    back to that in a moment.  The grounds then  go  on  to  quote  various
    paragraphs from the judge's decision that argue that the appellant  had
    misinterpreted the question being asked and had  thought  that  he  was
    being asked about the threat  he  had  expressed  earlier  due  to  the
    marriage rather than the property threat.  There is  reference  to  the
    appellant's  dissatisfaction  with  the   conduct   of   the   previous
    solicitors.

6.   Issue is taken with the judge's conclusion that there  was  a  lack  of
    supporting evidence on the basis that  the  appellant  was  in  minimal
    contact with his mother and also with the other significant unexplained
    issues to which the judge referred such as the delay.  It was said that
    he had not realised  that  his  life  was  in  danger  and  then  again
    disagreement is expressed with the conclusions under the Rules  on  the
    basis that there were significant obstacles  to  his  integration  back
    into Pakistan and the findings in respect of paragraph  117B.   It  was
    said he had provided sufficient interest  in  seeking  to  improve  his
    English language skills and as to whether or not he could be said to be
    self-sufficient.

7.   For myself I find it rather hard to read those grounds as  specifically
    taking issue solely with the judge's conclusion that the claim fell  to
    be considered as a claim for international protection given  that  both
    of the grounds are concerned with addressing the  judge's  decision  in
    that regard and I do not see any arguable error even if  the  point  in
    the grant of permission were appropriate.  Clearly the  statement  that
    was put before Judge Ferguson at the hearing on 18 March 2016  involved
    the claim of risk on return on the basis of the threat  from  the  land
    mafia group and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  give  and  gave  proper
    consideration to that and found with good reasoning that there  was  no
    merit to the claim and that it lacked credibility for the reasons  that
    he set out at paragraphs 13 to 15 of his decision and although  he  did
    not say much about the Article 8 claim he really did not  need  to  say
    very much.  Everything he said was entirely coherent and sound and as a
    consequence he dismissed the appeal on that basis also.  In my view  no
    error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision  has  been  shown  and  as  a
    consequence the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

