

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/20500/2015
                                                IA/20508/2015, IA/20516/2015
                                                IA/20529/2015, IA/20559/2015
                                                               IA/20574/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14th November 2016
          On 20th December 2016


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    A A G
                                   F A B G
                                    A Y G
                                    S-D G
                                     F G
                                    V I O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr O Osifeso (Legal Representative, Lannex
                    Immigration and Legal Advice Services)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants sought leave to remain in the UK as a family. Their
   immigration history is set out in the papers and summarised in the First-
   tier Tribunal decision and I do not need to repeat that in detail. Both
   the adult Appellants have been in the UK illegally for many years as have
   the children and have poor immigration histories. The Third Appellant in
   the original proceedings is now a British citizen.

2. The appeal was heard by Judge Rhys-Davies at Hatton Cross on the 19th of
   April 2016. In a decision promulgated on the 26th of May 2016 the appeals
   were allowed. The Judge set out the Appellants' history and circumstances
   and considered the appeals by reference to the case of PD and Others
   (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).

3. The complaint by the Secretary of State is that the Judge failed to
   consider properly the public interest in the enforcement of immigration
   control, the adults had worked illegally and had access to services and
   allowing the appeal appeared to be a reward for misconduct. The
   submissions of the parties are set out in the Record of Proceedings.

4. Obviously the Appellants sought to maintain the decision on the basis
   that the decision made was open to the Judge for the reasons given and
   that there was no error of law. At the end of the hearing I reserved the
   decision indicating that if I found an error then the appeal would be
   remitted for re-hearing.

5. The fact that one child now has British citizenship is a weighty factor
   but is not determinative of the appeal. A clear error in the decision is
   the failure by the Judge to have any regard to the many binding cases
   which mandate that the immigration history is directly relevant to the
   assessment of the overall circumstances of the family. This has been
   repeated recently in the case of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and
   previously EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

6. The requirement of reasonableness was added to paragraph 276ADE (iv)
   sometime after the rule was introduced and its application then backdated
   to cover all applications. Children are moved around the globe on a daily
   basis and manage to handle, with parental support, the changes in
   culture, climate, lifestyle and language that their parents' decisions
   impose on them. For the requirement of reasonableness to have any effect
   it must mean that a child has established more than the life that would
   be expected of a child of that age. If being immersed in the local
   schools and culture were sufficient then pretty much every child would
   succeed and the requirement would add nothing. Whilst it might not be
   necessary to show something compelling, SS (Congo), something more is
   needed and it is not clear from the decision what it was that the Judge
   had in mind in this regard.

7. It is not clear why the Judge appears to have attached no significance
   to the decision of the parents to live illegally in the UK for many years
   and to obtain services to which they had no right while working
   unlawfully. It could be added that if the family wished to return to
   Nigeria voluntarily the children, including the British citizen, would
   have no mechanism to prevent their parents from making what would be a
   lawful decision and clearly in their province. As a decision it would
   hardly raise an question mark.

8. The Judge appears to have regarded the children's position as sufficient
   to make removal unreasonable and to be determinative of the appeals. The
   decision does not discuss the adults decidedly poor immigration history
   in context or the fact that the entire family were in the UK illegally
   for many years. Given the observations by the Court of Appeal regarding
   the relevance of the overall immigration history, the need for
   circumstances that are more demanding than those a family might
   ordinarily have, the clear public interest in the maintenance of
   immigration control and the ability of the family, arguably, to relocate
   successfully to Nigeria, the failure of the Judge to discuss the case in
   those terms was a material error.

9. In the circumstances I am satisfied that, given the findings that will
   have to be made, it is appropriate to remit the hearing to the First-tier
   Tribunal for re-hearing on all matters. As the case will be considered on
   the facts as they stand at the renewed hearing the Appellants must submit
   any new evidence not previously before the First-tier Tribunal in
   accordance with directions previously issued.

10. I note that the Appellants have an address in Kent. Although the
   appeals were heard at Hatton Cross I note that Taylor House would be a
   more convenient location for the Appellants and their representatives to
   attend. In those circumstances the case is remitted to Taylor House for
   re-hearing.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing, not
before Judge Rhys-Davies.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing I make no
fee award which remains an issues for the First-tier Tribunal Judge who
considers the case afresh.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 6th November 2016

