
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20068/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th June 2013                                |On 28th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                      Thomas Olawande Olatunji-Odeyemi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adeolu of David and Vine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Kaler promulgated on 30th October 2012.

 2. Judge Kaler dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 10th September  2012  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

Immigration History and Background

 3. The Appellant a Nigerian citizen, born 19th March 1977  was  granted  a
    visit visa valid between 15th June  2000  and  15th December  2000  in
    Lagos, Nigeria.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 9th August 2000.

 4. The Respondent's records  indicate  that  the  Appellant  made  further
    applications for visit visas on 7th September 2001 and 11th April 2002.
     He was granted a visit visa on 11th April 2002 which was  valid  until
    12th October 2002.

 5. A fourth application for a visit visa was made on 24th  February  2003,
    for a two year visa, but not processed.

 6. On 26th October 2004 the Appellant was encountered  by  UKBA  officials
    while in the United Kingdom, and was served with a Notice to  a  Person
    Liable to Removal as he had overstayed the conditions of his leave.  He
    stated that he was residing with his fianc�e Janice Mustapha a  British
    citizen.

 7. On 8th February 2005 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom  claiming
    to have entered into a  proxy  marriage  with  Janice  Mustapha.   This
    application was refused on 28th September  2005  and  the  Appellant's
    subsequent appeal dismissed on 30th March 2006.  Applications to appeal
    further were refused.

 8. The Appellant remained in the United Kingdom and  was  reported  as  an
    absconder on 20th November 2006 after failing to report.  On  16th May
    2007 the Appellant was encountered by UKBA officials and  was  released
    on 18th May 2007, with a condition to report weekly.  On 2nd July 2007
    the  Appellant  was  detained  pending  removal.   On  4th  July   2007
    representations were submitted to the Respondent relying on Article  8.
    The Respondent's decision was maintained.

 9. The Appellant then lodged an application for  judicial  review  on  6th
    July 2007, and permission to proceed was refused on the papers  on  2nd
    August 2007.  The  Appellant  then  submitted  further  representations
    accompanied by a letter from his then  partner  Abiola  Akinpelu  which
    were submitted on 17th August 2007 and refused  on  18th August  2007.
    Further representations were submitted  on  20th  August  2007,  and  a
    further application for judicial review lodged  on  22nd  August  2007.
    The Appellant was released from detention on  4th  September  2007.   A
    response to the further representations of 20th August were sent on 2nd
    October 2007, and the judicial review application was  refused  on  the
    papers on 23rd November 2007.

10. The Appellant was then encountered by UKBA officials on 12th July 2010,
    at which time  he  said  he  was  residing  with  his  current  partner
    Elizabeth Oluwafeyikemi Afolabi.  He submitted an application for leave
    to remain based on Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on  Human
    Rights on 13th July 2010.

11. There was a further application for leave to remain dated 18th  January
    2011.  There is reference to such an application being submitted on 5th
    April 2011.  The Respondent issued a  refusal  letter  dated  24th  May
    2011.  There was a request to  reconsider  the  application  which  was
    refused on 14th August 2012.

12. The Respondent issued a letter dated 10th September 2012  refusing  the
    Appellant's application to remain in the United Kingdom  and  issued  a
    Notice of Immigration Decision of the  same  date,  indicating  that  a
    decision had been  taken  to  remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

13. The Appellant appealed and his appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  Kaler  on
    22nd October 2012.  The judge  noted  that  the  Respondent's  refusal
    letter considered the Appellant's application  to  remain  pursuant  to
    Article 8, in relation to the new Immigration Rules introduced  on  9th
    July 2012 by HC 194, which rules were designed  to  address  Article  8
    claims in relation to family and private life.  The  judge  found  that
    because the Appellant's application had been made  prior  to  9th  July
    2012, it fell to be decided in accordance with the rules in force prior
    to that date.  The judge concluded that the Appellant did  not  qualify
    for leave to remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  went  on  to
    consider his appeal under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

14. The judge found that the Appellant and his partner had not entered into
    a marriage recognised by United Kingdom law, but accepted that they had
    established family life as they had been living  together  since  2009,
    and that they had a genuine relationship  and  at  that  time  had  two
    children, and were awaiting the birth of their  third  child.   It  was
    accepted that the Appellant's partner had indefinite leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom, and that the youngest child was a British  citizen,
    having been  born  after  the  Appellant's  partner  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  The  judge  concluded  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the family to return to Nigeria with the  Appellant,  or
    alternatively it was reasonable to expect  the  Appellant  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance from Nigeria.  Therefore the appeal was
    dismissed.

15. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  on
    5th December 2012 in the following terms;

    1.    The  Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  against  the
         Respondent's decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  Kaler  dismissed  his  appeal  on  Article  8
         grounds.

    2.   The grounds of appeal essentially assert that the judge  erred  in
         her interpretation and findings of proxy marriages in  Nigeria  and
         that she failed to give consideration  to  the  decisions  in  Ruiz
         Zambrano  (European  citizenship)   [2011]   EUECJ   Case   C-34/09
         OJ2011C130/2 and ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2011] UKSC 4 in assessing the  best  interests  of  the
         children.

    3.   Arguably the judge's assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         children did not give adequate consideration or weight to the  fact
         of their British citizenship, in accordance with the principles  in
         Zambrano.   The  brief  reference  in  paragraph  27  was  arguably
         inadequate.

    4.   Whilst I see little merit in the other grounds of appeal, I  grant
         permission on all grounds.

16. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.



17. At the hearing before me on 9th April 2013 Mr Adeolu  relied  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to  appeal.   I
    was told that when the appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal, the
    Appellant and his partner had two children,  and  the  youngest  was  a
    British citizen.  Since that hearing a third child  had  been  born  on
    10th February 2013 who was also a British citizen.  It  was  argued  on
    behalf of the Respondent that the judge's decision was open to  her  on
    the evidence and the determination should stand.

18. I decided that the judge had erred in her  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children.  There was no reference to  either  Zambrano
    or ZH (Tanzania), although that alone did not amount  to  an  error  of
    law.  However it was not clear from reading the determination that  the
    principles in Zambrano  and  ZH  (Tanzania)  had  been  considered  and
    applied.  Therefore the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set
    aside.  Both representatives agreed  in  view  of  the  nature  of  the
    challenge to the determination, that the judge's findings  of  fact  in
    paragraph 19 of the determination should  stand,  and  therefore  those
    findings were preserved.  The hearing was then adjourned, as Mr  Adeolu
    indicated that he wished to call witnesses to give further evidence  in
    relation to the best interests of the children.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing, 7th June 2013

19. The Appellant and his  partner  Elizabeth  Afolabi  both  attended  the
    hearing.  Mr Adeolu indicated that he would not be calling them to give
    further evidence, and they relied upon the evidence contained in  their
    witness statements dated 17th October 2012 in the Appellant's case, and
    31st August 2012 in  the  case  of  his  partner.   However  Mr  Adeolu
    indicated that evidence would be given by Ms Adewunmi  Onikoyi  who  is
    the mother of the Appellant's partner.

20. The British passports of the Appellant's  youngest  two  children  were
    produced.  It was agreed that the issue before me related to Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention, and that the Immigration  Rules  introduced  on
    9th July 2012 did not apply, as the application for leave to remain had
    been made prior to that date.  Mr Melvin provided Mr Adeolu and  myself
    with a copy of the written submissions that he intended to make at  the
    conclusion of the hearing.

The Evidence of Adewunmi Onikoyi

21. Ms Onikoyi adopted her statement dated 7th June 2013.  In brief summary
    she confirmed that she arrived in the United Kingdom in May 1993  as  a
    visitor and met her ex-husband and married and was subsequently granted
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  She is  now  a  single  parent.
    The Appellant's partner is the second of her five children, and she was
    born in Nigeria.

22. She described the Appellant's partner as having sickle cell trait which
    in the absence of medication could be fatal.  Ms Onikoyi  indicated  in
    her statement that an individual with this type  of  medical  condition
    needed constant medical attention and personal care  and  support,  and
    her daughter required somebody to be with her all the  time  as  crises
    usually began in the middle of the night, and  which  could  result  in
    death if there was nobody to promptly attend to her.

23. Ms Onikoyi lives with her three daughters in London and the Appellant's
    partner lives in Kent.  Ms Onikoyi has another daughter who is  married
    and who lives with  her  husband  and  three  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

24. Ms Onikoyi explained that she could not relocate back to  Nigeria  with
    the Appellant's partner, because she has three teenage daughters and  a
    business in the United Kingdom and has lived here for twenty years.

25. When cross-examined it was put to Ms Onikoyi that she was not  expected
    to relocate back to Nigeria, and she said that she was aware of that.

26. In answer to a question that I put, Ms Onikoyi did not know why neither
    her daughter nor the Appellant mentioned  her  daughter's  sickle  cell
    trait in their statements or evidence.

The Respondent's Submissions

27. Mr Melvin relied upon his written submissions and  the  refusal  letter
    dated 10th September 2012.  It was accepted that the starting point for
    consideration of the best interests of the children  is  that  they  be
    brought up by their parents.  There was no evidence that  returning  to
    Nigeria would prejudice the  welfare  of  the  children.   It  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant is the primary carer of the  children.   It
    was not accepted that if the Appellant was required to leave the United
    Kingdom,  that  this  would  prejudice  the  children's  welfare.   The
    evidence indicated that the Appellant's partner has a large  number  of
    family members in the United Kingdom who could assist her if needed.

28. Mr Melvin accepted that because two of the three children are  British,
    it would not be reasonable to expect the family  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

29.  However  the  Appellant  should  still  be  required  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.  It would be proportionate, in view of his appalling
    immigration history, for him to be removed from the United Kingdom  and
    to make an application for entry  clearance  from  abroad.   Mr  Melvin
    submitted that it would be quite wrong for the  Appellant,  who  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules, to be allowed to circumvent those  rules
    by relying on Article 8.

The Appellant's Submissions

30.  Mr  Adeolu  submitted  that  it  was  clear  that  the  Appellant  had
    established a family life with his partner and children in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Adeolu submitted that the issue in this appeal related  to
    proportionality and I was asked to take into account the principles  in
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

31. I was asked to accept that the Appellant's partner was not in the  best
    of her health because she had  sickle  cell  trait  and  there  was  no
    foundation in Mr Melvin's comment that there were a  number  of  family
    members in the United Kingdom who could offer support.  I was  reminded
    that the Appellant's mother-in-law who had given evidence, was in full-
    time employment and lived in southeast London,  whereas  the  Appellant
    and his partner live in Kent.

32. Mr Adeolu referred to Zambrano, in support of his proposition  that  if
    children are citizens of the United Kingdom,  then  their  father,  the
    Appellant, should be given the opportunity to find  employment  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I was asked to accept that if the Appellant was forced
    to leave the United Kingdom, that would amount to constructive  removal
    of British children.

33. Mr Adeolu pointed out that neither the Appellant nor his  partner  have
    any savings either in the United Kingdom or in  Nigeria,  and  have  no
    home in Nigeria.  The  Appellant's  partner  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, and Mr Adeolu then went on to submit that  all  family  support
    was  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  conflicted  somewhat  with   his
    contention that Mr Melvin had no basis for making that submission.

34. Mr Adeolu referred me to paragraph 55(4) of Mahmood [2001]  1  WLR  840
    which states that Article 8 is likely to be violated by  the  expulsion
    of a member of a family that has been long established in  a  state  if
    the circumstances are such that it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    other members of the family to follow that member expelled.

35. I was also referred by Mr Adeolu to Noruwa Nigeria [2001]  UKIAT  00016
    at  paragraph  44  which  indicates  that  no  decision  affecting   an
    individual is lawful unless it is proportionate.  I was therefore asked
    to  find  that   in   this   case   the   Respondent's   decision   was
    disproportionate and therefore not in accordance with the law.

36. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

Discussion

37. I set out below paragraph 19 of the First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    which are preserved findings of fact;

    (i)  The Appellant has been living in the UK since 2002  since  he  was
         aged 25.  He has been here unlawfully for most of that period.

    (ii) The Appellant's partner has been in the UK since she was a  child.
         She is now aged 23 and she was only  granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on 14th September 2009.

    (iii)    The Appellant and his  partner  have  undergone  two  marriage
         ceremonies but they are not legally married in the eyes of Nigerian
         or UK law.

    (iv) The Appellant and his partner have established family life.   They
         live together with their two children.  The  only  British  citizen
         amongst them is the younger child.  The third child will also be  a
         British citizen.

    (v)  The older child attends nursery a few days a week and the  younger
         child has childcare, also a few days a week.

    (vi) The partner's mother and sisters live in the UK.  They are a close-
         knit family.

    (vii)    The Appellant has cousins in the UK.

    (viii)   The Appellant has siblings and other relatives in Nigeria.

    (ix) The Appellant's partner has relatives in Nigeria.

    (x)  The Appellant and his partner are not working at present.

    (xi) The Appellant has a BSc in multimedia and  technology  (gained  in
         the UK) and he has worked in the past.  One of his jobs  was  as  a
         security guard.

38. The Appellant did not seek to dispute his  immigration  history  either
    before the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.  That history  is
    set out at the beginning of this determination.

39. As the Immigration Rules introduced as from 9th July 2012  by  HC  194,
    designed to address Article 8 claims, do  not  apply  in  this  appeal,
    because the Appellant's application for leave to remain was made  prior
    to 9th July 2012, I am considering  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights, which states;

    (1)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence.

    (2)  There shall be no interference by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

40. When considering Article 8 the guidance given in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27
    indicates that the following questions should be considered;

    (i)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

    (ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

    (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

    (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

41. The decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that if  I  find  that
    family life exists which engages Article 8, then I  must  consider  the
    family lives of all members of the family, not only the Appellant.

42. In this case I am satisfied that the Appellant has established a family
    life with his partner and his three children.  I am also satisfied that
    he has established  a  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   I  am
    therefore satisfied that Article 8 is engaged, and that, leaving  aside
    the question of Article 8, the Respondent's decision is  in  accordance
    with the law.  It has been accepted that the Appellant  cannot  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.

43. I also conclude that the Respondent's decision is necessary, as  it  is
    important that a state  has  the  right  to  maintain  firm,  fair  and
    effective immigration control, and in this case that is  necessary  for
    the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
    or crime, and for the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others.



44. In my view, the main issue in this appeal is whether  the  Respondent's
    decision to remove the Appellant is proportionate.  The Respondent must
    prove that it is.

45. When considering proportionality it  was  confirmed  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 that the best interests of a  child  must  be  a  primary
    consideration.  The best interests of a child broadly means  the  well-
    being of a child, and the best  interests  must  be  considered  first,
    although those interests could be outweighed by the  cumulative  effect
    of other considerations.  It was confirmed that although nationality is
    not a "trump card" it is of particular importance in assessing the best
    interests of a child.

46. In MK India [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  confirmed  that
    consideration of the best interests of a child is an integral  part  of
    the Article 8 balancing exercise, and not something apart from it,  but
    it is a matter which has to be addressed first as a  distinct  inquiry.
    Factors relating to the public interest in the maintenance of effective
    immigration control must not form part of the  best  interests  of  the
    child consideration.

47. The Upper Tribunal confirmed in E-A Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC)  that
    the  correct  starting  point  in  considering  the  welfare  and  best
    interests of a young child would be that it is in the best interests of
    a child to live with and be brought up by his or her  parents,  subject
    to any very strong contra-indication.

48. In this appeal, the dates of birth of the children  are  5th  September
    2009, 17th April 2011,  and  10th  February  2013.   The  two  youngest
    children are British citizens.

49. My primary finding is that it would be in the  best  interests  of  the
    children to remain in the United Kingdom with both their parents.

50. As two of the children are British citizens I have to take into account
    the principles outlined in Ruiz Zambrano, which were considered by  the
    Upper Tribunal in Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied - Razgar)
    Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00247  (IAC)  and  Sanade  and  others  (British
    children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).  In Omotunde it
    was confirmed that where there is a proposed administrative removal  or
    deportation of one or both of his non-national parents, the welfare  of
    a child, particularly a child who is a British  citizen  is  a  primary
    consideration.  The second paragraph to the head note reads;

         "2.  National courts must engage with the question whether  removal
             of a particular parent will deprive [the child] of the genuine
             enjoyment of the substance of  the  rights  attaching  to  the
             status of European Union citizen."

51. I think it appropriate to set out paragraphs 5 and 6 of the  head  note
    to Sanade as follows;

    5.   Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano now makes it clear that where the child
         or indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a
         citizen of the European Union, as a matter of  EU  law  it  is  not
         possible to require the family as a unit to relocate outside of the
         European Union or for the Secretary of  State  to  submit  that  it
         would be reasonable for them to do so.

    6.   Where in the context of  Article  8  one  parent  ("the  remaining
         parent") of a British citizen child is also a British  citizen  (or
         cannot be removed as a family member or in their  own  right),  the
         removal of the other parent does not mean that either the child  or
         the remaining parent will be required to leave, thereby  infringing
         the Zambrano principle, see C-256/11 Murat  Dereci.   The  critical
         question is whether the child is  dependent  on  the  parent  being
         removed for the exercise  of  his  Union  right  of  residence  and
         whether removal of that  parent  will  deprive  the  child  of  the
         effective exercise of residence in the United Kingdom or  elsewhere
         in the Union.

52. In this appeal, I do not find that the children  are  solely  dependent
    upon the Appellant.  They are dependent on both  their  parents.   They
    are not however dependent upon the Appellant for the exercise of  their
    right to reside in the United Kingdom,  as  two  of  the  children  are
    British citizens, and therefore  have  the  right  to  reside  in  this
    country on that basis.  The issue that has to be decided is whether the
    Appellant's removal would deprive them of  the  effective  exercise  of
    residence in the United Kingdom.

53. I appreciate that the eldest child is not a British citizen, so when  I
    refer to the rights of residence of the children, I am referring to the
    two children who are British citizens, although it is not proposed that
    the children should be separated from each other.  As the jurisprudence
    referred to above indicates that it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    the family as a unit to relocate outside the  United  Kingdom,  if  the
    Appellant was removed to Nigeria, the three children would remain  with
    the Appellant's partner, their mother, who was granted indefinite leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on 14th September 2009.

54. The issue to be  decided  is  whether  the  Appellant's  removal  would
    deprive the children of the effective  exercise  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This would not be the case, in my view, if  there  was
    only a short period of separation, but it would be  the  case,  if  the
    Appellant,  when  returned  to  Nigeria,  was  unable  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules to enable him to return to this country.

55. The Respondent's position as outlined by Mr Melvin, is that it would be
    proportionate for the Appellant to be removed to Nigeria,  so  that  he
    could make an  application  for  entry  clearance  through  the  proper
    channels.  At first sight this is  readily  understandable,  given  the
    Appellant's immigration history.  In considering  this  issue,  I  have
    taken into account the principles outlined in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40,
    which were considered by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.  Elias  LJ
    summarised the principles in paragraph 30 which is set out below;

         "30.     In my judgment, the  effect  of  these  decisions  can  be
             summarised as follows;
             (a)  Where  an  applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry
                  clearance pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal  of  the
                  claim on the procedural ground that  the  policy  requires
                  that the applicant should have made the  application  from
                  his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute a
                  disruption of family or private life sufficient to  engage
                  Article  8,  particularly  where  children  are  adversely
                  affected.
             (b)  Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate
                  interference with family or private life to enforce such a
                  policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan  LJ,  there
                  is a sensible reason for doing so.
             (c)  Whether it  is  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  will
                  necessarily  be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified
                  certain potentially relevant factors in  Chikwamba.   They
                  will  include  the  prospective  length  and   degree   of
                  disruption of family life and whether other members of the
                  family are settled in the UK.
             (d)  Where Article 8 is  engaged  and  there  is  no  sensible
                  reason for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should
                  determine the Article 8 claim on its  substantive  merits,
                  having regard to  all  material  factors,  notwithstanding
                  that the applicant has no lawful entry clearance.
             (e)  It will be a very rare case where it is  appropriate  for
                  the  Court  of  Appeal,  having  concluded  that  a  lower
                  Tribunal has disproportionately interfered with Article  8
                  rights in enforcing the policy, to  make  the  substantive
                  Article 8 decision for  itself.   Chikwamba  was  such  an
                  exceptional case.  Logically the court would  have  to  be
                  satisfied that there is only  one  proper  answer  to  the
                  Article 8 question before subsisting its  own  finding  on
                  this factual question.
             (f)  Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter  the  way  the
                  courts should approach substantive  Article  8  issues  as
                  laid down in such well-known cases as Razgar and Huang.
             (g)  Although the cases do  not  say  this  in  terms,  in  my
                  judgment if the Secretary of State has no sensible  reason
                  for requiring the application to be  made  from  the  home
                  state, the fact that he has failed to  do  so  should  not
                  thereafter carry any weight in the substantive  Article  8
                  balancing exercise."

56. In this appeal, I have to consider the prospective length and degree of
    disruption of family life, taking into  account  that  the  Appellant's
    partner and two of his children are  lawfully  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant may have considerable difficulty in  satisfying
    the maintenance requirements of the Immigration Rules, to enable him to
    be granted entry clearance.   If  he  cannot  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules, then his partner would be left in the  United  Kingdom  to  look
    after three very young children, who  would  be  separated  from  their
    father.

57. At this stage I will deal with the claim made by the  partner's  mother
    that the Appellant's partner needs constant medical care.  I note  that
    neither the Appellant nor  his  partner,  made  any  mention  in  their
    witness  statements,  or  in  their  evidence  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal,  of  any  significant  health  problems   suffered   by   the
    Appellant's partner.  I have checked through  the  Appellant's  bundle,
    and note that it is recorded in the medical  records  relating  to  her
    pregnancy, that she does have sickle cell  trait.   There  has  however
    never been any suggestion, prior to her  mother's  evidence,  that  she
    needs constant or particular  medical  care,  and  there  has  been  no
    medical evidence produced.  I therefore do not accept the claim of  the
    partner's  mother,  that  constant  medical  care  is  required.    The
    Appellant's partner does have family members in the United Kingdom  who
    may be able to assist her, in the absence of  the  Appellant,  although
    there is no evidence that those family members live close to her, as  I
    accept that her mother and her sisters live in London, while she  lives
    in Kent.

58. In considering the proportionality  balancing  exercise,  I  take  into
    account that the Appellant and his partner both wish  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom with their children.  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    length of time that they have lived here, and also taken  into  account
    the Appellant's immigration history, which has involved him overstaying
    and  working  illegally,  and  absconding  and  failing  to  report  as
    directed.  He has made numerous applications in an attempt to remain in
    the United Kingdom, all of which have failed, yet he  has  remained  in
    this country.

59. If the Appellant did not have children, the result of this appeal would
    be clear cut, and he would be removed to Nigeria.  That however is  not
    the position, and I am faced with a situation in which if the Appellant
    is removed to Nigeria, and he cannot satisfy the Immigration  Rules  in
    order to return, then his family will be separated, or his partner  and
    children would be forced to leave the United Kingdom and  join  him  in
    Nigeria.  As two of those children are British citizens, this could not
    be regarded  as  reasonable.   The  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  an
    appalling immigration history has to be taken into account, but  it  is
    also the case that the Appellant in  ZH  (Tanzania)  had  an  appalling
    immigration history, and on the  facts  of  that  case,  that  did  not
    outweigh the best interests of the children.

60.  When  considering  proportionality,  the  House  of  Lords  stated  in
    paragraph 20 of Huang [2007] UKHL 11;

         "20.     In an Article 8 case where this question is  reached,  the
             ultimate question for the Appellate Immigration  Authority  is
             whether  the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  or   remain,   in
             circumstances where the life of the family  cannot  reasonably
             be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking  full  account  of
             all  considerations  weighing  in  favour  of   the   refusal,
             prejudices the family  life  of  the  applicant  in  a  manner
             sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the  fundamental
             right protected by Article 8.  If the answer to this  question
             is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the authority must
             so decide."

61. As I find that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's
    British children to leave the United Kingdom and travel to Nigeria, and
    I do not find  that  if  the  Appellant  was  removed,  the  period  of
    separation would be short, and it is  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to be brought up by both  parents,  I  conclude,  despite  the
    Appellant's  appalling  immigration  history,  that  the   Respondent's
    decision to remove him would be disproportionate.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and was set aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision.   The
appeal is allowed on human rights grounds in relation to Article  8  of  the
1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request for anonymity and the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed   M A Hall                       Dated 25th June 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.






Signed   M A Hall                       Dated 25th June 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
