
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN/DH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                          upper tribunal Judge gray


                                   Between

                                 avon visage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel instructed by Fletcher Dervish &
Co
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of South  Africa  born  on  3rd  August
    1984.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 7th March 2003 when  he
    was given leave to enter as a working holidaymaker until  17th  January
    2005.  The Appellant subsequently applied unsuccessfully for  leave  to
    remain as a student and then on human rights  grounds  based  upon  his
    relationship with a man named Jason Bennett.  They entered into a civil
    partnership on 17th October 2011, but on  11th  April  2014  the  human
    rights application was refused and the Respondent decided to remove the
    Appellant from the UK.  The Appellant appealed that decision,  and  his
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Jacobs-Jones  (the
    Judge) sitting at Richmond on 3rd December 2014.  He decided to dismiss
    the appeal for the reasons given in his Decision  dated  20th  December
    2014.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  23rd
    March 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. We must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the start of the hearing before the Judge, he refused an application
    on behalf of the Appellant to adjourn the hearing and amend the Grounds
    of Appeal to include the Appellant's fear of persecution on  return  to
    South Africa as a homosexual.  The Judge then found that the  Appellant
    did not qualify for leave to remain under Appendix FM of HC 395, and in
    particular paragraph EX.1(b), nor under paragraph 276ADE.  Finally, the
    Judge decided that this was not a case for granting the Appellant leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. At the hearing, Ms King argued that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming  to  those  conclusions.   She  referred  to  the   grounds   of
    application, but acknowledged that the decision in Singh v SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 had been promulgated subsequently.  She went  on  to  argue
    that the Judge should have exercised his discretion so as to allow  the
    proposed amendment to the grounds.  The Appellant  had  not  previously
    received proper advice concerning this aspect  of  the  case,  and  the
    Judge should not have relied upon the  expertise  of  the  Tribunal  to
    assume that the Appellant would come to no harm in South  Africa  as  a
    result of his sexual orientation.  Ms King then argued that as found by
    the Judge granting leave, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Jacobs-Jones
    had become muddled and inconsistent in dealing with the issues  in  the
    appeal.  The Judge should have made his own relevant findings of  fact,
    and there had been  no  careful  analysis  of  Appendix  FM.   Ms  King
    acknowledged that following the decision in Singh, Grounds 4 and  5  of
    the application were no longer arguable.  However the  Judge  had  been
    confused  concerning  the  application  of  Section  117B(4)  and   (5)
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Judge  was  also
    confused as to the Appellant's immigration history, and had  failed  to
    take into account the Appellant's employment history.   The  Judge  had
    also failed to attach any weight to  the  Respondent's  delay  of  five
    years in resolving the Appellant's immigration  status.   Finally,  the
    Judge had been at error  in  paragraph  28  of  the  Decision  to  make
    assumptions concerning the degree of the Appellant's disability without
    putting that matter to the Appellant at the hearing.

 5. In response, Ms Savage referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there were no errors  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  which
    accordingly should not be set aside.  The  Judge  had  dealt  with  the
    application to amend the Grounds  of  Appeal  in  accordance  with  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and the  relevant  Presidential  Guidance  and  had
    exercised his discretion in a way which was open to him.  The Judge had
    then considered the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights  both  within  and
    without the Immigration Rules in accordance with the decisions in Nagre
    v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Singh.  There had been no  error  of
    law in the Judge applying the decision in MM  (Lebanon)  and  Others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  The Judge had considered  all  the  relevant
    factors,  and  had  made  no  factual  errors.   There  had   been   no
    misunderstanding of the provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 6. As regards the Appellant's immigration history, Ms Savage  pointed  out
    that there was  no  evidence  of  any  misconduct  by  the  Appellant's
    previous representatives, or that an allegation of such had been put to
    them.  In any event, any failures by those  representatives  would  not
    have made  a  material  difference.   The  Judge  had  dealt  with  the
    employment record of the Appellant and the Sponsor at paragraph  26  of
    the Decision.  The Judge had taken account of the Respondent's delay in
    dealing with the Appellant's status, referring to it at  paragraphs  24
    and 25 of the Decision.  The Judge had considered the impact of such  a
    delay,  but  had  been  correct  to  conclude  that   the   Appellant's
    immigration status had always been precarious.  The  remaining  grounds
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the findings of the Judge.
     Considering the decision as a whole,  the  Judge  had  made  a  proper
    assessment of the Appellant's Article 8  case  and  had  not  made  any
    errors of law in deciding it.

 7. We agree with the submissions of Ms Savage.  The decision of the  Judge
    is not written in terms where his reasons are perfectly clear,  but  in
    our view it would not be correct to describe his  approach  as  muddled
    and in parts inconsistent, and there is sufficient clarity  for  us  to
    conclude that the Judge did not commit any error of law.  He came to  a
    decision which was open to him on  the  evidence,  which  evidence  the
    Judge analysed in order to explain his decision.   The  approach  which
    the Judge took to his factual findings in order to assess if there  had
    been a breach of the Appellant's Article 8  rights  was  in  accordance
    with recent jurisprudence and cannot be described as wrong in law.   It
    is to be remembered that according to what was written at paragraph  19
    of the Decision, at the hearing Ms Radford,  for  the  Appellant,  said
    that "This  appeal  was  a  straightforward  Article  8  appeal  to  be
    considered outside of the Immigration Rules".   Indeed,  it  has  never
    been argued that the Appellant qualifies for leave to remain under  the
    Immigration  Rules  either  on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds   or
    otherwise.

 8. We are satisfied that the Judge  carried  out  the  balancing  exercise
    necessary for any assessment of proportionality.   The  Judge  assessed
    the weight to be attached to the public interest  taking  into  account
    the factors mentioned in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  The Judge  then
    considered those factors in favour of the Appellant, and gave a  cogent
    reason for his finding that the Appellant's health  was  not  a  factor
    which carried much weight.  The Judge was entitled to conclude that the
    public interest carried most weight.  On the evidence before the Judge,
    that was a finding that was not perverse.  The Appellant may not  agree
    with that finding, but this does not amount to an  error  of  law.   In
    reaching his conclusion, the Judge dealt with the issue of delay and it
    was a matter for him what weight he attached to this factor.

 9. As regards the Judge's refusal to adjourn  the  hearing  and  allow  an
    amendment to the Grounds of Appeal, the Judge exercised his  discretion
    and made his decision in accordance with the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
    and the Presidential Guidance as  he  stated  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    Decision, and as his decision was not perverse, it cannot  be  said  to
    include an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.  The  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and we  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

