
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20862/2014
                                                               IA/20863/2014
                                                               IA/20864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 9th July 2015                     |
|Prepared 17 June 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr O V
                                   Mrs O V
                                 Master V V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms J Norman, Counsel instructed by Sterling Law
Associates LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondents are referred to as the Claimants.

2.   The Claimants, Ukrainian nationals born respectively on 19 March  1981,
    10 March 1983 and 12 May 2003, appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decisions to make removal directions following the service  of  a  form
    IS.151A and a decision to refuse leave to remain  based  upon  a  human
    rights based claim.

3.   Their  appeals  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clough  (the
    judge), who on 11  February  2015  allowed  their  appeals  based  upon
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  In somewhat confused terms it appeared that the
    judge was allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  but  from
    reading of the decision [D] and the notice of  decision  itself  it  is
    clear that he rejected  the  appeals  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules in respect of each of the Claimants.

4.   The challenge by the Secretary of  State  was  made  on  four  grounds.
    Their application was considered by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth, who stated:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent  of
         the consideration of the application of the  criteria  set  out  in
         Section 117."

    This appears to be intended to be a reference to Sections 117A and 117B
    of the Immigration Act 2014 amending the NIAA 2002.

5.   The judge in  granting  permission  made  no  reference  whatsoever  to
    grounds 1, 2 and 3 raised by the Secretary of State and much  time  was
    necessarily taken trying to sort out whether or not by  implication  it
    was intended those grounds were regarded as arguable  or  alternatively
    that notwithstanding a complete want  of  reference  to  it  they  were
    unarguable.  It is extremely difficult to infer any  reason  why  those
    grounds could be said to be unarguable.  It was unhelpful for the judge
    to have omitted reference to  clearly  material  grounds  of  challenge
    whatever their outcome might have been.

6.   Having heard the parties' submissions on it and  Mr  Nath  agreeing  so
    far as the Secretary of State was concerned that it was open to  me  to
    do so, I considered the application for permission sitting as a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and concluded that the grounds should  be  enlarged
    to include grounds 1 and 3 as originally drafted.  The submissions were
    then made with reference to grounds 1, 3 and 4.

7.   Having heard  the  parties'  submissions  which  the  brevity  of  this
    decision is  not  intended  to  make  light  of  the  considered  views
    expressed I was satisfied that the judge provided adequate  reasons  in
    law and sufficient reasons on the findings of fact made to sustain  the
    decision he ultimately reached.  It certainly could be argued that more
    extensive reasons to justify the conclusions he reached in relation  to
    the third Claimant would have been not only helpful but left the person
    settling the grounds on behalf of the Secretary of State  in  a  better
    informed position as to the judge's reasoning.

8.   It seemed to me that I should not interfere with the  judge's  findings
    of fact made having heard the Claimants' evidence and  he  also  having
    had the benefit of an expert report  from  Dr  Olga  Volosova.   Having
    carefully considered her report, not least based upon her experience as
    a teacher for six and a half years in the Ukraine, in higher  education
    before coming to the UK and her knowledge of school teaching systems in
    the Ukraine the judge was entitled to give weight to it.  She had  also
    formed a view on the third Claimant's language and writing  skills  and
    what that might have in  terms  of  significance  of  enabling  him  to
    integrate into the Ukrainian education system.  The judge made findings
    on those matters at [D] paragraphs 7, 8, 9 to 12 and ultimately on  the
    principal issue under Article 8 of the ECHR [D] paragraphs 14  and  15.
    I do not suggest that the reasons given could not  have  been  enlarged
    and improved upon in the way they are expressed.  Be that as it may  it
    is not for me to interfere with and rewrite decisions simply because  I
    might have reached the same or a different decision and/or expressed it
    with fuller reasons.  I agree with Mr Nath that the reasoning is  poor.
    However, it does not seem to  me  that  another  Tribunal  would  on  a
    reading of these evidence have been likely to have reached a  different
    decision than the one that was reached.  It may be said  by  comparison
    with other cases that these Claimants have done significantly better in
    the UK than other Claimants have done in other cases but  the  exercise
    is not one of a comparison between different cases; where  plainly  the
    factual context  is  often  materially  different;  or  with  different
    emphasis or possibly even different merits.  For  these  reasons  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the Original Tribunal made no  material  error
    of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

An anonymity order was made which is to be continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimants and to the Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 7 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

