
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20664/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Appeal decided on the papers         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 13 January 2017                   |On 13 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                           Romario Antonio Melhado
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Romario Antonio Melhado, date of  birth  17.2.96,  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cassel promulgated 3.6.16, dismissing on all grounds his appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his  application  made
    on 12.2.14 for indefinite leave to remain (ILR) on human rights article
    8 ECHR private and family life grounds.  The Judge heard the appeal  on
    16.5.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    30.11.16.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Andrew noted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge appears to have proceeded under the misapprehension
    that there was a deportation order and that the appeal was against  the
    decision to make such an order. There was no  proper  consideration  of
    section 55 in relation to the appellant's child and impact  of  removal
    of the appellant. Further, there was  no  consideration  under  section
    117B of the 2002 Act as to whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    child, a British citizen, to leave the UK to relocate to Jamaica.

 5. The Rule 24 reply of the Secretary of State, dated 30.12.16,  does  not
    oppose the appeal and accepts that the First-tier Tribunal  misdirected
    itself as to law, proceeding on the basis that the appeal  was  against
    an order to deport the appellant under section 32  of  the  UKBA  2007,
    when in fact no such order had been made.

 6. The Secretary of State invites the Upper Tribunal to remit  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal with a direction that it be heard de novo by
    a different judge.

 7. Following receipt of the Rule 24 reply, the appellant's representatives
    wrote to the Upper Tribunal on  11.1.17,  inviting  the  matter  to  be
    placed before an Upper Tribunal Judge and for the listed error  of  law
    hearing of 13.1.17 to be vacated.

 8. In the light of the correspondence, and on the instructions of an Upper
    Tribunal Judge, the Upper Tribunal directed that the appeal before  the
    Upper Tribunal would be dealt with on the papers on  13.1.17  and  that
    the parties need not attend the hearing.

 9. Thus the matter came before me on 13.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

10. It is clear and I am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    proceeded on an entire misunderstanding of the nature of  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State under appeal. There was no deportation  order
    and consideration of the appeal under the  Rules  and  statute  law  in
    relation to deportation was a manifest error of law.

11. The other points made in the grounds of application for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and in the grant of  permission  are  also
    well made.

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

13. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Consequential Directions

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

16. The ELH is 2 hours;

17. The appeal is to be heard and decided afresh, de novo, with no findings
    of fact preserved;

18. No interpreter is required;

19. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Cassel;

20. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

21. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

