


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20756/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 1 October 2013                           |On : 2 October 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              celestine ezeani
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Medhurst, instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Following a grant of permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   decision of 15 June  2012  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a  permanent
   residence card under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
   2006 ("the EEA Regulations"), it was found, at an error of law hearing on
   27 March 2013, that  the  Tribunal  had  made  errors  of  law  in  their
   decision. The decision was accordingly set aside and directions made  for
   it to be re-made.

2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in early 1999  and  was  granted
   limited leave to enter, but overstayed. He married a French  national  on
   26 March 2003 and on 17 June 2003 he was issued with a residence document
   as the spouse of an  EEA  national.  On  15  June  2008  he  applied  for
   permanent residence but his application was refused on 12  February  2010
   and his appeal against that decision was dismissed in  October  2010.  In
   the meantime, he was divorced from his wife, the divorce being  finalised
   on 17 June  2010.  On  14  December  2011  he  re-applied  for  permanent
   residence.

3. The appellant's application was refused on 15 June 2012 on the  basis  of
   the findings of the immigration judge  in  his  previous  appeal  to  the
   effect that he had failed to demonstrate that his EEA  sponsor  had  been
   exercising Treaty rights at the time of the  divorce  in  June  2010,  in
   particular given the indication in his representative's letter of 10 June
   2008 that she  had  left  the  United  Kingdom  on  15  April  2006.  The
   respondent noted that  the  appellant  had  since  provided  letters  and
   certificates  for  his  EEA  spouse's  educational   qualifications   but
   considered that he had failed to explain why he  had  not  produced  such
   information previously and why he had confirmed to the immigration  judge
   at his previous appeal that he had no idea what his spouse was  doing  at
   that time. The respondent noted further that the appellant  was  required
   to provide evidence that the  EEA  national  had  comprehensive  sickness
   insurance (CSI) in place for the duration of the time spent as a  student
   but had failed to do so. Furthermore,  two  of  the  colleges  for  which
   certificates  had  been  provided  had  had  their  accreditation  status
   suspended in 2009. The respondent was therefore not  satisfied  that  the
   EEA sponsor was exercising Treaty rights as a student for the  period  up
   to and including the date of  the  divorce  proceeding.  Accordingly  the
   appellant had failed to provide evidence that he had retained a right  of
   residence in the United Kingdom and the respondent refused to  issue  him
   with the confirmation he sought with reference to regulation 10(5) of the
   EEA Regulations.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  on
   13 December 2012 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips.

5. In her determination promulgated on  31  December  2012,  Judge  Phillips
   recorded the appellant's evidence. She noted his claim that his ex-spouse
   had travelled outside the  United  Kingdom  in  April  2006  following  a
   misunderstanding, but had returned a month later and  had  resumed  their
   relationship until she left him in  April  2007.  He  had  made  a  fresh
   application in November 2010, not November 2011,  and  once  he  received
   acknowledgement of that application he was able to secure employment as a
   mental health nurse which he had been unable to do previously owing to  a
   lack of evidence of entitlement to work and despite having  qualified  as
   such in 2010. He also continued  in  his  previous  work  as  a  security
   officer. He claimed that his  ex-spouse  had  been  working  as  well  as
   studying and she had provided him with documentary evidence including her
   tax returns for 2010  to  2011.  He  had  not  previously  mentioned  her
   employment as it was not all official and the hairdressing business  that
   she had was cash-based. She was working as a hairdresser at the  time  of
   the divorce.

6. Judge Phillips did not accept the appellant's evidence in regard  to  his
   ex-spouse's employment and  studies  and  considered  that  his  previous
   claim, that he did not know what she was doing, was inconsistent with his
   current account of her employment and studies. The judge did  not  accept
   that the evidence produced demonstrated that  the  appellant's  ex-spouse
   was exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom prior  to  or  at  the
   time of the divorce. Neither did she accept that there  was  satisfactory
   evidence of the appellant's own employment or self-employment at the time
   of the hearing or from 5 April 2012. She found  that  the  appellant  was
   unable to satisfy the requirements of regulation 10(5).  She  also  found
   that the respondent's decision was not in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR
   and she accordingly dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations and on
   human rights grounds.

7. Permission to appeal was sought on various grounds,  but  in  essence  on
   the basis that the judge had made various errors in the assessment of the
   evidence and had set the burden of proof too high. Permission was granted
   on all grounds relating to the EEA Regulations.

8. At a hearing on 27 March 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  found  that
   the judge had erred by finding that there was  an  inconsistency  in  the
   appellant's evidence as to his knowledge of the whereabouts  of  his  ex-
   spouse and his contact with her and  that  in  fact  there  was  no  such
   inconsistency. He concluded on that basis that the determination  had  to
   be set aside in its entirety and the decision re-made with  none  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal's findings preserved. He directed the  respondent  to
   make enquiries about the grant of a residence permit to  the  appellant's
   ex-spouse and to request from HMRC and DWE any information  demonstrating
   whether she was exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

Appeal hearing and submissions

9. The appeal then came before me following a Transfer Order.  I  sought  to
   clarify the issues with the parties.

10. Ms Vidyadharan advised me that she did not have any written response  to
   the Tribunal's directions, but she was able to  confirm,  from  enquiries
   made, that the appellant's EEA national ex-spouse was working at the time
   of the divorce and was exercising Treaty rights. However she did not have
   comprehensive medical insurance during the  period  of  her  studies.  Mr
   Medhurst submitted that that confirmation must have arisen as a result of
   the tax returns which appeared at pages  77  to  86  of  the  appellant's
   appeal bundle and which therefore confirmed employment since 1  May  2010
   (page 83). That was not disputed by Ms  Vidyadharan,  who  also  accepted
   that the appellant and his ex-spouse had been married for at least  three
   years prior to the date of termination of the marriage and had resided in
   the United Kingdom for at  least  one  year  during  their  marriage,  as
   required  by  regulation  10(5)(d).  She  therefore  accepted  that   the
   appellant  had  retained  the  right  of  residence  provided  he   could
   demonstrate that he was in employment himself. She accepted further that,
   in accordance with regulation 14, he would not lose that  retained  right
   unless he ceased employment and that that was the only basis  upon  which
   he could lose that right. However she did not accept  that  the  evidence
   demonstrated that he was employed or that he had been employed throughout
   the period since his divorce.

11. Accordingly, it was established that the only contentious issue  in  the
   appeal was the appellant's status subsequent to his divorce  and  at  the
   current time. I heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  submissions
   from the parties in that regard.

12. The appellant said that at the time of his divorce he was working  as  a
   security officer for Securitas, formerly Reliance. He had  been  employed
   as such since December 2006 and whilst employed had qualified as a mental
   health nurse in 2010. He was not able at that time to work  as  a  mental
   health nurse because he required confirmation from the Home  Office  that
   he was able to work, which he did not receive until February  2012.  Once
   he received that confirmation he found employment with  No.1  Recruitment
   and had been working through them since  then,  but  on  a  self-employed
   basis. He had set up his own company, Chice Limited, and was paid by No 1
   Recruitment in the name of his company, as shown by his salary slips.  He
   still did some shifts for Securitas, although he  was  on  zero  contract
   hours, and they would call him now and again to do some work for them. He
   last worked for them two days ago, in Marks & Spencer.  He  had  produced
   his P60s for his employment with Securitas and he had his tax return  for
   2012 to 2013 for his self-employment.  The  appellant  produced  his  tax
   return together with  a  financial  statement  which  he  said  had  been
   prepared by his accountants, although he had no documentary  evidence  to
   confirm that. The financial  statement  confirmed  that  he  had  no  tax
   liability as yet for his company.

13.  Ms Vidyadharan submitted that the appellant  had  failed  to  discharge
   the burden of proof to demonstrate that he had been employed since  2006.
   However, when  reminded  that  the  appellant  had  only  to  demonstrate
   employment since the date of his divorce and when referred  to  the  P60s
   for the years 2011 and 2012, she  accepted  that  he  had  been  employed
   throughout that period. She did not accept that  there  was  satisfactory
   evidence of his claimed self-employment from February 2012 and considered
   the evidence in that regard to be vague, noting in particular that  there
   was no evidence to confirm his claim not to be liable for tax.

14. Mr Medhurst pointed to the  appellant's  P60s,  salary  slips  and  bank
   statements  showing  his  income  throughout  the  relevant  period.   He
   submitted that the payslips showed payments made to Chice Limited,  which
   was in fact the appellant, as it was his  company.  The  bank  statements
   showed payments from LTSB CF T/A Cashfr, which  were  the  payments  made
   from No. 1 Recruitment, as well as  some  payments  from  Securicor.  The
   regulations did not require that the appellant paid tax, just that he was
   self-employed. In any event the appellant had explained why  he  was  not
   yet required to make any tax payments.

15. Mr Medhurst sought a decision  in  regard  to  regulation  10(5)  before
   deciding  whether  or  not  to  proceed  with  the  matter  of  permanent
   residence, which he acknowledged would be more difficult to establish.  I
   indicated that I was minded to allow the appeal on that limited basis and
   accordingly, having taken further instructions  from  the  appellant,  he
   decided not to pursue the grounds relating to permanent residence.

Consideration and findings

16. Following the concessions made  by  Ms  Vidyadharan  on  behalf  of  the
   respondent in regard to regulation 10(5)(b) and (d)(i), as stated  above,
   the only issue before me  is  the  appellant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
   condition in paragraph (6), as required under regulation  10(5)(c).  That
   condition is that he would, if he were an EEA national, be  a  worker,  a
   self-employed person or a self-sufficient person under regulation 6.

17. In order to meet the requirements  of  regulation  10(6)  the  appellant
   therefore needs to establish his status since the date of his divorce  on
   17 June 2010. It is his case that he has been employed by Securitas since
   that time (and since December 2006) and that claim is indeed supported by
   a letter of confirmation from Securitas at  page  111,  salary  slips  at
   pages 38 to 51 and P60s at pages 21 to 24 and 92, from which there can be
   little doubt that he was employed by that company until  at  least  April
   2012. I accept that he has continued to undertake some limited work since
   that time, as  evidenced  by  entries  in  his  bank  statements  and  as
   confirmed by his own oral evidence.

18. Ms Vidyadharan's concern  arose  not  so  much  from  that  evidence  of
   employment, but from the evidence of self-employment  thereafter  and  at
   the current time, which she considered to  be  somewhat  vague.  However,
   having had regard to  the  documentary  evidence,  the  appellant's  oral
   evidence and the explanations from the appellant and  Mr  Medhurst  about
   the methods of payments made to him in the  name  of  his  company  Chice
   Limited and the various agencies involved in those payments, I find  that
   he has demonstrated that he has been involved in work as a mental  health
   nurse, on a self-employed basis, since February 2012. That employment  is
   confirmed in the letter from No.1 Recruitment at page 112 of  the  appeal
   bundle, the performance review at pages 113 and 114 and the statement  at
   page 115, the payslips at pages  116  to  136  and  the  bank  statements
   showing corresponding deposits at pages 149 to 156. I note  the  concerns
   expressed in regard to the lack of deductions for tax, but I have had the
   benefit of what I consider to be a clear and reasonable explanation  from
   the appellant and Mr Medhurst, supported by the appellant's  tax  returns
   and financial statement, albeit not accompanied  by  correspondence  from
   his accountants. I am satisfied, on the basis of that evidence, that  the
   appellant has met the burden  of  proving  his  ability  to  satisfy  the
   condition  in  regulation  10(6)(a),  for  the  purposes  of   regulation
   10(5)(c).

19. In all the circumstances I find that the appellant is able to  meet  the
   requirements of regulation 10 and is thus entitled to a  continued  right
   of residence under the  EEA  Regulations  as  a  family  member  who  has
   retained the right of residence. I would allow the appeal on that basis.

20. Mr Medhurst properly acknowledged that the appellant would  be  in  some
   difficulty demonstrating that he had resided in  the  United  Kingdom  in
   accordance with the regulations for  five  years,  for  the  purposes  of
   entitlement to a permanent right of residence. That was particularly  so,
   in the light of his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, as  recorded
   at paragraphs 36 and 64, in regard to his lack of knowledge about his ex-
   spouse and the lack of documentary evidence of her  employment  prior  to
   May 2010. He would also have to overcome the matter  of  the  requirement
   for comprehensive sickness insurance during  her  periods  of  study,  in
   particular in light of the Court of Appeal  judgement  in  Lekpo-Bozua  v
   London Borough of Hackney & Ors [2010] EWCA Civ 909. In the circumstances
   he decided not to pursue the application for permanent  residence  and  I
   have therefore not gone on to consider the matter further.

DECISION

21. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of law. I  re-make
   the  decision  by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal   under   the   EEA
   Regulations, with specific reference to regulation 10(5).





                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
