
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20206/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 1st August 2013                            |On 18th September 2013       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                 TOME PETER
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Kaur of Andrew Williams Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms R Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against the determination of a panel of the First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sarsfield  and
        Ms V Street (hereinafter referred to as  'the  Panel')  who,  in  a
        determination promulgated on  16th  November  2012,  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
        made on 7th September 2012 not to revoke a deportation  order  made
        against him. The appellant was born on the 31st December 1974.


     2. The chronology set out in paragraph 6 of the Panel's  determination
        shows the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 2nd June  2002
        and claimed asylum. This was refused on 7th November 2002.  On 27th
        July 2007 he was convicted of  two  offences  of  possessing  false
        documents for which he received  a  14  month  custodial  sentence.
        Notice of intention to deport was served on 13th  March  2008.  The
        appellant became appeal rights exhausted  on  28th  September  2008
        following refusal of a High  Court  application  to  challenge  the
        decision relating to the notice  to  deport  him  from  the  United
        Kingdom.  A request to revoke the deportation order was refused  on
        5th May 2009 and his appeal dismissed on 18th September 2009.  High
        Court  review  was  refused  on   12th   November   2010.   Further
        representations for leave to remain in the UK  were  made  on  21st
        July  2010  and  refused  on  12th  November  2010  and  a  further
        application for leave to remain was refused on 17th October 2011.


     3. The Panel set out their findings at paragraphs 14  and  15  of  the
        determination in the following terms:


     14.  We find the following:


              (a)      The appellant has been convicted of,  and  imprisoned
   for, serious                 offences; although the judge did  not  order
   deportation he indicated it               remained a possibility.
              (b)      We accept that the motivation for the  crime  was  to
   provide for his                  then family, however, his crime involves
   deception of the UK                       authorities.
              (c)      He has been found to be Nigerian;  his  claim  to  be
   from Sierra Leone                is a fabrication and it has  been  found
   that he has been dishonest                about his nationality.
              (d)      His account of events in Sierra Leone was found to be
   not credible.
              (e)      His account of  obtaining  a  birth  certificate  was
   found to be not                       credible and it was found  that  he
   had deliberately  obtained  it  and                    tendered  a  false
   document     in     the     hope      of      convincing      the      UK
   authorities that he was from Sierra Leone - another deception.
              (f)      Two Tribunals have found he is not credible  and  has
   fabricated an                account and at  the  last  had  deliberately
   tried to mislead the                      Tribunal on one point.
              (g)      After failing to obtain asylum he failed to leave the
   UK.
              (h)      We conclude that the appellant cannot be regarded  as
   a credible                   individual.


     15.  We also find the following:


              (a)      The appellant last had contact with the children born
   to Ms Milnes in                  October 2011. It is accepted that  there
   is no current family life with                Ms Milnes. We  notice  that
   the only attempt to contact that family was                 by  obtaining
   advice from the Citizens Advice  Bureau  and  he  has                done
   nothing  more.  We  are  of  the  view  that  there  is  no  family  life
   with those children or Ms Milnes.
              (b) We note  that  no  proceedings  have  been  undertaken  in
   relation to                  access to those children, nor  legal  advice
   sought
              (c) He has married Ms Duerell, a Ghanaian who  has  indefinite
   leave to                remain in the UK and they  have  a  daughter;  we
   accept that there is a                family and private life with them.
               (d)       Ms  Durell  accepts  that  she  has  known  of  the
   appellant's precarious                status for  sometime,  long  before
   they married.
              (e)      We note that neither party has any  other  family  in
   the UK.
              (f)      The appellant claims to have no  family  in  Nigeria,
   but  given  the                 nationality   finding,   the   deception,
   fabrication and  lack  of  credibility                 found,  we  cannot
   accept this.


     4. The Panel went on to conclude that the appellant could not meet the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  276ADE  before  turning
        their mind to paragraph 390 which is the correct paragraph relating
        to the issues to be considered when dealing with  revocation  of  a
        deportation order.  The Panel concluded that the  mother's  of  the
        various children are able to care for them in the United Kingdom if
        the appellant is removed although, given the age  of  the  daughter
        born as a result of the appellant's relationship with Ms Durell, it
        was not considered unreasonable for them to leave the UK  with  the
        appellant as she would be able to adapt to life abroad  should  her
        mother choose to accompany the appellant [18]. The Panel  found  no
        insurmountable obstacles to Ms Durell living outside the UK as  she
        is not a British citizen and had only lived here nine  years,  only
        two of which were with leave. She is Ghanaian  and  speaks  English
        which could assist  her  in  Nigeria.  Having  considered  all  the
        relevant facts the Panel concluded that the appellant was not  able
        to succeed under the Immigration Rules.


     5. In relation to Article 8 ECHR the Panel concluded  that  the  issue
        was one of proportionality [28]. Having  considered  the  competing
        interests,  including  the  family  dynamics  and  the  appellant's
        medical condition, it was found that the high threshold of  Article
        3 had not been reached on medical grounds and that the decision  is
        proportionate to the legitimate aim relied  upon  by  Secretary  of
        State.


     6. Permission to appeal was granted by another  judge  the  First-tier
        Tribunal on 30th November 2012 and an Initial hearing conducted  by
        Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts who, on  13th  March  2013,  concluded
        that the determination contained an error of law on the basis  that
        her analysis of the  determination  did  not  demonstrate  adequate
        reasoning showing essential findings of why it would be  reasonable
        to expect the appellant's wife and child to dispose of  their  life
        in the United Kingdom and settled in  a  country  where  they  have
        never lived. It is also said there was no analysis of  whether  the
        wife and child will be allowed to enter Nigeria.



The submissions



     7. On behalf the Secretary of State it was accepted that the appellant
        has established private and family life in the United  Kingdom.  It
        was accepted that the appellant's  wife,  the  child's  mother,  is
        currently in employment although she is able to care for the child.
        It was accepted there have been changes over the years in  relation
        to the appellant's private and family life since the signing of the
        deportation order and that his wife obtained lawful status in  2010
        and that they  married  and  have  a  child.  It  is  accepted  the
        appellant is liable to be removed  as  a  result  of  his  criminal
        conduct and it was submitted the relevant issue  was  whether  this
        family should be split or whether the wife should  be  required  to
        make a choice. There was nothing in the evidence to show  that  the
        wife as a Ghanaian national would not be  admitted  to  Nigeria  or
        that the family could not  established  themselves  in  Nigeria  or
        elsewhere.  Although  the  child  is  a  British  national  she  is
        dependent on her  mother  and  could  enjoy  the  benefits  of  her
        nationality at a later date.  The further application for leave  to
        remain was refused in 2009.


     8. On behalf of the appellant it was argued that the offences were not
        serious criminal offences and the age of them needed  to  be  taken
        into account. The motivation had been considered by the  First-tier
        Panel and it was submitted  there  is  no  strong  public  interest
        objection as the offence was not at the higher end of the scale for
        that particular offence or offending in general.  It was  submitted
        that since 2007 the appellant has not offended  and  has  expressed
        remorse. He is now a  family  man  with  values.  His  wife  became
        pregnant and they decided  to  get  married  at  which  point  they
        cohabitated. It was submitted that no  attempt  had  been  made  to
        deport the appellant since 2008 notwithstanding his complying  with
        Home Office requests which meant they had the opportunity to detain
        and deport him.


     9. The current application was made in 2012 and the public interest in
        the case was not such that  it  was  imperative  the  appellant  be
        removed as he should not be deemed to be a threat to society.


    10. It was also submitted on his behalf that it was not  reasonable  to
        expect the wife and their child to leave the United Kingdom as  the
        child had never  left  this  country  or  visited  Africa  and  the
        appellant's wife had very little contact with  that  continent.  It
        was also said to be unfair to expect a British national  to  leave,
        especially as she is  also  a  European  national,  and  there  was
        evidence of strong family and private life in the  United  Kingdom.
        It was further submitted that it was not proportionate to split the
        family due to the appellant's relationship with his daughter who is
        dependent upon her father; they have a good  relationship  and  the
        father is the primary carer. If refused the family will be  divided
        with minimal chances of return so there will be a  loss  of  family
        life. It is accepted the appellant has a poor  immigration  history
        and  that  credibility  issues  arose  in  the  determination,  but
        notwithstanding this fact, family life has been found to exist.  It
        is submitted  that  when  balancing  the  appellant's  family  life
        against the offence committed, the family life outweighs  the  need
        to remove him indicating that the balance should be in his favour.







Discussion



    11. It was accepted at the outset that the issue upon  which  a  ruling
        was required relates to the  proportionality  of  the  decision  by
        reference to Article 8 ECHR only.


    12. The only relevant child, born on  the  25th  November  2011,  is  a
        British national as a result of the fact her mother has  indefinite
        leave to remain and is an EU citizen as a result.  Following Sanade
        [2012] UKUT 00048 it is accepted as a matter of EU law that  it  is
        not possible to require the family as a unit  to  relocate  outside
        the European Union if to so would deprive that  individual  of  the
        right to enjoy benefits accruing to  them  as  a  result  of  their
        status as European citizens.


    13. If the child remains in the United Kingdom a parent will also  need
        to remain although it is a preserved finding that the appellant  is
        not able to succeed under the Immigration Rules which must  include
        the finding that the mothers' of all the appellant's  children  are
        capable of caring for them and meeting their needs.  What  has  not
        been shown is that the appellant needs  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom as there is no one else  capable  of  meeting  the  child's
        needs.  I accept it is in the best interests of the child  to  grow
        up in a settled and stable family unit, if  at  all  possible,  but
        this is not  determinative  albeit  a  very  important  element  of
        paramount importance, as per the relevant case law.


    14. The fact the appellant is not able to succeed under the Rules is  a
        factor to be taken into account when considering the Article 8 ECHR
        issue but, again, his inability to do so is not determinative.  The
        Rules as currently drafted represent the view of the  Secretary  of
        State in relation to those individuals who should be  permitted  to
        remain in the United Kingdom and those who should not,  within  the
        States margin of appreciation,  and  the  appellant  is  unable  to
        fulfil such requirements.


    15. The appellant has been found to be dishonest in relation to  claims
        previously made, including those relating to his  own  nationality.
        The Panel in  the  clearest  terms  set  out  why  they  found  the
        appellant untruthful. His conduct does not assist  his  cause  when
        considering whether the balance should fall in his  favour  and  is
        one of the factors to be taken into account.


    16. The appellant is now married but it is clear that the marriage  was
        entered into at a time when both he and his wife were aware of  his
        precarious immigration status particularly in relation to the  fact
        that he was to be deported from  the  United  Kingdom.  A  previous
        appeal at Bradford on 9th September 2009 against the decision  made
        a late May 2009 to refuse to revoke the deportation shows  that  at
        that time he knew he was subject of a sign deportation order he had
        not successfully been able to challenge. This is  relevant  to  the
        weight to be given to this aspect of his claim.


    17. I accept that the appellant has not been removed  from  the  United
        Kingdom but delay in enforcing a deportation  decision  creates  no
        legitimate expectation that an individual will be granted leave  to
        remain in the United Kingdom or that the deportation order will  be
        revoked.  Any unexplained delay will, of course, give an individual
        time to prove they have remained  trouble-free  and  not  committed
        further offences.  In relation to this issue the  findings  of  the
        Panel that acts of deception have continued after the date  of  the
        offence, as demonstrated by the  adverse  finding  set  out  above,
        including deliberately attempting to mislead  an  appeal  tribunal,
        are a cause for concern. I accept and take into  account,  however,
        there is no evidence  the  appellant  has  been  charged  with  any
        further acts of criminality.


    18. Paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules states that  an  application
        for revocation of a deportation order will be considered  in  light
        of all the circumstances including:


              (i)      the grounds on which the order was made ;
              (ii)     any representations made in support of revocation ;
               (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
   maintenance of                        effective immigration control
               (iv)      the   interests   of   the   applicant,   including
   compassionate                         circumstances.


    19. The deportation order was made as a result of the  appellant's  use
        of false documents to  obtain  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom
        thereby circumventing immigration provisions relating to those  who
        have a lawful right to work.  When  sentencing  the  appellant  the
        Sentencing Judge noted that offences of this nature  are  extremely
        prevalent, such that the Court of Appeal has  given  guidance  when
        sentencing. The Sentencing Judge referred to "the  sheer  cheek  of
        it" in that the appellant used one  name,  leaves  and  returns  in
        another name.  Had he been  convicted  by  a  jury  he  would  have
        receive 21 months imprisonment but as  a  result  of  the  discount
        given  for  the  guilty  plea  he  was  sentenced  to   14   months
        imprisonment; being 10 months for the  first  count  and  4  months
        consecutive on the second count.


    20. This is not a simple offence and  although  submissions  were  made
        suggesting it was at  the  lower  end  of  the  scale  of  criminal
        offending, it is the type of offence that  can  do  great  harm  to
        society if individuals are  permitted  to  think  they  can  employ
        deception relating to their status and identity for the purposes of
        obtaining pecuniary benefit through deception.  It  excludes  those
        lawfully entitled to work  from  certain  sections  of  the  labour
        market and, as stated, enables those who have no legal right to  be
        in the United Kingdom or to work  in  this  country  to  circumvent
        immigration laws put in place precisely to regulate access  to  the
        labour market to those legally  entitled.   There  is  therefore  a
        strong deterrent element in making it clear  that  those  that  who
        choose to act in this way face a real risk of being  deported  from
        the United Kingdom if they have no legal right to remain.


    21. I set out above the submissions made in support of revocation based
        upon the fact the appellant has not reoffended and the  nature  his
        ties to the United Kingdom including his young daughter.  I  accept
        the appellant has not reoffended but note the fact it was  recently
        found he lacks credibility indicating that the use of deception  or
        acts of dishonesty is not something that the  Tribunal  can  accept
        there is no risk of re-occurring in the future. It appears  on  the
        facts that  the  appellant  is  a  resourceful  individual  who  is
        prepared to resort to acts of dishonesty if it suits  his  purposes
        to do so.


    22. The interests of the community are not going to be served by having
        a person in the United Kingdom who has no rights to remain here and
        who is a dishonest and deceitful individual. For  the  reasons  set
        out above  the  interests  of  the  community  are  not  served  by
        individuals using unlawful methods to secure access to  the  labour
        market to which they are not entitled, especially if it circumvents
        the  regulation  of  access  to  jobs  and  employment.   This   is
        particularly so at a  time  of  recession  when  jobs  are  not  as
        plentiful or accessible as they may have been in the  past.   Also,
        as stated above, there is a strong element to this  appeal  in  the
        Secretary of State's favour relating to the need not only  to  have
        but also to demonstrate strong and effective immigration  controls.
        In relation to the passage of time the  chronology  set  out  above
        shows  that  the  appellant  has  made  numerous  applications   in
        attempting to be permitted to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
        effect of the law is that if such applications are accepted, whilst
        they are being processed and whilst any resultant appeal  is  being
        considered,  the  appellant  cannot  be  removed  from  the  United
        Kingdom. It is therefore in  part  the  appellant's  insistence  on
        making numerous applications, none of which have been found to have
        merit, that are in part responsible for the fact he  has  not  been
        removed to the country of which it has  now  been  found  he  is  a
        national, Nigeria, and not Sierra Leone as he initially claimed  to
        be a national of. An individual claiming to be from a country which
        they have no right to enter or remain in will,  of  course,  create
        further delay in securing relevant travel documents  all  of  which
        contributes to the difficulties  for  the  Secretary  of  State  in
        effecting removal.


    23.  In  relation  to  the  interests  of  the   appellant,   including
        compassionate circumstances, these relate to his family life in the
        United Kingdom including this time with his  daughter.  It  is  not
        suggested that this is an appeal in which the family can reasonably
        be expected to go and live in Nigeria with the  appellant  although
        that is a matter for them. The fact the child is only one  year  of
        age means that the child's dependency and private life is currently
        internal, i.e. with one or both parents, and that as result of  the
        choices made by the appellant's wife working whilst  he  cares  for
        his daughter, I accept a bond will  have  developed  between  them.
        The child was, however, conceived and  born  at  a  time  when  the
        appellant and his wife knew he had no leave to remain and that  his
        immigration status was precarious.  This fact  cannot  be  ignored.
        Individuals must not think that if  they  have  no  status  getting
        married and conceiving  children  will  allow  them  to  circumvent
        immigration controls in every circumstance. It is contrary  to  the
        ability of the Secretary of State to  maintain  proper  immigration
        controls.


    24. There are number of elements in this appeal that stand in favour of
        the appellant being able to show that the strength  of  his  family
        and private life in the United  Kingdom  is  such  that  after  the
        passage of time he should be permitted to  remain.  But  there  are
        also strong arguments in favour of the Secretary of State  who  has
        given credible reasons in the refusal letter for why she  feels  it
        is inappropriate to revoke the deportation  order  at  this  stage,
        notwithstanding the  presence  of  family  members  in  the  United
        Kingdom. As with any case involving a family and  children  I  have
        taken great care to ensure that all aspects  of  the  evidence  are
        considered with the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny.  Having
        done so I conclude that there is still a very  strong  argument  in
        favour of the need for the appellant to be removed from the  United
        Kingdom based upon the legitimate aim relied upon by the  Secretary
        of State and the deterrent factor  relating  to  offences  of  this
        nature referred to above. The deportation order was  made  yet  the
        appellant has not left the United Kingdom. Is always open to him at
        some point in the future to make an application for revocation  and
        the Immigration Rules  make  provision  in  paragraph  391  if  his
        circumstances can be said to have  altered  sufficient  to  warrant
        revocation at some later date. This is not the case at this time.


Decision

    25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  found  to  have  materially
        erred in law and the decision set aside. I remake the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) has  no  application
   friend and in that he was made        and the grounds failed to establish
   any basis for such an order.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th September 2013
