
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20478/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th January 2014                            |On 20th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              SANA ULLAH ULLAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan of Marks & Marks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 12th May 1987.   He
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  which
    application was refused for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision
    dated 14th May 2013.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross
    on 8th October 2013.  He decided that the decision  of  the  Respondent
    was not in accordance with the law  and  allowed  the  appeal  to  that
    extent.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that  decision,  and  on
    10th December 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The application for leave to remain was refused because  the  Appellant
    failed to score sufficient points under Appendix A:  Attributes  of  HC
    395 as regards access to  funds;  funds  held  in  regulated  financial
    institutions; and funds disposable in the UK.   This  was  because  the
    Appellant  had  not  submitted  with  his  application   the   required
    documentary  evidence.   The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  That decision  has  not  been  challenged  in  this
    appeal.  However, the Judge found that the  Respondent's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law as the Respondent had not  operated  its
    Evidential Flexibility  Policy  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in
    Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC).  In particular,
    the Judge found that the Respondent should have made enquiries  of  the
    Appellant in respect of a defective NSC bank statement.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Tufan argued that the Judge had erred in  law  by  a
    wrong application of the Evidential Flexibility Policy.  The  Court  of
    Appeal in Rodriguez and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  2,  overturning
    the Upper Tribunal decision, now established the limitations  upon  the
    use of that Policy.

 5. In response, Mr Chohan accepted the arguments of Mr  Tufan  as  regards
    the application of the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  Rodriguez,  but
    argued that the Respondent  should  in  any  event  have  made  further
    enquiries under the provisions of paragraph 245AA of HC 395.

 6. I find that the decision of the Judge to allow the appeal to the extent
    of finding the decision of the Respondent not to be in accordance  with
    the law to contain an error on a point of law so that it should be  set
    aside.  There was consensus at the hearing that the Judge's application
    of the evidential  flexibility  policy  as  interpreted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Rodriguez was  in  error  of  law  as  established  by  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Rodriguez.  I  proceeded  to  remake
    the decision.

Remade Decision

 7. It is common ground that the application of the Appellant for leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) did not meet the various requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that in this respect the decision  of  the
    Judge was correct.  Mr Chohan has argued that it is possible to  review
    the  Respondent's  decision  further  by  applying  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 245AA of HC 395.  I do not agree with that  submission.   The
    deficiencies in the documents submitted by the Appellant are listed  in
    the Notice of Decision and are  such  that  they  are  not  capable  of
    rectification by any action taken under the provisions of  para  245AA.
    The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
