
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20144/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                            MATTHEW BRIAN PARKER
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pennington of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the basis of having United Kingdom Ancestry, and
         the decision requiring him to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  on  29
         January 2016. His appeal against the refusal of that was  dismissed
         by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brookfield  ("the  Judge")  following
         consideration of the papers on 5 August 2015.

      2. Curiously, the Judge allowed the appeal to a limited extent, namely
         for the Respondent to consider an application for an  extension  of
         his stay on the grounds of his United Kingdom Ancestry. This turned
         out to be irrelevant.

The grant of permission

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale granted permission to  appeal
         (20 December 2015) on the following ground. It is arguable that the
         Judge materially erred by preparing the decision on 5  August  2015
         which was before the deadline for  submission  of  evidence  on  14
         August 2015. In the intervening period the Appellant had  submitted
         the required English language  certificate,  that  being  the  only
         basis on which the application had been refused.

Respondent's position

      4. Mr Staunton  conceded  that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred  by
         determining the appeal prior to the time  period  allowed  for  the
         submission of evidence and accordingly the Judge's decision  should
         be set aside. He further conceded that the Appellant had  submitted
         evidence on 13 August 2015 of having passed  the  required  English
         language examination on 4 August 2015. As this was  not  a  "points
         based appeal" the English language certificate could be considered.
          He conceded that the appeal should be allowed.

Discussion

      5. Given the helpful concessions made by Mr Staunton, I did  not  need
         to hear from Ms Pennington.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remake the decision.

    I allow the appeal.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 February 2016
