
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20523/2014
     IA/20522/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 9 January 2015             |
|Prepared 19 December 2014                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         ESTHER ihebirinachi ohurogu
                          MASTER EMMANUEL OHURUOGU


                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Nwaekwu, Messrs Moorehouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission against a  decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Juss  who,  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 11 September 2014, allowed the  appeals  of  Mrs  Esther
    Ohuruogu and her son, Emmanuel  Ohuruogo  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse them  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is  the  appellant  before  me  I  will
    refer for ease of reference refer to her as the respondent as  she  was
    the respondent in the First-tier.    Similarly  I  will  refer  to  Mrs
    Esther Ohuruogu and Emmanuel Ohuruogu as the appellants  as  they  were
    the respondents in the First-tier.

3.     The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born in August  1965  and  May
    1996 respectively.  They entered Britain as visitors in July  2005  and
    on expiry  of  their  leave  to  remain  overstayed.   In  August  2012
    applications were made for them to be granted leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of their family life here.  Those applications were refused on 16
    September 2013 with no right of appeal.  A fresh claim application  was
    then made and after judicial review proceedings were issued  a  further
    decision to refuse leave to remain was made which carried  a  right  of
    appeal.

4.   The Secretary of State, in a letter dated  1  May  2014,  set  out  the
    appellants' immigration history and stated  that  the  first  appellant
    could not succeed under the "parent route" nor indeed under the private
    life provisions and  further,  that  the  second  appellant  could  not
    succeed under the "child route" or under the private life route.  Leave
    outside the Rules was considered as was Section 55 and  it  was  stated
    that it was relevant that the appellants would be returning to  Nigeria
    as a family  unit  and  could  continue  to  enjoy  their  family  life
    together.  It was also  stated  that  the  appellants  were  liable  to
    administrative removal in accordance with Section 10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.

5.   The appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge  Juss  in  the
    First-tier.  He noted the terms of the refusal and the  evidence  given
    and the submission made that the first appellant met  the  requirements
    of paragraph E-LTRP2.2 because she was the mother of a child who at the
    date of decision was under the age of 18 and the  child  had  lived  in
    Britain for seven years. He noted the Home Office Guidelines  which  he
    stated showed how seven years' continuous residence in the UK had to be
    interpreted and then referred to a policy document which stated:-

         "We consider that a period of seven continuous years spent  in  the
         UK as a child  will  generally  establish  a  sufficient  level  of
         integration for family and private life to exist such that  removal
         would normally not be in the best interests of the child.  A period
         of seven years also echoes the previous policy  (known  as  DP5/96)
         under which children who had accumulated  seven  years'  continuous
         residence in the UK were not deported which is still referenced  by
         the courts on occasion."

6.   The judge said that that policy was binding upon the courts who had  to
    give due weight to it and  therefore  on  the  basis  that  the  second
    appellant, although he was now aged 18, had lived in Britain for  seven
    years, the judge stated that:


         "15. The appellants accordingly  satisfy  the  requirements  of  E-
             LTRPT2.2 because subparagraph (d) refers to a  child  who  has
             'lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  at  least  seven  years
             immediately preceding the date of application'. Of course, the
             second appellant has now reached the age  of  18  years.   But
             that is not to say the circumstances surrounding the  original
             making of that decision are irrelevant to how this appeal  has
             to be determined at the date of the hearing."


         16.      Secondly EX1 - Section EX:  Exception  also  applies.  The
             appellant satisfies the conditions set out in provision of FMR-
             LTRPT1.1(d) for a grant of leave to remain.  Third, the  first
             appellant also met the requirements for the grant of leave  to
             remain in the UK on the basis of a private and family life  as
             a parent with a parental relationship with  a  child  who  was
             under the age of 18, who has lived in the UK for  seven  years
             immediately preceding the date of the decision.  For all these
             reasons, this appeal is allowed"

7.   The Secretary of State's appeal stated that  the  judge,  when  dealing
    with paragraph EX1 had  not  dealt  with  subsection  EX1(a)(ii)  which
    provided to succeed it should be shown that "it would not reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK" and furthermore it  was  argued  that
    the judge had not made material findings of fact as to why it would not
    reasonable to expect the second appellant to return to Nigeria.  It was
    stated that the Secretary of State  maintained  that  it  was  entirely
    reasonable for the second appellant to  return  to  Nigeria  given  the
    circumstances that he and the first appellant had  entered  the  UK  as
    visitors, that they  had  then  overstayed,  and  consequently  neither
    appellant should succeed under the Immigration Rules under  the  parent
    route.

8.   Permission to appeal, having been granted, the matter came  before  me.
    Miss Isherwood relied on the grounds of appeal.  She  argued  that  the
    letter of refusal  had  raised  the  issue  of  reasonableness  of  the
    appellants' returning to Nigeria and stated  that  the  judge  had  not
    dealt with this.  She referred to the provisions of LTRP2.2  which  had
    stated:-

         "The applicant must not be in  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
         immigration laws (disregarding any  period  of  overstaying  for  a
         period of 28 days or less) unless paragraph EX1.1. applies."

9.   She then referred me to paragraph EX1(cc)(ii) which  states  that  that
    paragraph would apply where the applicant had a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a child who had lived in the United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of
    application and that  it would not be reasonable to expect a  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  She argued that the judge had not considered
    the issue of reasonableness of  return  to  Nigeria  -  that  had  been
    highlighted in the letter of refusal.  Moreover,  with  regard  to  the
    policy document which the judge had cited, it did refer to a  situation
    where a period of seven continuous years spent in the United Kingdom as
    a child would "generally"  establish a sufficient level of  integration
    for it not to be in the best interests of the child to be removed.

10.  It appeared, she argued, that there had been no  submissions  regarding
    the reasonableness or otherwise of the child having to leave and  there
    was nothing to indicate that the judge had considered that it would not
    be reasonable for the child to leave.  She also stated that  the  judge
    had not been entitled to find that there was a private life established
    in the United Kingdom which would outweigh the public interest  in  the
    necessity of immigration control.

11.  In reply Mr Nwaekwu started that the decision was  fully  reasoned  and
    that the judge had  properly  applied  Home  Office  policy  which  was
    binding upon him.  He referred to the decision in JO and Others  [2014]
    UKUT 00517 (IAC) and stated that that indicated that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellants to leave Britain.  He  argued  that
    the Rules were Article 8  compliant  and  that  effectively  they  were
    codifying the provisions of DP5/96 and therefore the seven year  period
    was sufficient for the judge to find that  the second  appellant  would
    be entitled to leave to remain and on that basis that his mother  would
    also be entitled to remain.  He argued that the judge had clearly taken
    into account the issue of reasonableness before reaching his conclusion
    - the judge had referred to the fact that he had taken into account all
    documents before him and that included the witness  statements  of  the
    appellants and the documentation relating  to  the  second  appellant's
    studies.

12.  I consider that there is a material error of law in  the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge. He  has  not  considered  the  issue  of  the
    reasonableness of the second appellant's removal.  The reality is that,
    of course, that the second appellant is now an adult but also  that  he
    and his mother would be returning to Nigeria together as a family  unit
    - the family would not be split.  Moreover, they had  both  entered  as
    visitors and to allow them to remain now would ignore the importance of
    having effective immigration control.

13.  The reality is that the judge had simply ignored the  requirement  that
    for those who have lived in Britain  for  more  than  seven  years  the
    issues of reasonableness of their removal should be considered.   I  am
    satisfied that this is an appeal  in  which  the  requirements  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement (paragraph 7.2(a)) are  met.  The
    appeal will therefore be remitted to be heard at Hatton Cross or one of
    that hearing centres satellite courts on 28 June 2015.

Decision
     The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed to the extent that  the
    appeal is remitted to be heard in the First-tier afresh.


Signed                                  Date 07/01/2015
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
