
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20347/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3 June 2015                       |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D J ARCHER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            syed nadir abbas shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not Represented. Mr P Nathan, Counsel, acted as
                    Mckenzie friend
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for and do not make any order restricting publication  of
    the details of this appeal.

 2. The appellant was not represented before us.  Mr  P  Nathan  of  counsel
    happened to be in our hearing room when the case was called on  and  the
    respondent accepted his offer of assistance as a McKenzie friend. We are
    grateful to Mr Nathan for his assistance.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey)  who  allowed  the
    appeal of the present respondent, hereinafter  "the  claimant",  against
    the decisions of the present appellant, hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of
    State" to refuse him leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    directing his removal.

 4. The claimant wanted to remain on the basis of his marriage to a  British
    citizen and his circumstances were  such  that  if  his  was  a  genuine
    marriage in accordance with the Rules he  would  have  been  allowed  to
    stay.

 5. The Secretary of State  was  not  persuaded  about  the  nature  of  the
    marriage and there were good reasons to be doubtful.  Not the  least  of
    these was that the claimant's  wife  had  brought  criminal  proceedings
    against him and divorce proceedings had been started.  By the  time  the
    case came before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  things  had  changed  a
    little.   The  criminal  proceedings  had  resulted  in  the  claimant's
    acquittal and the claimant said that he intended to be reconciled to his
    wife.

 6. There was no evidence directly from the wife about her  intentions  and,
    without meaning to be disrespectful to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it
    might be thought rather surprising that in the absence of such  evidence
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied that there was a  subsisting
    marriage and that it was the intention of both parties to live  together
    permanently.  The Secretary of State was given permission to appeal  and
    the  reasons  for  giving  permission  have  been   summarised   in   my
    introduction to this case.

 7. Things did not proceed before us quite as might have been expected.  The
    claimant arrived in the company of a woman and child who were identified
    as his wife and child of their marriage.   Their  identity  was  not  in
    issue.  We have seen passport photographs of the  wife  that  confirming
    that the woman before us is the person she claimed to be.

 8. We recognise that this is not evidence that they are now living together
    permanently. Neither is it evidence of what they  were  doing  when  the
    First-tier Tribunal decided the appeal but  although  we  have  directed
    ourselves correctly, I do not think we can pretend  that  we  have  been
    able to completely ignore the fact that the claimant and his wife do now
    seem to be intending to live together in a genuine relationship.

 9. However we must concentrate on the position when the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge allowed the appeal. There was no reason advanced for  disbelieving
    the evidence of the claimant except that it was only  his  evidence  and
    not  supported  independently.  That  might  not  have  been  enough  to
    undermine the finding but that is  not  right.   There  was  before  the
    Tribunal a letter from the wife's solicitors who had been  advising  her
    in respect of the contemplated divorce. That says,  quite  unequivocally
    "I write further to my previous correspondence and understand  that  you
    no longer wish to proceed with your divorce proceedings as you and  your
    husband have reconciled."

10. The letter was dated 6 February 2015 which is approximately a  fortnight
    before the First-tier Tribunal's decision and is,  we  find,  very  good
    evidence that at least by then the claimant's wife was reconciled to her
    husband and the broken marriage was a restored marriage.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge directed  himself  correctly,  looking  at
    paragraph 284(vi) of HC 395.  We are satisfied,  although  this  is  not
    what we thought when we read the papers, that he was indeed entitled  to
    conclude that the requirements of the Rules were met  and  that  he  was
    entitled to allow the appeal for the reasons that are given.

12. It follows therefore that we dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

13. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2015                   |

