
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20953/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2015               |On 21st October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                Mr mirza khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1966.
    The Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 23rd May  2006.   The
    Appellant claimed asylum and his appeal was dismissed on 19th June 2006
    and subsequently his appeal rights became exhausted on 28th June  2006.
    The Appellant was not removed from  the  United  Kingdom  and  on  11th
    January 2011 he asked that his representations be considered as a fresh
    application for asylum  and  for  a  claim  pursuant  to  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.  This application was refused on 27th March
    2012.  On 10th October 2013 a further application  form  was  submitted
    this time for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  compassionate
    circumstances and this was rejected on 28 October 2013.  Yet a  further
    application was submitted on 19th November 2013 for indefinite leave to
    remain again on the  basis  of  compassionate  circumstances  and  this
    application was also refused by a Notice of Refusal dated 8th May 2014.
     By a letter dated 19th November 2014 the Appellant's  application  for
    indefinite leave was given  further  consideration  by  the  Respondent
    where it was found that the Appellant's presence  in  the  UK  was  not
    conducive to the public good because he was excluded from  the  Refugee
    Convention for  a  serious  non-political  crime  and  the  Appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain was refused.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal O'Rourke sitting at Newport on 1st April 2015.   In  that
    determination Judge O'Rourke noted  that  the  appeal  was  made  under
    Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    against the decision to refuse an application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the grounds that the Respondent was not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's family or private life was sufficient to  satisfy  Appendix
    FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.  That decision  was
    upheld on  appeal  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
    promulgation handed down on 16th April 2015.

 3. On 27th April 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 16th June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  granted  permission
    to appeal.  In granting permission Judge Levin noted that going back to
    the original asylum appeal in 2006 Judge Harmston had  noted  that  the
    Appellant had given no reason for his failure to  attend  that  hearing
    and even if Counsel's record of the Appellant's evidence given  at  the
    hearing before Judge O'Rourke at paragraphs 4 and 5 of the grounds were
    correct he gave no reasons or no good reasons for his failure to attend
    the hearing back in 2006.  He considered  that  it  therefore  followed
    that there was no merit in the suggestion that the judge had  erred  in
    his finding that the Appellant gave no reason for his failure to attend
    the hearing of his asylum appeal either at the hearing in  2006  or  at
    the hearing before  him.

 4. Judge Levin noted that the grounds, which were settled by  Counsel  who
    had represented  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing,  asserted  that  the
    Appellant  complained  during  the  hearing  that  he  was  unable   to
    understand the interpreter and that the Record of Proceedings  recorded
    that a Pashtu interpreter was booked for the hearing.   He  noted  that
    the judge's decision was silent as to any interpretation  problems  but
    considered that if what Counsel asserted in  the  grounds  was  correct
    then arguably the judge had erred by continuing with the  hearing.   He
    considered that in such circumstances it was arguable  that  there  had
    been a procedural unfairness amounting to an error of law and  that  it
    would be necessary to seek the judge's comments thereon.

 5. With reference to the Appellant's claim that he would  be  at  risk  of
    suffering serious harm in Afghanistan so as to breach Articles 2 and  3
    of the ECHR, Judge Levin considered that it was arguable that the judge
    erred by simply finding that the issue was "res judicata" by reason  of
    the findings made by Judge Harmston in the 2006  determination  of  the
    Appellant's asylum appeal and  by  failing  to  follow  the  Devaseelan
    guidelines and to consider the evidence before him which was not before
    Judge Harmston, matters which had arisen  thereafter  and  the  changed
    country conditions.  On that basis Judge Levin  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 6. On 2nd July 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That written response contended that  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal had  directed  himself  appropriately.   The
    Rule 24 response points out that the judge did not indicate that  there
    was any issue with interpretation and it was not apparent to the  grant
    of  permission  that  it  was  recorded  as  such  in  the  Record   of
    Proceedings.   The  Secretary  of  State  contends  that  this  was  an
    important matter that should have been raised either during the hearing
    or at the very least after the hearing but that this did not appear  to
    be the case and that Judge O'Rourke had, on a careful  reading  of  the
    determination, considered breach  of  the  ECHR  which  is  evident  at
    paragraph 13 of his determination.  The Rule 24  response  goes  on  to
    contend that the grounds have no merit and amount to mere  disagreement
    with the adverse outcome of the appeal without identifying any arguable
    material error of law.

 7. The matter next appeared before Judge Murray sitting as a Deputy  Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal on 17th August  2015.   Judge  Murray  granted  a
    request at that stage for an adjournment and gave a direction that both
    parties were to file and serve  witness  statements  dealing  with  the
    assertion in the grounds  of  permission  that  there  were  issues  in
    relation to interpretation and that the parties were to agree and  note
    the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. It is on that basis that this  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, Judge O'Rourke.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed Counsel, Mr Ell, and the Secretary of State  appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble.

Documents

 9. I am referred by the legal representatives to two additional  documents
    which I  am  asked  to  consider  and  which  I  give  due  and  proper
    consideration to.  The first is a memorandum which dates back to  April
    2015 from  Hollie  Davies,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  who
    attended before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  addition  I  am  provided
    with a witness statement from Morgan Read who appeared as  Counsel  for
    the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.  The witness statement of
    Mr Read is served late but Mr Bramble does not  take  issue  with  that
    fact and there  is  no  request  made  before  me  for  yet  a  further
    adjournment.

10. The second is a minute by  Miss  Davies,  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Bramble  points  out  that
    Miss Davies' minute indicates that the  Appellant  states  he  was  not
    aware of the hearing in 2006 and he accepts on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State that that is the position maintained by the Appellant and  his
    legal representatives.  However he points out there is no record of the
    proceedings on file, that there  is  no  point  in  seeking  a  further
    adjournment because quite  simply  such  record  is  not  going  to  be
    forthcoming.  He acknowledges that  it  may  be  in  the  interests  of
    justice bearing in mind that there  is  no  possibility  of  an  agreed
    minute and that it is possible that the Appellant  did  not  understand
    the interpreter that the matter would be best dealt with by  way  of  a
    remit to be re-heard providing that can be shown to be a material error
    of law.  Whilst noting that Mr Read had contended that there  had  been
    changes in the law with regard to Article 1(F) since  2006  Mr  Bramble
    points out firstly that Judge O'Rourke records that  there  was  little
    argument or case  law  advanced  in  support  of  that  contention  and
    secondly poses the question as what has changed since  2006  which  has
    merit for the Appellant.  He submits  there  is  nothing  to  show  the
    position with regard to the Appellant's circumstances as they would  be
    in Afghanistan and wonders how much further a re-opening of the  matter
    would take us.  He submits that the Appellant's solicitors have  failed
    to show what has changed  and  therefore  it  is  for  the  Appellant's
    solicitors to show that there is a material error which would require a
    remittal.  He further points out that  interpreter  issues  were  never
    raised  at  the  previous  hearing  and  that  whilst  there  was  this
    examination of the Appellant if nothing is shown to have  changed  then
    the principles of Devaseelan are binding.

11. Mr Ell contends that the judge's analysis of Devaseelan  is  wrong  and
    that there must be evidence for him  to  reconsider  and  that  as  the
    Appellant was not present in 2006 in the absence of the  Appellant  the
    judge himself made findings which he was not entitled to.   He  submits
    that there is a material error of  law  on  that  alone  and  that  the
    correct process is for the matter to be re-heard.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. It is clear that the Secretary of State has not helped herself in  this
    matter by allowing an inordinate period of time to elapse  between  the
    initial decision in 2006 and subsequent applications and  the  complete
    failure of the Secretary of State to  take  any  steps  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the UK.  Judge  O'Rourke  was  placed  in  an  extremely
    difficult position and is correct in his starting point when he says he
    cannot re-assess the factual determination of 2006.   However  I  agree
    that the judge has erred in his analysis of Devaseelan  in  that  there
    has to be evidence for him to reconsider and  the  concession  made  by
    Miss Davies in her note the Appellant had stated that he did  not  know
    about the hearing in 2006 differs from the finding of Judge O'Rourke at
    paragraph 9(i) that the Appellant  had  not  attended  the  hearing  or
    explained his absence then  or  now.   Such  a  finding  does  not  sit
    comfortably with the note of  the  Home  Office.   Consequently  it  is
    possible bearing in mind the recording of  the  position  by  the  Home
    Office representative  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  not
    entitled to draw the conclusion that the Appellant had not provided any
    explanation for his absence in 2006.

15. There is nothing within the determination to indicate  that  there  has
    been any difficulty in interpretation given the fact that at  paragraph
    9(ii) Judge O'Rourke finds:

         "It proved extremely difficult in cross-examination to  get  direct
         answers from the Appellant, to include an  explanation  as  to  why
         this attack had occurred."

    Such an analysis may well have tainted the adverse credibility findings
    if the interpreter had not been able to understand  the  Appellant  and
    this may well prejudice the fairness of the proceedings.  I acknowledge
    that this does beg the question as whether the  findings  made  by  the
    judge were as a result of poor interpretation or to  the  vagueness  of
    the Appellant's responses.

16. When looked at together and particularly with regard to the  issues  of
    fairness that have developed in this case I am satisfied that there are
    errors of law and that they are material and that the correct  approach
    is for the matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
    hearing with none of the findings of fact to stand.

17. I am aware that unfortunately due to the difficulties of court  listing
    the obtaining of a re-hearing date can  take  some  considerable  time.
    The history of this matter is one that causes considerable concern  and
    whilst I have no influence over the listing of this matter I would urge
    that the administration list this matter at the first  available  date.
    Directions are attached within the decision herein.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  None of the findings of fact are to stand.   The
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  at  either
    Newport or Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence  with
    an ELH of three hours.  It is recorded that if possible this hearing be
    expedited and that it is for the solicitors instructed by the Appellant
    to ensure that the Tribunal  is  notified  within  seven  days  of  the
    handing down of this decision of the  language  requirements  of  their
    interpreter.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
