
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/20523/2014
                                                               IA/20522/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On November 16, 2015                 |On November 19, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                       ms esther ihebirinacho ohuruogu
                            mr emmanuel ohuruogu
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Ikeh (Solicitor)
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria  and  are  mother  and  son
    respectively. They entered the United Kingdom on July 9, 2005 as family
    visitors and overstayed. On August 31, 2012 they applied for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life but this was refused with  no  right
    of appeal. Following other proceedings the respondent reconsidered  the
    application but still refused the applications  on  May  1,  2014.  The
    appellants appealed these decisions on May 12, 2014 under section 82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Butler  on  May
    8, 2015 and he refused both appellants' appeals  under  the  Rules  and
    under ECHR legislation.

 3. The appellants appealed those decisions and  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Garro found an error in law based on the  fact  the  second-
    named appellant was over the age of eighteen at the date of hearing and
    had spent half his life in the United Kingdom and it was  arguable  the
    Tribunal should have given consideration to those facts and  considered
    the appeal under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) HC  395  as  against  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395.

 4. The respondent opposed the error and filed a  Rule  24  response  dated
    September 15, 2015 in which she reminded the Tribunal the relevant date
    for paragraph 276ADE HC 395 was the date of  application  and  not  the
    date of hearing.

 5. The matter was listed before me for legal arguments.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Ikey relied on his grounds of appeal and the permission  for  leave.
    He stated that the Tribunal had erred by  not  considering  the  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) because  the  decisions  of  LS  (Gambia)
    [2005] UKIAT 00085 and MM  (Article  8-family  life-dependency)  Zambia
    [2007] UKIAT 00040 along with Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act made  clear
    that in in-country appeals the relevant date was the date  of  hearing.
    Alternatively, he submitted that the Tribunal's approach to  article  8
    was flawed.

 8. Mr Bramble relied on Rule 24 response  and  submitted  the  grounds  as
    argued  had  no  merit.  Paragraph  276ADE  clearly  stated  that   the
    requirements had to be met as at the date of application and  the  fact
    the position had changed since did not alter  the  starting  point.  As
    regards the free-standing article 8 claim he submitted the Tribunal had
    reached a decision that was open to it.

 9. Following these submissions, I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION

10. The appellant's appeal was brought on the pre-text  that  the  Tribunal
    had applied the wrong Rule and Mr Ikey sought to persuade me  that  the
    date for considering whether the Rule was met was the date of hearing.

11.  I  reject  this  submission  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  Rule
    specifically  states  that  when  considering  an   application   under
    paragraph 276ADE the relevant date for qualification  is  the  date  of
    application.

12. The case law referred to by Mr Ikey  was  contained  in  the  grant  of
    permission but I fail to see how this assists in his argument that  the
    relevant date is the  date  of  hearing.  These  cases  relate  to  the
    admission of evidence to support the case and neither has any relevance
    to this Rule as they  pre-date  the  date  when  paragraph  276ADE  was
    brought in. The cases refer to the admission of evidence  and  not  the
    actual requirement of an Immigration Rule. So for  instance  if  it  is
    disputed the appellant was under the age of 18 years then  evidence  to
    prove his age could be adduced after the date of decision.

13. The Tribunal correctly identified the appellant was under  the  age  of
    eighteen years when the application was submitted and had  continuously
    lived in the United Kingdom as at the date  of  application  (paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv)). In order for his appeal to have been  considered  under
    sub-section (v)  the  appellant  had  to  show  that  at  the  date  of
    application he was over the age of eighteen  years  and  had  spent  at
    least half his life in the United Kingdom. As he could not do this  the
    Tribunal applied the correct provision.

14. I find no merit in Mr Ikey's submissions that a later date  (after  the
    date of application) applied for the purposes of the Rules  although  I
    accept that for the purposes of article 8  ECHR  the  Tribunal  had  to
    consider the position at the date of hearing.

15.  The  Tribunal's  consideration  of  article  8  is  contained  between
    paragraphs [56] and [69] of its  decision.  The  Tribunal  was  clearly
    aware of how long he had been here (see paragraphs [1] and [3] for  age
    and date of arrival) and that he was now 19 years of age at the date of
    hearing. The Tribunal also had regard to Section 117B of the  2002  Act
    and in particular the fact that no weight should be attached to private
    life when a person's immigration status was precarious  or  the  person
    was here unlawfully. The Tribunal also had regard  to  the  appellants'
    claims they had no family  in  Nigeria  but  made  an  adverse  finding
    against  the  first-named  appellant  on  this  issue.  In  considering
    proportionality, the Tribunal considered the  circumstances,  including
    the fact he was now nineteen years of age.

16. The conclusion that article 8 was not engaged was clearly open  to  it.
    No error of law has been established in this appeal and I find there is
    no error in law.

    DECISION

17. There is no error in law. I dismiss the appeals.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

