

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20980/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent on:                     |
|On 27 February 2014                           |On: 4 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD IMRAN NASEER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.
For the respondent: Mr S Walker


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. In this case the party  who  was  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal is a citizen of Pakistan. It is convenient if I continue  to  refer
to him throughout as "the appellant" in the remainder of this  determination
except where context requires otherwise.

The appellant entered the United Kingdom with valid  leave  to  enter  as  a
student. On 5 April 2012 he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier  1
(Post Study Work) Migrant within the currency of  his  valid  leave.  On  27
September 2012 the Secretary of State refused that application. The  refusal
decision pointed out, inter alia,  that in order to score points  under  the
relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules the appellant was  required  to
show he had been awarded a relevant eligible  qualification  within  the  12
month period directly prior to the application,  whereas  the  position  was
that the appellant had not been  awarded  his  qualification,  which  was  a
Master of Arts awarded by Anglia Ruskin University  until  after  that  date
(on 6 July 2012.

2. In December 2012  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  dismissed  the  appeal.
Permission to appeal was then granted to the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  February
2013 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson decided, on the basis of the  Khatel
decision, that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law, that  its  decision
should be set aside and that he should re-make  the  decision  allowing  the
appeal.

3. In response to the determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Wilson,
the Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
Appeal.

4. On 25 June 2003 the Court of Appeal gave judgment in Raju  and  others  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  In  October
2013 the Upper Tribunal reported its decision in  Nasim  and  others  (Raju:
reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 610(IAC). In January the Upper  Tribunal
reported its follow-up case of Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014]  UKUT  25
(IAC). It will be convenient if I refer to these  below  as  "Nasim  I"  and
"Nasim 2" consecutively.

5. In light of these developments the  Upper  Tribunal  sent  Directions  in
this case. These gave notice that issues to be  considered  at  the  hearing
included: (i) whether the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  made  by
reference to the determination in Khatel should be set aside  in  the  light
of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Raju  and  others  (reference  was
then made to Nasim I)  and (ii) if so, whether there was an error of law  in
the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  such  that  the  determination
should be set aside. The Directions also required the appellant to serve  on
the Tribunal and the Secretary of State, not later than 7  days  before  the
forthcoming  hearing,  all  written   submissions   and   written   evidence
(including witness statements) on the issue of Article 8 of the  ECHR,  upon
which they seek to rely at that hearing  (where  necessary,  complying  with
rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

6. The head note to Nasim  I states as follows.


    (1) It is not legally possible for the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper
    Tribunal to decline to  follow  the  judgment  in  Raju  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754  on  the
    basis that the Secretary of State's Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) policy  of
    July 2010 (concerning the approach to be taken to "late" submission  of
    certain educational awards) continued to apply in respect of  decisions
    taken by the Secretary of State on or after  6  April  2012,  when  the
    Immigration Rules were changed by abolishing the Tier 1 PSW route.


    (2) The Secretary of State was under no duty to  determine  Post  Study
    Work applications made before that date by reference  to  that  policy,
    the rationale for which disappeared on 6 April. In particular:


          (a) a person making such an application had no  vested  right  or
          legitimate  expectation  to  have  his  or  her  application   so
          determined;


          (b) it was not legally  unfair  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
          proceed as she did;


          (c) the de minimis principle cannot be  invoked  to  counter  the
          failure of applications  that  were  unaccompanied  by  requisite
          evidence regarding the award;


          (d) the Secretary of State's May 2012  Casework  Instruction  did
          not gloss  or  modify  the  Immigration  Rules  but  merely  told
          caseworkers to apply those Rules;


          (e) evidential flexibility has no bearing on the matter;


          (f) an application was not varied by the submission  of  evidence
          of the conferring of an award on or after 6 April 2012; but  even
          if it were, the application would fail on the basis that it would
          have to have been decided under the Rules in force at the date of
          the variation; and


          (g) an application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  falls  to  be
          determined by reference to policies  in  force  at  the  date  of
          decision, not those in force at the date of application.




    (3) The date of "obtaining the relevant qualification" for the purposes
    of Table 10 of  Appendix  A  to  the  Immigration  Rules  as  in  force
    immediately before 6 April 2012 is the date on which the University  or
    other  institution  responsible  for  conferring  the  award  (not  the
    institution where  the  applicant  physically  studied,  if  different)
    actually conferred that award, whether in person or in absentia.


    (4)  As  held  in  Khatel  and  others  (s85A;  effect  of   continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC),  section  85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 precludes a tribunal, in a points-based
    appeal, from considering evidence as to  compliance  with  points-based
    Rules, where that evidence was not before the Secretary of  State  when
    she took her decision; but the section does not prevent a tribunal from
    considering evidence that was before the Secretary of  State  when  she
    took the decision, whether or not that evidence reached her only  after
    the date of application for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  34F  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


Submissions
7. There was no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  no
explanation for his failure to attend. I decided to exercise  my  discretion
to proceed with the hearing in the absence of one of the parties. Mr  Walker
for the respondent sought to rely on Nasim I and II.


My assessment

The power to set aside

8. As noted earlier,  prior  to  this  case  been  listed  for  hearing  the
Secretary of State had applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
Appeal.  However, the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and  the
Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  made  hereunder  clearly
contemplate that it is within the jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal to  set
aside its decision in  particular  limited  circumstances:  see  s.10(4)(c))
rules 45, 46.  Logically a decision on whether to exercise such  power  must
take place before any  consideration  of  whether  to  grant  permission  to
appeal to the Court of Appeal; and indeed  rule  45(1)  stipulates  that  on
receiving an application for permission to appeal  the  Upper  Tribunal  may
review the decision in accordance with rule  46.  If  the  decision  of  the
Upper Tribunal is set aside, then there is no  longer  any  statutory  basis
for consideration of whether to grant permission  to  appeal.  The  decision
sought to be appealed has been rendered null and void.

9. Rule 45(1)(a) provides that the Upper Tribunal may review a  decision  of
the Upper Tribunal if "since the Upper  Tribunal's  decision,  a  court  has
made a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal  and  which,  had  it
been made before the Upper Tribunal's decision, could have  had  a  material
effect on  the  decision".   As  noted  earlier  since  the  Upper  Tribunal
decision in Khatel there has been the judgment in  Raju  and  others,  which
constitutes binding Court of Appeal authority overturning Khatel.

 10. Hence I am entirely satisfied that it is within my  powers  to  proceed
to consider whether to set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal   and  I
also consider that to do so furthers the overriding objective of  the  Rules
to deal with cases justly and fairly under rule 4. In  this  regard  I  note
that the procedure adopted by the  Tribunal  of  notifying  the  parties  in
advance of the hearing that  it  would  consider  whether  to  exercise  its
powers to set aside afforded both parties ample opportunity to  respond  and
address the point.

11. I have been asked to take a different view from that taken by the  Upper
Tribunal panel in Nasim I and II. Whilst it is true in the abstract  that  I
am not bound to follow a reported decision of this  Chamber,  I  would  only
consider doing so if there were compelling reasons. Quite simply  there  are
none here. In any event, for the most part Nasim I gives effect to Court  of
Appeal authority, Raju and Others in particular, by which I am bound.

The Immigration Rules

12. In essence the appellant was not able to meet the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules under Appendix A because they required that  he  had  been
awarded his eligible qualification within the 12 month period prior  to  the
date of application. At the date of application the appellant  had  not  yet
been awarded his eligible qualification. It had been awarded by the date  of
decision, but that does not assist. Whilst section 85A of  the  Nationality,
Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  does  not  prevent  a   tribunal   from
considering evidence that was before the Secretary of State  when  she  took
the decision, even  if  post-application,  the  rule  in  question  in  this
context required such evidence to relate  to  an  event  that  had  happened
prior to the date of application.

Fairness

13. The fairness argument was fully explored in Nasim  I  and  was  rejected
for cogent reasons.

Article 8

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered   the   appellant's   Article   8
circumstances but found that they did not justify allowing the appeal  under
Article 8. Upper Tribunal Judge Lane in  the  Directions  mentioned  earlier
had directed that any further evidence or submissions relating to Article  8
should be sent at least 7 days  before  the  hearing.  Notwithstanding  that
Direction the appellant's  representatives  failed  to  submit  any  further
evidence in accordance with Directions. Having considered the evidence I  am
quite satisfied that the appellant has  failed  to  show  that  he  has  any
Article 8 grounds of substance.

Section 47

15. In this case although neither the First  tier  Tribunal  judge  nor  the
Deputy Upper Tribunal judge addressed the simultaneous  s.47  decision  made
by the respondent, it is settled law that such a decision was unlawful.

Disposal

16. It follows from what has been said above that the decision of the  Upper
Tribunal is contrary to binding Court of Appeal authority and cannot  stand.
I hereby set it aside. Applying the principles set out in  Raju  and  others
and subsequently in Nasim I and II, I conclude that the  decision  I  should
re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

17. Accordingly:


The decision of the Upper Tribunal is set aside.


The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal except in
relation to the section 47 decision which I hold was not in accordance with
the law.

                               Signed


                               Date:




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
