

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20379/2015
                                                               IA/20387/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 February 2017                         |On 3 February 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                               THANDIWE KAPALA
                          MTHOKOZISI BISWICK KAPALA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Hashmi of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellants'  applications  for  leave  to
       remain here on 20 May 2015. Their appeal against this was allowed on
       human rights grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robson  ("the
       Judge") following a hearing on 5 August 2016.

    2. In summary the Judge found that the Appellants had  not  established
       they had  submitted  their  application  within  the  relevant  time
       period. Therefore, the appeal under  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
       Immigration Rules HC 395 ("the rules") must fail. As they  fulfilled
       all aspects of the rules however, it  would  be  a  disproportionate
       interference with their Article 8 rights to require  them  to  leave
       the United Kingdom.

The grant of permission


    3. Judge Gillespie granted permission to appeal (23 November  2016)  on
       the ground that it is arguable that the Judge erred in finding  that
       the application had been submitted late.


Respondent's position

    4. Mrs Petterson agreed that the application was submitted in time, but
       this was inconsequential as they only had a right of appeal  against
       (in this case) the human rights decision. As that  appeal  had  been
       allowed,  this  application  was  irrelevant.  I  had  no  power  to
       interfere with the dismissal of the Fee Award.


Appellants' position

    5. After having stood the matter down to enable Miss Hashmi to consider
       the law, she acknowledged that  the  Appellants  did  not  have  the
       initial right of appeal on any basis (in this case) other than human
       rights and the appeal could not have been allowed under  the  rules.
       She also agreed that I had no power to interfere with the lack of  a
       Fee Award.

Discussion


    6. I am not satisfied that the Judge made a material error of law  even
       though he was wrong regarding the  time  limit  issue  as  he  still
       allowed the appeal on the only basis he could namely  human  rights,
       and the Respondent had not appealed that decision. I have  no  power
       to interfere with the lack of a Fee Award. I was  initially  of  the
       view that there was  no  right  of  appeal  to  me  at  all  as  the
       Appellants had won at  the  First-tier,  but  on  reflection,  I  am
       satisfied that they do have such  a  right  given  s11  (2)  of  the
       Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
2 February 2017
