


                                    [pic]

|                                     |Appeal number: IA / 20115 / 2012     |
|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                  |                      |               |                   |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Determination promulgated    |
|On       |20 June 2013              |On                 |28 August 2013     |
|         |                          |                   |                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Lord Burns                                                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|           |SP                                                 |           |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                             |           |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Respondent |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |           |

Representation:

For the  appellant:            Mr.  N.  Klear,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Ziadies Solicitors.
For the respondent:          Mr. D. Hayes,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





1.    This is an appeal from the  First-Tier  Tribunal  refusing  an  appeal
      against a decision dated  6  September  2012  refusing  the  appellant
      further leave to remain in this country.


      Background
2.    The appellant is a national of Thailand born  in  November  1971.  She
      arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor  on  31 May  2005  and  on
      22 July 2006 applied for leave to remain in order  to  care  for  her
      "husband" who was suffering from  HIV/Aids.  This  was  granted  until
      22 January 2007.  On 10 January 2007 she applied for leave to remain
      as the "spouse" of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.
       That application was  refused  but,  following  an  appeal,  she  was
      granted further discretionary leave to remain until 19 June 2010.  On
      16 June 2010 she made an application for leave to  remain  which  was
      refused on 6 September 2012 on the basis of the immigration rules and
      a removal direction was made in respect of her.  This is the  decision
      that is the subject of the appeal before us.

3.    It appears from the history given to the First-Tier Tribunal that  she
      had, in fact, been divorced from her husband in Thailand in 2004 prior
      to applying to come to the United Kingdom.  Her  ex-husband,  who  had
      come to the United Kingdom after the divorce, became ill with HIV/Aids
      and the appellant came to the United Kingdom in order  to  look  after
      him.  In 2005, however, she met and began a relationship with  another
      man (AP) and subsequently had a son by him born in 2009.  Accordingly,
      the appellant had deceived  the  immigration  authorities  as  to  her
      marital status in order to remain in the United Kingdom  in  2006  and
      persisted in that deception when she  applied  for  further  leave  to
      remain in 2007.

4.    Prior to the birth of her son, her partner AP had  been  convicted  of
      sexual offences  involving  young  girls  and  sentenced  to  4 years
      imprisonment.  Because of this, care proceedings were taken in respect
      of  the  child  who  was  eventually  taken  into  care  and  adoption
      proceedings commenced.  In August 2012, the child was placed with  his
      new adoptive family.  It is not clear from the papers whether  or  not
      that child had been formally adopted by the time of the hearing before
      the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   His  whereabouts  were  unknown  to   the
      appellant at that time.   The care proceedings  were  complicated  and
      protracted, not least because the  appellant  had  falsely  named  her
      former husband as the father of her child whereas, in fact, AP was the
      father of that child.

      Proceedings before the First-Tier Tribunal
5.    The First-Tier Tribunal had a statement from AP  before  it  and  also
      heard evidence from both him and from the appellant.  The  appeal  was
      argued under Article 8 grounds only since it was clear, as the  First-
      Tier Tribunal judge points out at paragraph 39,  that  the  appellant
      could not succeed under the immigration rules  in  respect  of  either
      family or  private  life.   He  found  that  the  appellant  had  used
      deception in obtaining leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
      claiming that she was still the wife of her ex-husband but found  that
      she did care for him here.  He  also  found  that  the  appellant  had
      started a relationship with AP and had a son by him.   He  found  that
      that relationship was a genuine one and, in addition, that  they  were
      genuine in a desire to be married.

6.    At paragraph 42 of the determination, the  First-Tier  Tribunal  judge
      embarked upon an assessment of the Article 8 family and  private  life
      rights of the  appellant.   In  that  and  subsequent  paragraphs  the
      relevant cases on how such an assessment ought to be carried  out  are
      set out.  Those include the case of Razgar (2004) 2 AC 368.  The judge
      also refers to the House of Lords case of Chikwamba 2008  UKHL  40  in
      which Lord Browne said that it would only be  "comparatively  rarely"
      that an article 8 case involving children should be dismissed  on  the
      basis that it would be proportionate  and  more  appropriate  for  the
      appellant to apply for leave from abroad.  The First-Tier  judge  also
      notes that in subsequent cases it has been held that such a  principle
      was not confined to cases where children were involved.

7.    The judge had regard to the nature of the balancing exercise which  it
      was necessary to carry out in cases of this sort by  reference  to  VW
      (Uganda) and AB (Somalia) v SSHT 2009 EWCA Civ 5 where  it  is  stated
      that if a removal is to be held to be disproportionate:
           "What must be shown is more than  a  mere  hardship  or  a  mere
           difficulty or a mere obstacle.  The question  in  any  one  case
           will be whether the hardship consequent on removal will  go  far
           enough beyond this baseline to make removal  a  disproportionate
           use of immigration control.  This in  turn  will  depend,  among
           many other factors, on the severity of the interference".

8.    Having directed himself to  these  principles,  the  First-Tier  Judge
      stated at paragraph 42 that he did not need to consider the rights  of
      the child of the appellant in this case because that child was due  to
      be,  or  may  already  have  been,  adopted.   However,  he  expressly
      recognises that the appellant had established family life with AP  and
      that article 8 is thus engaged.  Further, he accepted that, albeit  to
      a lesser degree, she  had  established  private  life  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  At paragraphs 54 to 56 he sets out the reasons why he  finds
      that the respondent had justified the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
      remain and that her removal was a necessary  and  proportionate  step.
      He begins by highlighting that  the  appellant  came  to  the  UK  and
      obtained a visa under the false pretence that she was  still  married.
      The  factors  which  had  justified  her  being   granted   subsequent
      extensions, namely the fact that she was looking after her  ex-husband
      and then her role as a mother of her child born in the  UK  no  longer
      pertained.  What was left in the appellant's favour was first that she
      had a genuine relationship with AP.  However, as the First-Tier  judge
      pointed out, AP knew from an early stage of the precarious  nature  of
      the immigration status of the appellant and that she had no legitimate
      expectation  of  a  right  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
      maintained strong family and private life links  with  Thailand  where
      she had a son and a sister.  Secondly although it  was  accepted  that
      she herself had contracted HIV the  judge  found  that  she  could  be
      treated for that condition  in  Thailand.   There  was  no  suggestion
      before the First-Tier Tribunal that this was not  the  case.   In  the
      last sentence of paragraph 56 the judge states:
           "Given her immigration history, I find that it is reasonable for
           her to be expected to return and to  make  such  an  application
           which would then have to be considered on its own merits."

      The appellant's submissions
9.    Before us Mr Klear argued, in  short,  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      judge had erred in his assessment of the Article 8  issues  pertaining
      in this case.  He had got the balance wrong in  that  there  had  only
      been one  incident  of  deception  by  the  appellant.   Her  personal
      circumstances, such as the relationship with AP and  her  HIV  status,
      had not been given sufficient weight.  We referred Mr.  Klear  to  the
      case of Mumu v Entry Clearance Officer-Dhaka 2012 UKUT 00143  but  Mr.
      Klear sought to distinguish that case on the basis that the  deception
      carried out by the appellant in that case was more  extreme  than  the
      present one.

      Discussion
10.   We are unable to agree that the First-Tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in
      making the determination that it did in  this  case.   The  First-Tier
      judge addressed himself to the correct legal tests and had regard,  in
      our view, to all the material considerations which were applicable  in
      the balancing exercise that  was  required  to  be  carried  out.   He
      weighed  up  those   considerations   appropriately.    He   correctly
      identified that there was no reason for the  appellant  to  remain  in
      this country but for her relationship with AP.  He  was  entitled,  on
      the evidence before him, to find that the HIV condition from which the
      appellant was suffering could  be  treated  in  Thailand.   There  was
      nothing to prevent her returning to that country. She maintained close
      links there.  Indeed, she had returned to Thailand on 3 or 4 occasions
      between 2005 and 2009 in order to see  her  family  there.   In  those
      circumstances, the tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  public
      policy considerations in requiring the appellant to return to Thailand
      to make an application to  return  outweighed  considerations  in  her
      favour.  Deterrence of the use of deception in making applications  of
      this type is plainly of substantial  importance.   The  detection  and
      subsequent rectification of the results of such deception  constitutes
      a drain on the resources of the state.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal  was
      accordingly entitled to give such considerations  considerable  weight
      in this case and, in our view, standing the factors in the appellant's
      favour which the tribunal correctly identified, it cannot be said that
      the First-Tier Tribunal judge erred in finding that  the  refusal  for
      further leave to remain and order to remove was proportionate.
11.   We reject the arguments Mr. Klear advanced  for  distinguishing  Mumu.
      He drew attention to the fact that Mumu concerned an  entry  clearance
      application where there were no issues other than the use of  a  false
      passport, whereas in the instant case, the appellant is HIV  positive,
      that AP has criminal convictions for sex offences; that the claimant's
      husband had made the application for leave  on  her  behalf  in  which
      dishonesty was employed;  that  in  any  event,  there  was  only  one
      instance of dishonesty; and that in the instant case, the sole  factor
      in favour of the interests of the state in the balancing exercise  was
      that the appellant should be required to make an application for entry
      clearance. Our reasons are as follows:
12.   The  Tribunal  in  Mumu  made  the  point  that  in  relation  to  the
      application of the Chikwamba principle in cases where  dishonesty  has
      been employed  so  that  the  mandatory  grounds  of  refusal  in  the
      Immigration Rules are applied, there must be recognition of  the  fact
      that there are "clear, cogent policy reasons" in favour of the state's
      interests and, further, that the  state's  interests  are  not  to  be
      automatically diminished on the basis of some  speculation  about  the
      outcome of a future application for entry clearance that may  be  made
      by an appellant. These  points  are  equally  applicable  whether  the
      appeal under  consideration  is  an  in-country  appeal  or  an  entry
      clearance appeal.   The  suggestion  that  the  application  in  which
      dishonesty was employed was made by the appellant's ex-husband ignores
      the fact that the First-tier Tribunal judge made the finding that  the
      appellant had used deception, a finding which has not been challenged.
      We do not accept that there was only one instance of deception, as the
      appellant's application of 22 July 2006 for leave  to  remain  was  an
      application to care for her "husband" whereas  she  had  already  been
      divorced, and her application on 10 January 2007  was  an  application
      for leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and  settled  in
      the United Kingdom whereas she had been divorced from  her  ex-husband
      and had not married AP. However, even  if  only  there  was  only  one
      instance of dishonesty, this goes to weight and  does  not  mean  that
      Mumu does not apply.
13.   The First-tier Tribunal judge has already taken into account the  fact
      that  the  appellant  is  HIV  positive  and  that  AP  has   criminal
      convictions for sex offences. Finally, we do not accept that the  sole
      factor in favour of the state's interests in the balancing exercise is
      the procedural requirement that entry  clearance  should  be  obtained
      from abroad.  A second and weighty consideration in the state's favour
      concerns the need to deter foreign nationals from employing deception.
      As the Tribunal said in Mumu,  those  who  engage,  or  who  might  be
      tempted to engage, in dishonest attempts to deceive the United Kingdom
      authorities in relation to immigration control need to be  aware  that
      such actions will have disadvantageous consequences for those who  are
      the intended beneficiaries of the dishonest conduct. A third and  also
      weighty consideration is the impact of the second consideration on the
      state's  interests  in  efficient  immigration   control,   which   is
      undermined if the possibility that  a  future  application  for  entry
      clearance may be refused on a mandatory ground of  itself  means  that
      removal would be disproportionate.
14.   We appreciate that the First-tier Tribunal judge made a  finding  that
      it would not be reasonable to expect AP to give up his  job  and  home
      here and live in Thailand which he has never visited. Nevertheless, we
      cannot speculate on the outcome of an entry clearance application.  If
      and when an  application  for  entry  clearance  is  made,  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer would need to consider the Article 8 rights  of  the
      appellant and AP on such evidence as is put forward  at  the  relevant
      time.
15.   It was not drawn  to  our  attention  that  the  respondent  made  two
      decisions at the same time: a decision to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to
      remain and a decision to  remove  the  appellant  under  s.47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. However, at the date  of
      the two decisions (7 September 2012),  the  respondent  did  not  have
      power to make a removal decision  at  the  same  time  as  a  decision
      refusing to vary leave (Secretary of State for the Home Department  v.
      Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512). Accordingly, we declare that the decision
      under s.47 is not in accordance with the law. However, the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge did not make any error on a point of law in relation to
      the appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave to remain.

      Decision
      The appeal is dismissed.

      Anonymity
      We make an order  under  r.14(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the applicant.
      No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
      him.  This  direction  applies  to  both  the  applicant  and  to  the
      respondent. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
      contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:





Lord Burns             Date:
