
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20307/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2017                          |On 26th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr Usman Zaman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, Lee Valley Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 20th  May
    2015 refusing his application for leave to remain as the partner of  Ms
    Ume Kalsoom.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian allowed the appeal and
    the Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the UK as a
    Tier 4 Student on 7th June 2010 with  leave  to  enter  until  November
    2011.  He was subsequently granted an  extension  of  stay  until  13th
    April 2014 but on 2nd April 2013 his  leave  to  remain  was  curtailed
    following a notification from the college he was attending in  relation
    to his non-attendance.  He submitted a further application for leave to
    remain as a Tier  4  Student  but  that  application  was  rejected  as
    invalid.  A further application was submitted and was refused.  On 22nd
    January 2015 the Appellant submitted an application for leave to remain
    on the basis of his relationship with Ms Kalsoom.

 4. The Secretary of  State  refused  that  application  because,  although
    evidence had been submitted in relation to  the  Appellant's  partner's
    income, he had not submitted required evidence including an  employer's
    letter confirming his partner's employment for six months prior to  the
    application date, corresponding  payslips  and  bank  statements.   The
    Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his British  partner.   The  Secretary  of
    State also acknowledged that the Appellant's partner had lived  in  the
    UK for 28 years and is in employment in the UK but concluded that there
    are no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  his  partner
    continuing their relationship in Pakistan under Ex 1(b) of Appendix FM.
     The Secretary of State considered the application under 276ADE (1)  in
    relation to private life and  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    demonstrated  that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
    integration in Pakistan under 276ADE (1)(vi).

 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  evidence   of   the
    Appellant's partner's earnings and oral evidence from the Appellant and
    his wife.  The judge reached his conclusions at paragraphs 8 to  11  of
    the decision.  The judge took into account the fact that the  Appellant
    and his partner are in a genuine relationship and said:

         "...the only reason that the application was  refused  was  because
         the Appellant did not have wage slips for his wife for  six  months
         at the time of the application but certainly has them now, that  on
         human rights grounds it would be disproportionate  for  him  to  be
         removed."

 6. The judge also took into account that in the circumstances of this case
    it would not be right to send the Appellant back to Pakistan for him to
    obtain entry clearance to return as a married spouse [9].

 7. The Secretary of State contends in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge
    made a material misdirection in law and failed  to  give  any  adequate
    reasons.  The first ground contends that the judge failed to  give  any
    or adequate consideration to the principles  of  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality and Immigration Act 2002.  The second ground contends  that
    the judge failed to explain why it would be disproportionate to  expect
    the Appellant to return to make a fresh application for entry clearance
    with the correct  specified  evidence.   Reliance  was  placed  on  the
    decision in R (On the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC).  The third ground  contends
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to apply the decision  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387  and  failed  to  identify  if  there  was
    anything compelling about this case before proceeding onto an Article 8
    analysis.  In the fourth ground the Secretary of State  contends  that,
    in suggesting that the  only  reason  the  Appellant  was  refused  was
    because the wage slips were not provided, the judge erred in  fact  and
    law because the judge failed to appreciate  that  the  application  was
    also refused because the Sponsor  was  not  earning  above  the  income
    threshold, did not have the employer's letter and had not been employed
    for six months at the date of the application.  It  is  contended  that
    the judge appears to be deciding that the Appellant only  missed  by  a
    small margin which  is  erroneous  but  in  any  event  the  de-minimis
    principle has been firmly disapproved in  immigration  appeals  in  the
    decision in Chau Le (Immigration Rules - de minimis  principle)  [2016]
    UKUT 186 (IAC).  It is submitted that in all of the circumstances it is
    plain that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  used  Article  8  as  a
    general dispensing power.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Ahmed submitted that it was  material  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.  She submitted that a proper consideration of the factors set
    out in Section 117B could have led to a different  decision.   Mr  Miah
    submitted that there was no material error in relation to Section  117B
    because the  considerations  set  out  in  Section  117B  were  already
    mirrored in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

 9. Ms Ahmed further contended that the  judge  failed  to  appreciate  the
    reasoning in Chen and referred to in paragraphs 35, 36 and 39  of  that
    decision. She submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  appreciate  that,
    because the Appellant had not passed  the  English  language  test,  he
    would not be able to meet the requirements and she submitted  that  the
    judge undertook no scrutiny of the  evidence  in  relation  to  whether
    temporary separation would be  an  interference  before  concluding  at
    paragraph 9 that it would not be right to send the  Appellant  back  to
    apply for entry clearance.

10. Ms Ahmed submitted that the judge failed to consider paragraph 51 of SS
    (Congo)  and  failed  to  identify  compelling  circumstances  why  the
    consideration  was  appropriate  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    relation to Chau Le Ms Ahmed submitted that it was clear that the judge
    allowed this appeal on the basis that  the  Appellant  almost  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.

11. Mr Miah submitted that the judge did undertake sufficient and  adequate
    consideration of all the factors, for example the judge referred to the
    Appellant's partner's mother-in-law having been murdered  in  Pakistan,
    the judge referred to the fact that the Appellant and his  partner  and
    her adult children were a family unit and that he is regarded as  their
    stepfather.

Error of law

12. The difficulty here is that the only real assessment of the particulars
    of the Appellant's case  was  a  particularly  brief  consideration  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of the decision.  I have looked  at  the  assessment
    undertaken by the judge at paragraphs 8 and 9 and in my view the  judge
    has not given adequate reasons for his decision that  the  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's application is disproportionate to his right  to
    family life under Article 8.

13. In addition the judge failed to make any assessment of the  Appellant's
    case under the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State had considered
    the  application  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules but the judge failed to engage with the Rules at all.



14. Further, having apparently engaged in an assessment of the  Appellant's
    appeal under freestanding Article 8(without explaining why he  went  on
    to do so), the  judge  completely  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    statutory considerations  in  Section  117B.   Section  117B  places  a
    statutory obligation on a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  consider  the
    factors set out therein in considering  the  public  interest.   It  is
    clear that the judge here did not do so.  Whilst of  course  the  judge
    need not rehearse Section 117B and set out all of the factors  therein,
    the judge must consider the substance of those factors and plainly  the
    judge did not do so here.  I consider that this amounts to  a  material
    error of law in this case.

15. For all of these reasons it is my view that  the  judge  made  material
    errors of law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore
    cannot stand.  Ms Ahmed confirmed that there was no  challenge  to  the
    facts in this case.  I therefore preserve the findings of fact made  by
    the judge at paragraph 8 but I set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Remaking the decision

16. I heard submissions from Ms Ahmed and Mr Miah in relation  to  remaking
    the decision.  Ms Ahmed submitted that the starting point is  that  the
    Appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   In
    terms of considering the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  she
    relied on SS (Congo) paragraphs 31 to 33 and 51.   She  submitted  that
    there are  no  compelling  circumstances  in  this  case  as  both  the
    Appellant and his wife are adults, the Appellant's  partner's  children
    are adults and able to look after themselves.  She accepted that  there
    is family life in this case.  In terms of Section 117B  she  relied  on
    the  case  of  Rajendran  [2016]  UKUT   00138   and   submitted   that
    precariousness applies to family life  as  well  as  to  private  life.
    Family life in this case was formed when the  Appellant  did  not  have
    settled status.  In terms of Chen she relied on paragraphs 36,  39,  41
    and 42.  She submitted that the burden is on the Appellant to show that
    any temporary separation would be disproportionate.  Here it would  not
    be disproportionate as the Appellant's partner's children are adults.

17. Mr Miah  relied  on  paragraph  2  of  Rajendran.   He  submitted  that
    integration was not an issue in  this  case  as  the  Appellant  speaks
    English  and  that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  are  maintaining
    themselves and are financially  independent.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant entered the UK in 2010 as a student and at that time he would
    have had to satisfy the Entry Clearance Officer that he  spoke  English
    and had the required funds.  His wife has been in the UK since 1987 and
    her ties to the UK are established by her two adult children with  whom
    she lives as a family unit.  He submitted  that  the  Appellant  speaks
    English and relied on the City & Guilds certificate  submitted  on  his
    behalf.  He submitted that looking at the case in the round the factors
    in Section 117B do not dilute a conclusion that the Appellant's removal
    would be disproportionate.  He submitted that I  am  entitled  to  make
    positive findings to tip the balance in favour of the  Appellant  whose
    credibility has not been challenged.

Remaking the Decision

The Immigration Rules

18. Although the judge's findings of fact have not been challenged  he  did
    not make  significant  factual  findings.  The  only  findings  are  at
    paragraph 8.  The  judge  appears  to  have  accepted  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

19. In his witness statement the Appellant says  that  his  wife  has  been
    working regularly and her annual  income  is  more  than  the  required
    threshold but acknowledged that at the time of the application she  had
    changed jobs and she had not been in her second job for six months.  He
    said that his wife's mother was  murdered  in  Pakistan  and  that  she
    suffered  a  lot  of  trauma  and  suffered  a  lot  in  her   previous
    relationship and that since they met there is  a  lot  of  pleasure  in
    being in each other's lives.  He said that he could not  make  a  fresh
    application for leave to remain because he has been unable to pass  the
    relevant English test because he has been unable to obtain his original
    passport from the Home Office.  He said that his  wife  fears  for  her
    life in Pakistan and that she  cannot  go  there  and  neither  can  he
    because he believes that he would be a target too.  He  said  that  his
    father died in July 2016 and he had been unable to  return  there.   He
    said that he believes that there are insurmountable obstacles to  their
    family life continuing in Pakistan.

20. In her witness statement the Appellant's wife accepted that she did not
    have six months' pay slips for both of her jobs  at  the  time  of  the
    application because she had changed jobs before that.   She  said  that
    she is afraid to go to Pakistan because of her mother's murder and that
    she is afraid of her husband going back.

21. The Appellant's bundle contains a number of documents  including  press
    reports of the murder of Wiseem Naz, a 70-year-old school principal and
    evidence of her identity.  The Appellant's bundle also contains a  City
    & Guilds certificate in international English  for  speakers  of  other
    languages in relation to the Appellant.  The  Appellant's  bundle  also
    contains pay slips and HMRC documents in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    wife.

22. I begin by considering the  Immigration  Rules.   In  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter the Respondent refused the application under Appendix FM
    R-LTRP1.1 on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had  not  submitted  the
    required evidence to demonstrate that his  partner  met  the  financial
    threshold.  In the reasons for refusal letter I note that there  is  no
    allegation that the Appellant falls for  refusal  under  Section  S-LTR
    suitability requirements. There is no  allegation  that  the  Appellant
    does not meet the requirements of E-LTRP1.2 to 1.12 and E-LTRP2.1.  The
    Respondent therefore considered whether exception Ex1 applies. That  is
    my starting point for consideration of this appeal.

23. Ex 1 of Appendix FM provides as follows:

      "EX.1. This paragraph applies if
        (a)
           (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child who-
               (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18
               years when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis
               that this paragraph applied;
               (bb) is in the UK;
               (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously
               for at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of
               application ; and
           (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           UK; or
        (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK
        or in the UK with refugee  leave  or  humanitarian  protection,  and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner
        continuing outside the UK.


        EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
        obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would  be
        faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family
        life together outside the UK and which  could  not  be  overcome  or
        would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
        partner."

24. There is no evidence that the Appellant  has  a  parental  relationship
    with a child under 18 therefore I go on to  consider  Ex  1(b).  It  is
    asserted that the fact that the Appellant's mother was  murdered  is  a
    barrier to her return to Pakistan however there is no detail as to  how
    this prevents her returning there nor is there any evidence as  to  how
    this prevents the Appellant returning there.  There  is  no  detail  or
    evidence as to how this might place the Appellant  or  his  partner  in
    danger in Pakistan or in any particular part of Pakistan.  Although  it
    appears that the Appellant and his wife live with  her  adult  children
    there is no evidence about or from them. In fact the  application  form
    shows that the Appellant's wife's youngest child, who was then aged 16,
    lived with other adult siblings at that time as the Appellant was  said
    to be looking for bigger accommodation. There is no evidence before  me
    as to the accommodation in which the family currently reside. There  is
    no evidence as to the nature of the Appellant's relationship with  them
    or as to whether his return to Pakistan or the return of  their  mother
    would  have  any  impact  on  them.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    relationship  with  the  adult  children  poses  any  obstacle  to  the
    Appellant and his wife residing in Pakistan or elsewhere.  There  is  a
    real dearth of evidence as to the circumstances of  the  Appellant  and
    his wife in the UK and as to their likely  circumstances  in  Pakistan.
    Accordingly there is insufficient evidence to  demonstrate  that  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to the family life of  the  Appellant  and
    his wife continuing outside the UK.

25. I have  considered  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence before me.  As the Appellant has been in the UK since 2010 the
    appropriate provision is 276ADE (1) (vi) which requires  the  Appellant
    to show that "there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  [his]
    integration into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
    to leave the UK." In light of my findings above and given that he is  a
    national of Pakistan, speaks the language, and lived there until  2010,
    I am not satisfied that the Appellant has demonstrated that there would
    be very significant obstacles to his reintegration in Pakistan.

Article 8

26. In deciding  how  to  approach  human  rights  and  Article  8  I  have
    considered the relevant case law including the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in R (on the application of  Esther  Ebun  Oludoyi  &  Ors)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)
    and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) which makes it clear that  there
    is a need to look at the evidence to see if there is anything which has
    not  already  been  adequately  considered  in  the  context   of   the
    Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.
    There is  nothing  in  the  evidence  before  me  which  has  not  been
    considered in my assessment of the Immigration Rules above.

27. However, for the purposes of completeness I consider the  appeal  under
    Article 8 in accordance with the guidance set out by Lord Bingham in  R
    v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  It was not disputed by Ms Ahmed
    at the hearing and I accept that the Appellant is married to  his  wife
    and that they have a family life together in the UK. If the Appellant's
    wife does not go to Pakistan with him there  will  be  an  interference
    with  that  family  life.  The  Appellant's  return  to  Pakistan  will
    interfere with any private life he has established in the UK.  I accept
    that such interference would  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8. As the appellant does
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules any interference  is
    in accordance with the law.

28. In considering proportionality I consider the same factors as  set  out
    above including the scant evidence as to the nature and extent  of  any
    private life established by the Appellant in the UK and the  dearth  of
    evidence in relation to the Appellant's relationship  with  his  wife's
    adult children and details about their living arrangements. There is no
    evidence as to how the murder of the Appellant's  wife's  mother  would
    impact on his return to Pakistan. I  take  into  account  the  lack  of
    evidence to  show  that  there  are  any  obstacles  to  the  Appellant
    returning to Pakistan with his wife. I weigh as  a  significant  factor
    the fact that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

29. In considering proportionality  I  also  take  account  of  the  public
    interest considerations set out in  section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It appears that the  Appellant  speaks
    English. There is no evidence that  the  Appellant  is  in  receipt  of
    benefits. I take account of the guidance in Rajendran and I  note  that
    the appellant's private and family life in the UK has been  established
    whilst his immigration status was precarious.

30. The appellant may choose to return to Pakistan,  with  or  without  his
    wife, and apply for entry clearance to return to  the  UK.  This  is  a
    choice for the couple to make. As  the  Appellant  does  not  have  the
    required English language certificate I cannot find that  he  can  meet
    the requirements for entry clearance.  Given  my  findings  above  that
    there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life being  enjoyed  in
    Pakistan and the lack of detailed evidence in this case I  cannot  find
    that a  temporary  separation  to  enable  the  Appellant  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance would be disproportionate.

31. Weighing all of these factors I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  to
    refuse the application is proportionate to the respondent's  legitimate
    aim of the maintenance of an effective system  of  immigration  control
    for the prevention of disorder or crime or to secure the economic well-
    being of the country.

Notice of Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and I set it aside.

33. I remake the decision by dismissing the Human Rights appeal.

34. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
