


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 20441 2012
       IA 20442 2012
                                                               IA 02443 2012
                                                               IA 20444 2012
                                                               IA 20445 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2013 and 11 June 2013              |On 24 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ARSHAD IQBAL
                                YASMEEN IQBAL
                                ALISHA ARSHAD
                                 AMAN ARSHAD
                               KHADIJA ARSHAD
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Jinnah Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this case the appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary  of  State")  has
    appealed a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeals  of
    the respondents (hereinafter "the  claimants")  against  a  decision  of
    Secretary of State to refuse to extend their leave to be in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur ) Migrant or  his  dependants  as  the
    case may be.

 2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffen and she allowed
    the  appeal.   She  said  that  the  respondents  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Rules, and in order to make sense of the  Rules  she
    imposed a purposive construction on the Rules and made the decision that
    she did.



 3. This was challenged by the Secretary of State  and  came  before  Deputy
    Judge Black who decided that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law.
    She gave reasons for that decision and those reasons are  part  of  this
    determination.  We incorporate  those  reasons  into  the  determination
    because it sets out more of the background of the case, as well as being
    a necessary part of our overall decision. The reasons set out below  are
    very similar to but not precisely the same as those that have previously
    been disclosed to the parties with Directions following a hearing  on  5
    March 2013. In particular it accepts a factual error in the  draft  sent
    to the parties that was identified in the appellants'  further  skeleton
    argument. If either party is considering an appeal the relevant decision
    is that set out here and below.

 4. Judge Black said:

    1.   This is an appeal against a determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  R  Tiffen  who  allowed  the  present  respondents'   appeal
         following a hearing at Taylor House in a determination  promulgated
         on 11 December 2012.

    2.   The Secretary of State is  the  appellant  in  these  proceedings.
         Permission to appeal was granted on 21 December 2012 by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Saffer who found that there was an arguable error of
         law in that the  Tribunal  was  wrong  in  its  construction  of  a
         mandatory Rule.

    3.   The matter comes before me today for the purposes of a hearing  to
         enable me to consider whether or not the judge made an error of law
         that is material to the decision to allow the appeal, and if so, to
         substitute a decision.

    Background

    4.   Mr Iqbal who is a citizen of Pakistan made a combined  application
         on 14 April 2012 for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  1
         (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the  points-based  scheme  and  for  a
         biometric  residence  permit.   Applications  were  also  made   by
         dependant members of his family.

    5.   The applications were refused by the  Secretary  of  State  on  13
         September 2012 under paragraph 245DD(b) of HC 395 (as amended).

    6.   The notice of refusal stated that a  decision  had  been  made  to
         remove the appellant from the UK by way of directions under Section
         47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    7.   The Secretary of State relied paragraph 41-SD(a) that he failed to
         establish that funds (�208,377.90) were being made available to him
         because the bank letters sent  in  support  of  funds  held  by  Mr
         Muhammad Asghar Shah (Bank Islami Pakistan Ltd and Silkbank) and Mr
         Nabeel Ahmed Mirza (United Bank Ltd) did not state the  appellant's
         name on the letters as required.  The requirements specified  under
         Appendix A of the Immigration Rules were not met.

    Grounds

    8.   In her determination First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffen  found  that
         paragraph 41-SD(a)(6) "has not and cannot be met".  The grounds  of
         appeal submit that the judge then continued to interpret  what  the
         intention of parliament must have been and allowed the appeal under
         the Immigration Rules  notwithstanding  that  she  found  that  the
         appellant could not meet the requirements of those  Rules  approved
         by parliament.

    9.     Mr Jarvis relied on three decisions, RS (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011]
         EWCA Civ 434, T (entry clearance - Section 55  BCIA  2009)  Jamaica
         [2011] UKUT 483 (IAC) and the Supreme Court judgment of Ahmed Mahad
         [2009] UKSC 16.

    Application to amend grounds of appeal

    10.  Mr Jarvis made a preliminary application to amend the  grounds  of
         appeal under Rule 5 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.  He
         sought to amend the grounds of appeal to argue that the  First-tier
         Judge did not have jurisdiction to find that the actual wording  of
         the relevant sub-Rule was unlawful and  that  this  amounted  to  a
         perverse and/or irrational decision.

    11.  Mr Iqbal opposed the application arguing  that  the  Secretary  of
         State had had ample opportunity in  which  to  address  the  point,
         permission to appeal having been granted on 21 December  2012.   If
         the Secretary  of  State  were  allowed  to  amend  the  Rules  the
         appellant would have no sufficient notice in which to respond.   Mr
         Iqbal's case had been  prepared  in  the  skeleton  argument  which
         revolved around all arguments and grounds  put  forward  thus  far.
         Further research would be necessary in order to prepare a  response
         to the appellant's proposed amendment which  related  to  Rules  of
         statutory interpretation.

    Decision on Application to Amend Grounds of Appeal

    11.  I decided to refuse the application for leave to amend the grounds
         of appeal.  I considered that the Secretary of State had had  ample
         opportunity to fully consider all grounds of appeal and to  prepare
         the  same  in  advance  of  the  hearing  in  compliance  with  the
         directions made.  The main appeal issue  was  clear  and  could  be
         dealt with at the hearing before me.  It would be  unfair  for  the
         grounds to be amended at such a late stage as those representing Mr
         Iqbal had had no notice of this and no opportunity to prepare their
         arguments on the separate point of jurisdiction.

    Submissions Re Error of Law

    12.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the requirements under paragraph 41-SD in
         Appendix A are mandatory.  The judge  misdirected  herself  as  she
         accepted that the requirements were not met but she sought then  to
         interpret  the  Rule  and  parliament's  intention   for   herself.
         Thereafter she decided to allow the appeal.

    13.  Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  the  judge  interpreted  or  read  the
         construction of Section 41-SD in a way to make it  lawful  but  she
         was unclear as to what conclusion she reached in consequence of her
         findings with regard to Section 41-SD.  It  was  perverse  to  find
         that the Rule was unlawful and then go on to allow the appeal under
         the Rules.  The judge had not concluded that the decision  was  not
         in accordance with the law.

    14.  It was submitted that the judge considered the evidence of the two
         letters from the two banks in Pakistan.  She  interpreted  this  as
         being enough evidence to show that the requirements of the sub-Rule
         were met and further  that  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  were
         contrary to financial Regulations in  Pakistan.   The  two  letters
         indicated that it was the internal banking policy of the two  banks
         not to show the name of the appellant on the bank letters for third
         parties.

    15.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge focused on the  effect  of  the
         sub-Rule on this appellant and for Pakistani nationals.   The  Rule
         applied to all applicants and so to consider it  from  the  limited
         perspective of Pakistani nationals generally was  unlawful.   There
         had been no evidence adduced that the Rule affected  others  beyond
         this appellant or other Pakistani nationals in general  who  banked
         with the particular banks.

    16.  The judge failed to consider the scheme overall in paragraph 41-SD
         which was unambiguous.  The scheme had been set out specifically to
         assist applicants to show what they needed to satisfy to  meet  the
         Rules  and  therefore   allows   for   consistent   and   efficient
         consideration of all applications.  The Secretary of State intended
         to  provide  a  transparent  and  efficient   process   for   these
         applications as has been observed and  accepted  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal.  The judge's approach was wrong  to  the  extent  that  she
         concluded that the appellant on balance complied with  the  purpose
         behind the Rules but she ignored the actual sub-Rule.

    Submissions from Mr Iqbal

    17.  Mr Iqbal submitted that the banks in question do not allow for the
         issue of a letter with the name of the applicant  on  it.   In  the
         event that this is  banking  policy  Mr  Iqbal  questioned  how  an
         applicant in these circumstances would be able to meet the Rule.

    18.  He relied on his skeleton argument and quoted Lord  Brown  in  the
         Supreme Court decision of Mahad.  Further, he referred to a  recent
         ministerial statement by Mark Harper (Minister for Immigration) who
         on 22 November 2012 arguably made it clear that the purpose of  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules is "to  ensure  entrepreneurs
         and investors genuinely have access to the funds  they  claim  they
         do".

    19.  Mr Iqbal also cited Lord Bingham's dicta in Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]
         UKHL 11 at paragraph 17 and the more recent Upper Tribunal decision
         of Izuazu (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC).   Mr  Iqbal
         argued that a proper construction of the  Rule  was  possible  from
         beginning to end and the approach would be to decide what the  Rule
         fundamentally requires and to look at this  having  regard  to  the
         intention of  the  Secretary  of  State.   He  submitted  that  the
         Secretary  of  State's  intention  was  to  ensure  that  potential
         investors genuinely had access to the funds.  Mr Arshad  Iqbal  had
         met the intentions and purpose behind the Rule and failed  only  to
         meet the specific requirements under paragraph 41-SD(a)(6).

    20.  It was submitted that the judge had not found that this  appellant
         could not meet the Rule but that in general the Rule cannot be  met
         in isolation, and the Rule could not be met.  This was an important
         distinction.  The Judge's approach was to  interpret  the  sub-Rule
         purposively to give effect to the respondent's  intentions  and  as
         such this should have been welcomed by the Secretary of State.

    21.  Further it was submitted that the Rules were not subject to active
         debate in parliament and parliament  may  not  have  envisaged  the
         consequences of this sub-Rule.  Mr Iqbal identified the evidence to
         show that Mr Iqbal had met the requirements of  the  Rules.   There
         was a genuine intention to get money into  the  UK  and  there  was
         documentary evidence from which such intentions could be  inferred,
         all of which had been considered by the First-tier Judge.

    In response

    22   Mr Jarvis observed that this hearing was to consider the issue  of
         the error of law.  There was a lack of  precision  in  the  judge's
         findings and she has effectively reconstructed the Rule by imposing
         her own interpretation.

    23.  Mr Jarvis relied on Mahad.  He referred to the  observations  made
         by Lord Bingham  and submitted that the quote set out in  paragraph
         8 of Mr Iqbal's skeleton argument must be seen in  the  context  of
         the further qualification made by Lord Bingham.

    24.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the First-tier cannot routinely ignore or
         rephrase the sub-Rules as this would lead to  increased  litigation
         in the courts.  Rewording or ignoring the Rules specified cannot be
         right.  How the sub-Rule is to be construed has been  done  by  the
         Secretary of State through the negative resolution process and  the
         requirement in these Rules is that the name of the  applicant  must
         appear on the  specified  financial  documentation.   The  sub-Rule
         effects all persons making such applications not simply  Mr  Arshad
         Iqbal.   The  policy  adopted  by  the  two  named  banks  was  not
         indicative of broad financial Regulations.  There was  no  evidence
         to support that this is a banking policy  in  other  areas  of  the
         world.

    Discussion

    25.  The grounds of appeal challenge  the  decision  and  reasoning  of
         Judge Tiffen who allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but
         yet found on the facts that Mr Arshad Iqbal was unable to meet  the
         specified requirements of the sub-Rule under Appendix A set out  in
         paragraph  41-SD(a)(i)(6).   The  Judge  found  that  the  evidence
         established that he had in effect met  the  purpose  and  intention
         behind the Rules.

    26.  Mr Arshad Iqbal adduced evidence in the form of letters from three
         banks regulated by the State Bank of Pakistan  namely  Bank  Islami
         Pakistan Ltd, Silkbank and United Bank Ltd.  The sub rule  requires
         that letter from each financial institution holding the funds  must
         confirm the amount of money available to  the  applicant  and  must
         "state the applicant's name, and his team  partner's  name  if  the
         applicant is applying under the provisions in paragraph 52 of  this
         Appendix".   It  was  submitted  by  Mr  Iqbal  that  the   banking
         Regulations in Pakistan  do  not  allow  the  banks  to  state  the
         applicant's name on the  bank  letter  in  the  way  in  which  the
         respondent requires.  Each of  the  three  named  banks,  Silkbank,
         United  Bank  Ltd  and  BankIslami  were   unable   to   meet   the
         requirements.  Those banks have confirmed that  the  money  can  be
         transferred to the UK. The internal banking policy is  set  out  in
         two letters dated 1 August 2012 in which bank  officials  from  the
         two respective banks have stated "we are unable to mention the name
         of the third party or person or entrepreneur application  according
         to the bank policy".  There was no evidence  before  the  Judge  to
         show that the requirements in the Rules cannot be met by all of the
         banks in Pakistan and/or other countries worldwide.

    27.  I have  referred  to  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Mahad  at
         paragraph 10 where Lord Brown was considering the  proper  approach
         to the construction of the Rules and quoted Lord Hoffman in Odelola
         v SSHD [2009] 1 WLR 1230, 1233 (paragraph 4):

         " "Like any other question of construction, this  [whether  a  Rule
         change  applies  to  all  undetermined  applications  or  only   to
         subsequent applications] depends upon the  language  of  the  Rule,
         construed  against  the  relevant  background.   That  involves   a
         consideration of the Immigration Rules as a whole and the  function
         which they serve in the administration of immigration policy".

         That  is  entirely  consistent  with  what  Buxton  LJ  (collecting
         together a number of dicta from past cases concerning the status of
         the Rules) had said in Odelola in the Court of Appeal [2009] 1  WLR
         126 and indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the House  of  Lords
         decision in Odelola) in the present case.  Essentially it comes  to
         this.  The Rules are not to be construed with  all  the  strictness
         applicable to the construction of  a  statute  or  instrument  but,
         instead, sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning  of
         the words  used,  recognising  that  they  are  statements  of  the
         Secretary  of  State's  administrative  policy.   The  respondent's
         Counsel readily accepted what she meant in her written case by  the
         proposition  "the  question  of  interpretation  is  ...  what  the
         Secretary of State intended his policy to be" was that the  court's
         task is to discover from the words  used  in  the  Rules  what  the
         Secretary of State must be taken  to  have  intended.   After  all,
         under Section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971,  the  Secretary  of
         State has to  lay  Rules  before  parliament  which  then  had  the
         opportunity to disapprove them.  True, as  I  observed  in  Odelola
         (paragraph 33): "The  question  is  what  the  Secretary  of  State
         intended.  The Rules are her Rules."  But that intention is  to  be
         discerned objectively  from  the  language  used,  not  divined  by
         reference to supposed policy considerations.   Still  less  is  the
         Secretary of State's intention to be  discovered  from  Immigration
         Directorate Instructions  (IDIs)  issued  intermittently  to  guide
         Immigration Officers in their application of the Rules.   IDIs  are
         given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule  2  to  the  1971  act
         which provides that:

         "In the exercise of their  functions  under  this  act  Immigration
         Officers shall act in accordance with such Rules (not  inconsistent
         with the Immigration Rules) as may be given then by  the  Secretary
         of State ...".    "

          28.   I find that the approach and decision taken by Judge  Tiffen
         is flawed.  The Immigration Rules including the sub-Rule set out in
         Appendix A exist in order to specify the criteria and  requirements
         that it is necessary to  meet  when  making  an  application.   The
         detailed and specific provisions make it  clear  to  the  applicant
         what documentation they have to produce and in what  format.   This
         is to simplify and to clarify the requirements for  the  applicants
         and equally to ensure fairness  and  consistency  in  the  decision
         making  process.   The  requirements  in  the  relevant  Rules  are
         expressed clearly in the Immigration Rules that have been  approved
         by parliament. They are not therefore open to interpretation by the
         Tribunal for the judge to decide what the Secretary  of  State  may
         have meant or intended.  It is  not  the  role  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to rewrite legislation or to make assumptions  as  to  the
         intentions behind the Rules.  There was no evidence  to  show  that
         applicants generally  would  not  be  able  to  meet  the  specific
         requirements as to the bank letters for third parties but there was
         no  evidence  that  any  of  the  three  banks  identified  by  the
         appellants was able to meet the specific requirements of the rules.
         There was no evidence adduced to show that in other  countries  the
         requirements contravened financial rules or policies.

    Decision and directions

    29.   I find that Judge Tiffen made an error of law that is material to
         the decision to allow the appeal.

    30.  The determination is set aside.

    31.  The appeal be relisted for hearing  by  way  of  submissions  only
         before me.

 5. In the event the appeal came before  a  panel  comprising  Deputy  Judge
    Black and myself.

 6. The key point  of  contention  is  the  particular  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules set out at Appendix A paragraph 41-SD(a)(i)(6)  of  HC
    395.  This requires that  the  documents  produced  in  support  of  the
    application:

         "state the applicant's name and  his  team  partners  name  if  the
         applicant is applying under the provisions of paragraph 52 of  this
         Appendix".

 7. It is common ground that the documents relied upon by the claimants  did
    not comply with this Rule.  The claimants' case was simple.  It was that
    they could not satisfy the requirements of the Rules because  the  banks
    would not oblige.  It was because of this  evidence  that  Judge  Tiffen
    made the decision that she did.

 8. When Judge Black decided that the Rule was clear and  should  have  been
    applied she could have dismissed the appeal without  a  further  hearing
    but she chose not to do that. Rather she  gave  further  directions  and
    listed the appeal for a further hearing.  The  directions  provided  for
    either party to adduce further evidence that was relevant to  the  point
    of contention.  Neither party has taken advantage of  this  opportunity.
    The Secretary of State has produced some evidence from Pakistan  to  say
    that many applicants do comply with the Rule and that  particular  banks
    said that  they  could  issue  appropriate  documents.   Conversely  the
    claimants  have  produced  contrary  evidence  on  the  practices  of  a
    particular bank.  Neither of the documents containing the  evidence  was
    disclosed much before the hearing.  The Secretary of State  delayed  for
    the perfectly sensible that she was trying to  get  the  best  evidence.
    The claimants responded quickly to the evidence but not  until  the  day
    before the hearing, so nobody had  time  to  investigate  their  counter
    claims, and  we  deliberately  did  not  resolve  them.  The  additional
    evidence had not  been  produced  in  accordance  with  directions.  The
    parties could not rely on  it  without  a  further  adjournment  and  we
    determined the appeal by ruling on the law.

 9. We do, however, note that what we do not have is clear evidence from the
    claimants that it is contrary to the law of Pakistan or contrary to  the
    regulations of the banking industry to provide evidence in  a  way  that
    complies with the evidence of 41-SD(a)(i)(6), and  that  we  find  is  a
    telling omission.

10. We put it no higher than that because it is our view that  even  if  the
    Rules are written in a way that means no one can meet them, or at  least
    no one from Pakistan can meet them, it is not something that is  in  our
    power to change.  If the Rules are unsatisfactory then there might be  a
    remedy in the High Court of Parliament but we are certainly not advising
    either of those things.  What we are doing is saying if it is a  problem
    it is not one we can address.

11. Mr Iqbal tried to persuade us that it was not necessary to  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 41-SD(a)(i)(6).  He based this argument  on  a
    carefully prepared and patient examination of the Rules  which  he  said
    supported his contention that it was satisfactory if a  person  met  the
    requirements of 41-SD(b),  and  if  the  person  did  that  it  was  not
    necessary to satisfy the  requirements  of  41-SD(a).   We  follow  that
    argument which is presented with meticulous care, but we  disagree  with
    it.

12. We are satisfied that a plain reading  of  paragraph  41-SD  requires  a
    person to meet paragraph 41-SD(a) and, if appropriate, (b) and  possibly
    (c).  It might be that (b) and (c) are alternatives to each other;  that
    is not something that  we  have  to  decide  in  this  appeal.   We  are
    satisfied  that  in  every  case  where  paragraph  41-SD  applies  then
    paragraph 41-SD(a) has to be satisfied.

13. We think that this  is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  Rule  but  we  are
    reinforced in this construction by  looking  at  41-SD(a)(i)(8),(9)  and
    (10), which on our reading,  plainly  contemplate  the  situation  of  a
    person relying either on third party funds or in part on their own funds
    and in part on third party funds, and still clearly having to  meet  the
    requirements of 41-SD(a).

14. It follows therefore that we  reject  Mr  Iqbal's  contention  that  the
    claimant did not have to comply with this Rule.  We are  satisfied  that
    he did have to satisfy the rules as  interpreted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but he could not and that, therefore, on the findings of fact made
    by the First-tier Tribunal  the  proper  decision  would  have  been  to
    dismiss the appeal.  If his appeal is dismissed the  other  appeals  are
    necessarily dismissed consequentially because they are dependent on him.

15. It follows therefore that we set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and substitute a decision dismissing the claimants' appeals.

16. Mr Iqbal has been very helpful taking us through  a  difficult  area  of
    law.  Nobody has been assisted by the draftsman but we have reached  the
    decision we have for the reasons given.

17. There were before the First-tier  Tribunal  two  decisions;,  firstly  a
    decision under the Rules to refuse the leave sought  and,  secondly,  an
    appeal against a decision to remove.  It is quite plain that when  Judge
    Tiffen allowed the appeal she allowed  both  appeals,  so  the  decision
    against the appeal to remove was not challenged.  It is not affected  by
    our decision today.  If the Secretary  of  State  wants  to  remove  the
    claimants she has to make a fresh decision.

18. It was not argued before us that the claimants appeals should have  been
    allowed with reference to article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights and, given that they have only been in the United  Kingdom  since
    October 2009 any such claim would clearly have failed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  claimants  appeals
against leave to remain is set aside.

A decision to dismiss the claimants' appeals against the decision to  refuse
leave is substituted.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 June 2013                   |






