
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20252/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TAMANNA BEGUM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hussain, Counsel instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 17 April  1996.   She
    arrived in the UK with entry clearance as a  visitor  on  18  September
    2013.  She made an application on 20 February 2014 for leave to  remain
    on Article 8 grounds.  That application was refused in a decision dated
    17 April 2014.

 3. She appealed against that decision and her appeal  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe on 4 June 2015 whereby  she  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed it under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  The Secretary of State's appealed against  the  decision  of
    the FtT is in terms of Article 8.  There was no cross-appeal on  behalf
    of the appellant in relation to the appeal having been dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. After a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 17 November 2015, Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Froom ("DUTJ Froom") found that the decision of the  FtT
    involved the making of an error on a point of law.   Its  decision  was
    set aside, for the decision to be re-made in the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    error of law decision by Judge Froom is annexed to my decision.

 5. To put my decision into context, it is useful to set out the  basis  of
    the decision of the FtT and the grounds of  appeal  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State in relation to it.

 6. The appellant gave evidence before the First-tier  judge,  as  did  her
    husband Mohammed Mamnun Ahmed.  The judge concluded that the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private or family life.   At  [12]  she  noted
    that it was not disputed that the appellant is  married  to  a  British
    citizen and that their relationship is genuine  and  subsisting.   They
    have a child born on 2 October 2014, that child also  being  a  British
    citizen.  Again, she noted that it was not disputed that the  appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship with her son.

 7. She referred to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009 ("the 2009 Act") in terms of that child's best interests.  She
    concluded that  the  evidence  established  that  the  appellant  takes
    responsibility for the majority of her son's care and at that time  was
    still breastfeeding.  She  found  that  it  was  in  the  child's  best
    interests to be brought up by both his parents.

 8. At [15] she concluded that the appellant's spouse and son,  both  being
    British citizens, could not be required to leave the UK.  She  referred
    to ss.117A-117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act").  She stated that it was not suggested before her that
    the appellant's spouse could not maintain his wife and child.

 9. Although the appellant did not have  an  English  language  certificate
    from an approved provider, "she did provide evidence that she has  some
    qualifications in English".

10. She found that the appellant having entered the UK as  a  visitor,  her
    relationship with her husband was entered into "whilst her  immigration
    status was precarious".

11. At [19] there is reference to the appellant having spent  the  majority
    of her life in Bangladesh, the judge concluding that she had  no  doubt
    that the appellant maintains family and cultural ties to that  country.
    She reminded herself that British citizenship of the appellant's son is
    not to be regarded as a trump card.

12. Noting however the "substantial benefits" for the child of citizenship,
    including access to free healthcare and education, she  concluded  that
    it was not reasonable to expect their son to follow  the  appellant  to
    Bangladesh as he would be deprived of the  right  to  grow  up  in  the
    country of which he is a citizen.  She also found that it  was  not  in
    his best interests to be separated  from  his  father.   She  concluded
    therefore,  that  the  decision  to  remove  the   appellant   is   not
    proportionate.

13. The respondent's grounds asserted that the judge's conclusions fail  to
    balance the public interest  in  removal  in  circumstances  where  the
    appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules, against the appellant's
    rights.  The judge had failed to explain why it would  be  unreasonable
    for the child to go with her mother to Bangladesh.  The judge  appeared
    to have taken the child's British citizenship as the only  factor  that
    determined proportionality.  Similarly, the judge  had  not  considered
    whether the appellant's husband could accompany them to Bangladesh.

14. Although there is reference to s.117B of the 2002 Act,  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard  to  the  substance  of  those  provisions.   The
    grounds refer to the decision in AM S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
    (IAC).

15. It can be seen that in DUTJ Froom's decision he stated at [24] that the
    findings of fact made by Judge O'Keefe could stand,  albeit  that  they
    may be built on by further evidence.  Accordingly, I identified to  the
    parties my view as to what findings of fact  had  been  made  by  Judge
    O'Keefe.  They were as follows:

      i) The appellant does not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules for leave to remain in terms of family or private life.

     ii)  The  appellant  is  married  to  a  British  citizen   and   their
         relationship is genuine and subsisting.

    iii) The appellant and her husband have a child who is  also  a  British
         citizen and  with  whom  the  appellant  also  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship.

     iv) The appellant takes responsibility for the majority  of  her  son's
         care, and at the time of the hearing she was still breastfeeding.

      v) It is in the child's  best  interest  to  be  brought  up  by  both
         parents.

     vi) It was not suggested that the appellant's spouse could not maintain
         his wife and child.

    vii) The appellant did not have an English language certificate from  an
         approved provider but she did provide evidence that  she  has  some
         qualifications in English.

   viii) The appellant has spent the majority of her life in Bangladesh  and
         she maintains family and cultural ties to that country.

16. Neither party expressed any disagreement with my identification of  the
    findings of fact made by the FtT.




    Submissions

17. Mr Hussain pointed out that the appellant's son is still only 15 months
    old.  Both parents are his carers, although the primary  carer  is  his
    mother, the appellant.  Her husband works and is the main  breadwinner.
    This is relevant to the disruption that would be involved in  requiring
    the  appellant  to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance   from
    Bangladesh.

18. Mr  Hussain  produced  a  document  in  relation  to  visa  application
    processing times from  Dhaka,  Bangladesh.  It  was  pointed  out  that
    according to that document the majority (86%) of visa applications were
    decided within 30 days in terms of applications for settlement.   After
    60 days 100% of applications were processed.  However,  the  'note'  to
    those processing times indicated that there is no guarantee as to  when
    an application would be processed.  The appellant's case is  likely  to
    be less straightforward and therefore the 60 day  period  is  the  more
    likely.

19. The First-tier Judge had concluded that there was no issue in  relation
    to maintenance and although the appellant had not provided  an  English
    language test from an approved provider, she had provided evidence that
    she has some qualifications in English.

20. I enquired of Mr Hussain as to why the appellant had not taken  a  test
    from an approved provider.  He accepted that she had not taken  such  a
    test, with the only explanation being proffered that it may be that her
    mind was "not focused sufficiently".

21. It was submitted that as at the date of her application  for  leave  to
    remain she met all the requirements except in terms of  having  entered
    as a visitor.  A fresh application for entry clearance would  now  meet
    all the requirements of the Rules except for the language  requirement.
    The appellant would be able to obtain an approved language certificate.



22. So far as s.117B  of  the  2002  Act  is  concerned,  that  is  not  as
    prescriptive  as  the  Rules  in  terms   of   the   English   language
    requirements.  That was relevant to the issue of  proportionality.   As
    the First-tier  Judge  found,  she  does  have  some  English  language
    ability.

23. It was submitted  that  the  question  arises  as  to  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect her to leave her very young child for as  long  as
    at least 60 days.  The 60 day period is  only  the  'processing'  time.
    Further time would be needed in order to prepare the  application,  for
    example.

24. As to why her son could not go to Bangladesh with her whilst  she  made
    her application for entry clearance, he said that he had no information
    in terms of whether the child would be able to enter  Bangladesh  as  a
    visitor or whether he would be able  to  obtain  citizenship.   In  any
    event, that would involve  some  time  delay  because  of  the  process
    involved.

25. It was submitted that the "whole premise" of 'Chen' and  'Zambrano'  is
    that there would be some disruption but it would  not  be  significant.
    In this case, the child would soon be in need of  nursery  and  primary
    education.  Certainly, he is not far away from  the  nursery  education
    stage.

26. There would be emotional disruption to the appellant's husband and  her
    son if  she  had  to  return  to  Bangladesh.   It  would  require  the
    appellant's husband to adopt the  main  caring  responsibilities  which
    would have an impact on his ability to work.   The  very  circumstances
    which would enable a successful application to be made would thereby be
    put at risk, at the very least in terms of the number of hours he could
    work.

27. Mr Clarke referred to the decision in Chikwamba v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40.  In that respect, the appellant
    would  need  to  meet  the  entry  clearance  requirements  before  the
    principle applied.  It is evident that the appellant would not be  able
    to meet the English language requirements.

28. Reference was also made by Mr Clarke to the decision  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  in
    particular at [44] in terms of the public interest.

29. The 'parent route' requires the appellant to  establish  that  she  has
    sole responsibility for her child, and that is not asserted here.

30. Although British citizens cannot be required to leave the UK, it  would
    have no effect on the child's Treaty rights if he left the UK with  his
    mother  for  a  short  period  of  time  pending  the  entry  clearance
    application.  The decision in Damion Harrison (Jamaica) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736  at  [63]  was  also
    relied on in this respect.

31. In terms of s.117B(6) and the reasonableness of the child  leaving  the
    UK, the child is not compelled to leave.  Although s.55 is relevant  to
    the  proportionality  assessment,  the  public  interest  needs  to  be
    considered in terms of financial independence,  precarious  immigration
    status and the proportionality involved in expecting the  appellant  to
    make an entry clearance application.  The  appellant  came  here  as  a
    visitor.  Her son is still very young and would not be greatly affected
    by going to Bangladesh with his mother for a short period of time.

32. In reply, Mr Hussain submitted that SS (Congo) dealt with circumstances
    of leave to enter and leave to remain.  The issue arises  in  terms  of
    proportionality of the appellant returning to  Bangladesh  without  her
    child.  If the child left the UK with the appellant, he would be denied
    all the rights and benefits of citizenship and  also  of  his  father's
    input as a carer.  In effect, he would be forced to leave the UK if the
    appellant had to leave.







    My assessment

33. It is accepted that the appellant is not able to meet the  requirements
    of the Article 8 Immigration Rules.  That is so, at the very least,  in
    terms of  the  appellant's  inability  to  meet  the  English  language
    requirements of the Rules.

34. The fact that she entered the UK as a visitor meant that she could  not
    meet the eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a partner.  In
    addition, at the time of the application she was not 18 or  over.   She
    accordingly is not able to rely on section EX.1.

35. I have considered whether it could be said that there are circumstances
    not recognised within the Rules sufficient to require consideration for
    leave to remain outside the Rules.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are,
    those circumstances including that the appellant has a very  young  son
    who is a British citizen and the question of  potential  separation  of
    the appellant and her son,  or  the  appellant  and  her  son  and  her
    husband, a British citizen.

36. I adopt the structured approach set out in R v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   It  is  accepted
    that the appellant has family life with her  husband  and  child.   The
    respondent's decision does amount to an interference with  that  family
    life on the basis of the appellant potentially being required to  leave
    the UK on her own.  That interference will have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of  Article  8.   The
    decision  is  however,  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  pursues  a
    legitimate aim.  The issue is one of proportionality.

37. The best interests of the appellant's son are a primary  consideration.
    It is a preserved finding that it is in that child's best interests  to
    be brought  up  by  both  his  parents.   That  is  an  uncontroversial
    conclusion.  However, I do not consider,  for  reasons  explained  more
    fully below, that the respondent's decision  does  in  fact  compromise
    that assessment of where the  child's  best  interests  lie,  when  one
    considers the issue of the appellant returning to Bangladesh  to  apply
    for entry clearance.

38. In SS (Congo) the Court of  Appeal  referred  at  [33]  to  the  public
    interest factors which find expression  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    formulation of the Article 8 Immigration Rules.  It is to be remembered
    that in this case, as pointed out in the error of law decision by  DUTJ
    Froom, the appellant is not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Article 8 Rules in more than one respect.

39. She came to the UK as a visitor and entered into an arranged  marriage.
    She then became pregnant.  Those are choices made by the appellant  and
    her husband which are not choices which are the responsibility  of  the
    Secretary of State.

40. Furthermore, the appellant is not able to  meet  the  English  language
    requirement of the Rules.  Mr Hussain was unable to explain to me  when
    I enquired, as to why the appellant had not taken an  approved  English
    language test.  He did however, submit that if  she  were  to  make  an
    entry clearance application from Bangladesh, she would do so  with  the
    necessary English language qualification.  The  fact  remains  however,
    that she is not able to meet that requirement of the  Rules.   This  is
    not a requirement of the  Rules  that  is  trifling  or  insignificant.
    That, as with the other requirements of the Rules, is an expression  of
    the Secretary of State's view as to the importance  of  integration,  a
    matter also reflected in s.117B of the 2002 Act.

41. Mr  Hussain  submitted  that  the  provisions  of  s.117B(2)  are  less
    stringent than the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   The  Rules  require
    language ability to be demonstrated with reference to an approved test.
     S.117B(2) states that it is in the public interest and  in  particular
    in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the UK, that persons  who
    seek to enter or remain are able to speak  English,  because  they  are
    less of a burden on the taxpayers and are better able to integrate into
    society.

42. I do not agree however, that the statutory provisions  in  this  regard
    involve any dilution of the requirements of the Rules in this  respect.
    The Rules are an expression of the executive's judgement as to the  way
    in  which  a  person's  English  language  ability,  and   thus   their
    integration and the economic  wellbeing  of  the  country,  are  to  be
    assessed.  I  accept  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant does have some English language ability.   The  fact  remains
    however, that she is not able to meet the requirements of the Rules  in
    this respect.

43. No submissions were made to me on the  basis  of  Chikwamba.   In  that
    case, at [42] it was said as follows:

         "In an article 8 family case the prospective length and  degree  of
         family disruption involved in going abroad for an  entry  clearance
         certificate will always be highly relevant."

44. Mr Hussain produced evidence of visa processing  times  in  a  document
    with  that  title,  apparently  printed  from  the  UK  Visas  (or  its
    equivalent) website.  The relevant part  states  that  in  relation  to
    settlement visas most applications are processed within 60 days.  There
    is  then  a  table  of  processing  times  which  states  that  2%   of
    applications are processed within ten days, 23%  within  fifteen  days,
    86% within 30 days and 100% within 60 days.   A  note  to  those  times
    states that "actual processing times may vary depending on a  range  of
    factors".

45. Mr Hussain submitted that any application for entry clearance that  the
    appellant might make is likely to  be  more  involved  than  the  usual
    application of this type.  However, he did not advance any argument, or
    point to any evidence, in support of  that  contention.   There  is  no
    basis from which to conclude that an application for entry clearance by
    the appellant as a spouse would take any  longer  than  what  could  be
    described as a run-of-the-mill application of this type.

46. In the event that the appellant were to make an application  for  entry
    clearance from Bangladesh, it could  reasonably  be  expected  that  it
    would be processed, as most applications are, within 60 days.   If  the
    appellant's son remained in the UK with his father, there would  in  my
    judgement be a relatively short period  of  disruption  to  the  family
    unit.  It is also to be remembered that the evidence  accepted  by  the
    FtT was that both the appellant and her husband take responsibility for
    the care of their son, albeit that the appellant is the main carer.

47. It was submitted to me that if the appellant's husband was required  to
    care for their son on his own, that  would  have  some  impact  on  his
    employment, at least in terms of the  number  of  hours  having  to  be
    reduced.  I was told that certain documents in terms of the appellant's
    husband's  financial  circumstances  were  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, albeit not in any bundle, and were not disputed.   The  FtT's
    decision makes no reference to any  such  documentary  evidence.   More
    importantly, there is no evidence  before  me  of  what  employment  he
    actually has, or what impact any reduction of hours  may  have  on  his
    earning ability.  In addition, no evidence was  advanced  in  terms  of
    whether there is anyone else who could care for the  child,  perhaps  a
    family member or friend. Similarly, there is no evidence before  me  to
    suggest that care could not be provided on a paid basis.

48. The submission therefore, that the appellant's child remaining  in  the
    UK would compromise the very basis upon which an application for  entry
    clearance could be made in terms of the appellant's husband's financial
    circumstances, is unsupported by any evidence.

49. It is true that if her son remained in the UK  the  separation  between
    her son and the appellant is likely to have some  emotional  impact  on
    the appellant.  The extent to which it would affect emotionally a child
    of that very young age is difficult to gauge, although it is reasonable
    to assume that it would have some effect, albeit not a lasting  effect.
    Nevertheless, as I have indicated, the likelihood is that the period of
    separation would be very short.

50. Of course, it is important to bear in mind the British  citizenship  of
    the child.  However, the  contention  that  the  child's  rights  as  a
    British citizen would be compromised by the refusal of leave to  remain
    has no discernible merit.  On the evidence put before me, even  if  the
    appellant's son went with her to Bangladesh, he would only  be  out  of
    the country for a relatively short period of time.   He  is  not  at  a
    stage when he would require even nursery education.   No  evidence  was
    put before me to indicate that there are any issues in relation to  his
    health.  There is no basis upon which to conclude that he would need to
    be  in  the  UK  to  access  health  services,   apart   from   routine
    appointments.

51. Whilst during the period of making the entry clearance  application  he
    would be separated from his father, he would still be with his  mother,
    the primary carer.  Furthermore, there is no reason to suppose that the
    appellant's husband could not visit them pending  the  entry  clearance
    application.

52. In addition, I bear in mind  what  is  said  at  [63]  of  Harrison  as
    follows:

         "I agree with Mr Beal QC, counsel for the Secretary of State,  that
         there is really no basis for asserting that it is arguable  in  the
         light of the authorities that the  Zambrano  principle  extends  to
         cover anything short of a situation where the EU citizen is  forced
         to leave the territory of the EU. If the EU citizen, be it child or
         wife, would not in practice be compelled to leave  the  country  if
         the non-EU family member were to be refused the right of residence,
         there is in my view nothing in these authorities to suggest that EU
         law is engaged. Article 8 Convention rights may then come into  the
         picture to protect family life as the Court recognised  in  Dereci,
         but that is an entirely distinct area of protection."

53. I am  prepared  to  accept,  with  reference  to  s.117B(3),  that  the
    appellant is financially independent, that  being  a  matter  that  was
    accepted by the FtT.

54. However, the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
    public  interest,  a  matter   that   is   of   significance   in   the
    proportionality assessment, and as reflected at s.117B(1) of  the  2002
    Act.

55. Furthermore, whilst the appellant did not  establish  her  relationship
    with her husband whilst she was in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  as
    previously indicated both she and he knew that she was in the  UK  with
    permission to remain on a temporary basis only.

56. So far as s.117B(6)(b) is concerned, whilst the appellant does  have  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,
    for the reasons already explained I am not satisfied that it  could  be
    said that it was not reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  child  to
    leave  the  UK  with  the  appellant  pending   the   entry   clearance
    application.

57. In any event, also for reasons already given,  I  do  not  accept  that
    there is any expectation that the appellant's son should leave  the  UK
    with the appellant.

58. In summary, I am satisfied that the respondent has established that the
    decision is a proportionate response  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the country expressed through the maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.



    Decision

59. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      25/02/16

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20252/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 17 November 2015                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TAMANNA BEGUM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  17
    April 1996. The appellant is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, who has appealed with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    O'Keefe, allowing the respondent's appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 17 April 2014 outside the rules on article 8
    grounds. The appellant conceded she could not meet the requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the rules.

 2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Ms Begum from now on as
    "the appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

 3. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 18 September 2013  but  on
    22 August 2013 she applied for leave  as  the  spouse  of  Mr  Mohammed
    Mamnun Ahmed, a British citizen born on 29 July 1986 ("the sponsor") by
    filing form FLR(M). The respondent refused the application for a number
    of reasons, including that the appellant was under the age of 18 at the
    date of application and her English language test certificate  was  not
    from an approved provider. By the date of the hearing  of  the  appeal,
    the appellant had given birth to her son, born on 2 October 2014.

 4. The judge  directed  herself  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules for leave on the grounds of  her  private  or
    family life. "The issue for me is whether there are  circumstances  not
    envisaged in the Immigration Rules in order to justify a grant of leave
    to remain outside the  Rules.  In  order  to  decide  that  question  I
    consider the 5 questions  set  out  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.  [The
    presenting officer] made no submissions in support of the  decision  to
    refuse the application; his submissions were limited solely to  whether
    or not I should made a fee award in this case" [11].

 5. The judge found it was common ground that the appellant and the sponsor
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship and that their child  was
    British. The judge found it was in the child's  best  interests  to  be
    brought up by both his parents. His British citizenship had a value  to
    be taken into account when assessing his best interests (ZH  (Tanzania)
    v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4). Applying section 117B of the 2002 Act, the judge
    noted that it was not suggested  the  sponsor  could  not  support  the
    appellant and the child. The appellant did not provide  a  satisfactory
    English language test certificate but there was evidence she  had  some
    qualifications in  English.  The  appellant's  immigration  status  was
    "precarious" when she entered  a  relationship  with  the  sponsor  (AM
    (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 00260 (IAC)). The  judge  then  referred  to
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and FV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874. She concluded as follows [19]:

         "I take into account that the appellant has spent the  majority  of
         her life in Bangladesh and I  have  no  doubt  that  she  maintains
         family and cultural ties to that country. I remind myself that  the
         British citizenship of the child in this case is not to be regarded
         as  a  trump  card.  Citizenship  does  however  carry  substantial
         benefits for this young child particularly access  to  free  health
         care via the NHS and education. On the facts of this  case  I  find
         that it is not reasonable to expect this child to follow his mother
         to Bangladesh as he will be deprived of the right to grow up in the
         country of which he is a citizen. I find that it is not in his best
         interests to be separated from his father. Considering the evidence
         as a whole, I find that the decision to remove the appellant is not
         proportionate."

 6. The respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons on two  areas.  Firstly,  she
    had not adequately explained why the child's best interests  outweighed
    the public interest in removing the appellant,  who  had  not  met  the
    requirements of the rules. Secondly, the judge  had  failed  to  engage
    with the impact of section 117B when assessing the public interest.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal  because  it  was
    arguable the judge erred by failing  to  take  into  consideration  the
    possibility of  the  appellant  returning  to  Bangladesh  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance (R (on the application of Chen) v  SSHD
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation) IJR [2015] UKUT  00189
    (IAC)). No findings were made about the appellant's ability to meet the
    maintenance requirements of the rules.

 8. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.

 9. Mr Tufan argued the judge erred by failing to make a finding that there
    were compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave  outside  the
    rules on article 8 grounds. He relied on Singh & Khalid v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 and SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387. This was a  case
    of "precarious family life". The judge had allowed the  appeal  because
    the child was British and she did  not  consider  whether  family  life
    could be continued in Bangladesh.  Alternatively,  the  judge  had  not
    applied section 117B of the 2002 Act. In  particular,  in  relation  to
    subsection  (6),  she  had  not  adequately  assessed  whether  it  was
    reasonable for he child to leave the UK. Finally, he argued  the  judge
    had not considered the possibility  of  the  appellant  returning  with
    entry clearance in line with Chen. Mr Tufan acknowledged the presenting
    officer did not appear to have contested the appeal but he said that no
    concessions had been made and the judge was not absolved from making  a
    lawful decision.

10. Ms Akther's answer to all Mr Tufan's points was that the judge  had  to
    allow the appeal because the appellant  benefited  from  the  principle
    established in the CJEU decision in  Ruiz  Zambrano  [2011]  EUECJ  (C-
    34/09). The Grand Chamber of the CJEU in Zambrano held as follows:

         "45. Accordingly, the answer to the question referred is  that  art
         20 TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes a  member
         state from refusing a third country national upon which  his  minor
         children, who are European Union citizens, are dependent,  a  right
         of residence in the member state of residence  and  nationality  of
         those children, and from refusing to grant a work  permit  to  that
         third country national, in so far as such decisions  deprive  those
         children of the genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights
         attaching to the status of European Union citizens."

11. Ms Akther relied on Sanade and others (British children  -  Zambrano  -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) as authority for the proposition  that,
    as the child is British, it was not possible to require the family unit
    to relocate outside the EU or for the respondent to submit that it  was
    reasonable for them to do so. She said that principle had been "upheld"
    in AQ (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 250. She  referred  me  to
    passage from the submissions made in that case.

12. Ms Akther went on to argue that the judge  was  entitled  to  go  to  a
    second stage assessment of article 8 because the fact the appellant had
    a  British  child  was  a  very   important   factor.   In   terms   of
    proportionality, the judge had taken into account that  the  child  was
    very young and still breast-feeding. She applied ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4. She had considered section 117B with care.

13. Mr Tufan replied that the judge had not applied SS  (Congo)  and  shown
    that she recognised the weight which had to  be  given  to  the  rules.
    There were clear material errors in the decision.

14. I reserved my decision on whether the decision is vitiated by error  of
    law.

15. The judge has been criticised in submissions for a failure to  identify
    compelling circumstances so as to justify considering article 8 outside
    the rules. However, that was not the  basis  on  which  the  respondent
    sought permission to appeal or the basis on which permission to  appeal
    was granted. I do not see any reason to widen the grant  of  permission
    at this stage and the judge's self-direction in paragraph 11 is, on the
    face of it, adequate.

16. As noted, Ms Akther rested her case on the application of the  Zambrano
    principle, which was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal at  all.
    It is plain the judge rested her decision  on  a  pure  proportionality
    assessment, giving considerable weight to the  best  interests  of  the
    child. I see no reason to admit this issue to the appeal at  this  late
    stage either.  However, were it necessary to decide the point, I  would
    point out that AQ (Nigeria) did not, in fact,  approve  Sanade  or  the
    Secretary of State's concession in deportation cases,  as  recorded  in
    those cases. At paragraph 64 Pitchford LJ expressly declined to  decide
    the point. In the recent case of Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A -
    Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    leading European and  domestic  authorities  and  reiterated  that  the
    Zambrano principle only applies in situations in which the  EU  citizen
    is forced to leave the territory of  the  EU.  There  was  no  test  of
    reasonableness and the test was not whether there would be a  reduction
    of quality of life or standard of living. The judge in this appeal made
    no findings on the question of whether the child  would  be  forced  to
    leave the EU and therefore be deprived of his rights of an EU  national
    because she was not asked to. Given  the  appellant's  father  is  also
    British and could remain in the UK, it was likely  the  Zambrano  point
    would not assist this appellant.

17. In my judgment, the  appeal  turns  on  the  adequacy  of  the  judge's
    approach  to  the  task  of  conducting  a  proportionality   balancing
    exercise.  In that respect, paragraph 33 of  SS  (Congo)  is  important
    because what is missing from the judge's decision  is  any  recognition
    that the rules were more than  a  starting-point  and  that  the  judge
    needed to show in her decision that she recognized that she had to give
    "appropriate weight to the focused  consideration  of  public  interest
    factors as finds expression in the Secretary of State's formulation  of
    the new Rules in Appendix FM."

18. The context is important. The appellant gained entry to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor and shortly afterwards entered into marriage. According to  the
    statements, this was an arranged marriage. She was not  eligible  under
    the five-year partner route provided in Appendix FM  because  she  only
    had leave as a visitor. She also failed under that route  by  reference
    to  the  English  language  test  requirement  and  the   minimum   age
    requirement. She failed under the ten-year  route  as  well.  Paragraph
    EX.1 was not available to  her  because  she  failed  the  minimum  age
    requirement. In other words, the appellant sought to extend her  leave,
    as she was entitled to do, but she could not meet the  requirements  of
    the published rules by a clear margin. This would have been apparent to
    her and those advising her.

19. By the date of the appeal hearing she had turned 18 but she could still
    not show she met the rules because paragraph E-LTRP.1.4 required her to
    have been over 18 at the date of application. Moreover,  the  appellant
    had not apparently taken steps to comply with the English language rule
    as no such evidence has been filed to date. I agree with Mr Tufan  that
    this case can be properly characterised as "precarious family life"  in
    the sense that the appellant and her partner formed a new  relationship
    while the appellant was in the  UK  temporarily  and  they  planned  to
    establish family life here in the knowledge this would only be possible
    if Appendix FM were met.

20. In these circumstances, the judge was required to note, not  only  that
    the rules were not met, but also to assess  the  force  of  the  public
    interest given expression in those rules. This is a vital ingredient in
    the balancing exercise, particularly where  there  is  a  comparatively
    narrow gap between the rules and what article 8 requires,  as  must  be
    the case here. This factor appears to be  altogether  absent  from  the
    judge's consideration of reasonableness. In my view, the judge in  this
    appeal has missed this out  of  her  assessment  and  her  decision  is
    therefore fatally flawed.

21. I would also note that, whilst she directed herself  that  the  child's
    best interests were not a 'trump card', it is difficult to find  within
    this decision any factor which applied in  addition  to  the  fact  the
    child was British.

22. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

23. Ms Akther argued that, if the decision were set aside, further findings
    of fact would be required. I was initially unpersuaded that this  would
    be necessary. However, on further  reflection,  it  is  clear  that  an
    assessment of the application of the Chen (Chikwamba) point, which  was
    not  apparently  raised  at  the   previous   hearing,   will   require
    investigation of the degree of disruption to family life which would be
    caused by the appellant returning to Bangladesh to seek entry clearance
    as a partner and whether there was a "sensible reason" to  require  her
    to do so. Whilst the Tribunal is not required to  speculate  about  the
    appellant's prospects of success in any  further  application,  as  the
    judge granting permission to appeal pointed out, there is  no  analysis
    of the appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

24. As no interpreter had  been  provided  it  was  not  possible  to  hear
    evidence even though the appellant and her partner were in  attendance.
    The appeal must therefore be adjourned for a continuance hearing in the
    Upper Tribunal. Judge O'Keefe's findings of fact  (as  opposed  to  her
    conclusions on the law) can stand but they may be built on  by  further
    evidence on the points identified above. The Tribunal will be assessing
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing. The  following  directions
    will assist:

    DIRECTIONS

    (a)  The parties may file and serve additional evidence no  later  than
    10 days before the hearing;

    (b)  Witness statements should stand as evidence in chief;

    (c)  The Tribunal will expect to see  evidence  of  waiting  times  for
    entry clearance applications in Dhaka;

    (d)  A Bengali (Sylheti) interpreter will be provided.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    her decision allowing the appeal is set aside. The appeal is  adjourned
    for a further hearing in order to decide on the correct disposal of the
    appeal.




                               Signed   Date 18 November 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal


