

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      IA/20864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 27th July 2016                  |On: 28th July 2016                    |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Jones Awuah
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel instructed by Bernard
                       Owesu
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana date of birth 18th September 1983.
      He appeals with permission the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge RA Cox)  to dismiss his appeal against a refusal  to  issue  him
    with a residence card confirming his right of  permanent  residence  in
    the United Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ('the Regs').

 2. The background to this appeal is  that  on  the  10th  March  2010  the
    Appellant was granted a residence card as the family member of  an  EEA
    national  exercising  her  treaty  rights.  His  wife  is  a  Ms  Agnes
    Stillemunkes, a  German  national.  The  couple  had  married  in  2009
    according to Ghanaian customary law, by proxy. The Secretary  of  State
    was at that time satisfied that this marriage should be recognised, and
    the card was duly issued in accordance with Regulation 7 (1)(a).


 3. The  couple  remained  living  together  in  the  UK.  Ms  Stillemunkes
    continued to exercise treaty rights as a worker. They  did  so  in  the
    belief that their marriage was recognised, that the Appellant  had  his
    residence card, and that he was accruing  such  periods  of  continuous
    residence in compliance with the regulations that he  would  eventually
    be able to apply for permanent residence.

 4. That application, for confirmation of his right of permanent  residence
    in accordance with Regulation 15 (1)(b), was made in November 2014. The
    Respondent's decision is dated the 18th May 2016. The Respondent  noted
    that the Appellant's marriage to Ms Stillemunkes had been conducted  by
    proxy in Ghana. Although it had  previously  been  accepted  that  this
    marriage may be considered valid in Ghanaian law,  the  Respondent  now
    doubted that this was the case, having regard to  the  requirements  of
    the Ghanaian Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Law  1985.
    Further the Appellant had not demonstrated it to be valid as far as the
    German law was concerned. Since  the  Upper  Tribunal  promulgated  the
    decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] 00024  (IAC)  that
    had been deemed to be a prerequisite to recognition  of  validity,  and
    therefore any residence rights under  Regulation  7.    The  Respondent
    further queried whether this was a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    at all.

 5. That latter issue was resolved decisively in the Appellant's favour  by
    the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who  having  heard  the  live
    evidence of the Appellant and Ms Stillemunkes, and having had regard to
    all of the documentary evidence produced, was quite satisfied that this
    is a genuine and subsisting relationship and that the parties have been
    living together as man and wife for some seven years. As to  the  legal
    matters raised by the refusal the Tribunal's findings were as follows:

           a)  The  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had   previously
              recognised this marriage as valid  did  not  estop  her  from
              reviewing that decision. Kareem clarified the law and as such
              the Respondent was entitled to rely upon it at  the  date  of
              decision;
           b) In the absence of evidence that the marriage  was  recognised
              by the Ghanaian and German authorities it could  not  now  be
              relied upon to demonstrate compliance with Regulation 7;


           c) Whilst the Tribunal accepted that the couple had  been  in  a
              durable  relationship  for  in  excess  of  seven  years  the
              Applicant had never been issued with a residence card on that
              basis (ie under Regulation 8 as an 'extended family member').
              Having regard to the discretionary powers in  Reg  17(4)  the
              Tribunal was not prepared to infer that one would  have  been
              issued had the Respondent been asked for one;

           d) There was therefore no basis upon which  the  Tribunal  could
              conclude that the Appellant had been living for a  continuous
              period of five years in accordance with the  Regulations  and
              the appeal was dismissed, albeit with a  recommendation  that
              the Respondent  take  the  positive  findings  of  fact  into
              account in assessing  whether  the  exercise  her  discretion
              under Reg 17(4).

 6. The grounds of  appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    retrospectively applying the requirements of Kareem, and  that  it  had
    failed to consider that  Regulation  15  (1)(b)  draws  no  distinction
    between 'extended family members' and 'family members'.



    Error of Law


 7. I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its  approach
    to the question of whether  the  proxy  marriage  could  found  a  free
    movement right under Regulation 7.  Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli submitted  that
    the application of Kareem amounted to a  retrospective  change  in  the
    law. This is not correct. As the determination points out,  Kareem  did
    not change the law, it clarified how it  should  be  interpreted.  That
    said there is an obvious unfairness in the position that the  Appellant
    now finds himself in. The Respondent recognised his  marriage  in  2010
    and treated him as a family member. He cannot be blamed for relying  on
    that acceptance and not having applied for  a  residence  card  on  the
    alternative basis that he was an extended family member.   I  need  not
    consider the question of estoppel however, since it is clear  that  the
    appeal falls to be allowed on the basis of the second ground.


 8. Ms Bassiri- Dezfouli submitted that Article 15(1)(b) applies equally to
    the Appellant whether he is a 'family member' or  an  'extended  family
    member'.   Ms Ahmed helpfully submitted the Respondent's policy on this
    matter, 'Extended Family Members of EEA Nationals - v2.0, valid from  7
    April 2015.    That  sets  out  what  case-owners  must  consider  when
    assessing if an extended family of an EEA national sponsor  is  allowed
    to live in the UK on a permanent basis. As  it  makes  clear,  such  an
    individual qualifies for permanent residency if

           a) They have lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  five
              years and
           b) They have lived in line with Regulation 8 during that period


 9. The guidance goes on to say the following:


         "There may be circumstances where the five year  qualifying  period
         is made up of residency as a  family  member  and  as  an  extended
         family member. This is acceptable provided that the total five year
         period in question is continuous...."

10. In light of that guidance Ms Ahmed  very  properly  conceded  that  the
    Appellant had made out her grounds in respect of  Regulation  15(1)(b).
    There is  no  requirement  that  the  Appellant  has  had  five  years'
    continuous residence as a family member, nor is there  any  requirement
    that he has held confirmation of  his  right  to  residence  in  either
    category.  It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal   is
    set aside and the appeal is allowed.



    Decisions


11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


12. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

    "The decision is not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006)"

13. I was not asked to make an Order for anonymity and having regard to the
    nature of the evidence I see no reason to do so.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               28th July 2016
