

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number:  IA/20912/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 July 2017                       |               On 4 October 2017     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                MR RAZU AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Basith
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  in  1987.   He  appeals
    against a decision of the Respondent made on 20 May 2015 to refuse  his
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his private and  family
    life, in particular his marriage to a British citizen.

 2. The Respondent found that the Appellant could not meet the  Immigration
    Rules under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM.  It  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  British
    partner who has lived in the UK all her life and is in employment here.
     However, although relocating to Bangladesh might  cause  a  degree  of
    hardship for her there were not insurmountable obstacles preventing the
    relationship continuing in Bangladesh.

 3. He appealed.  Evidence submitted with the  appeal  included  the  birth
    certificate of their British citizen daughter born in January 2016.

 4. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12 August 2016  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on human rights grounds by First-tier Judge Zahed.




    First tier hearing



 5. Having accepted that the relationship is  genuine  and  subsisting  (at
    para 8) and having  noted  a  summary  of  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his wife [10, 11], his analysis is at [12] to [18].

 6. He found that financially the Appellant and his wife are  dependant  on
    his wife's family [12] and that 'this  support  can  be  replicated  in
    Bangladesh by the Appellant's and his wife's family'.

 7. At [13] he placed  little  weight  on  a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying  partner  that  was  established  when  he  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  It was noted that he entered the UK as a Tier 4 Student in
    January 2010 with  leave  until  May  2013  which  was  extended  until
    December 2014.  However, as he had not been  studying  that  leave  was
    curtailed to December 2013 since when he had overstayed.

 8. He found also that it was while he  was  here  unlawfully  he  met  and
    formed a relationship with his British partner, that his  partner  knew
    of his precarious status and notwithstanding that chose to marry  [14].
    Further, that they chose to have a baby knowing  that  the  Appellant's
    status was precarious [15].

 9. The judge gave little weight to the Appellant's private life while  his
    status was precarious [16].

10. Dealing with their baby daughter (at [17])  he  considered  whether  it
    would be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.  He stated: 'Firstly
    the child is not being removed it is a British child  whose  mother  is
    British.  Thus the child will only leave if the mother leaves with  the
    child and they live as a family unit.  I find that the  baby  was  born
    less than a year ago and thus will be entirely dependent on her mother,
    will not have formed any relationships  outside  her  family.   I  find
    given this finding that it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to
    go to Bangladesh with her mother.'

11. The judge concluded (at [18]) that the public interest in removing  the
    Appellant outweighs the  family  life  that  he  created  whilst  being
    unlawfully in the UK.

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted on 13  June
    2017.








    Error of law hearing



13. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Singh agreed  with  Mr  Basith
    that the First Tier decision showed material error of law such that  it
    had to be set aside.  It suffices to note  the  following.   The  judge
    gave inadequate, if any, consideration to paragraph 276  ADE,  Appendix
    FM EX1 and 2, and the best interests of the Appellant's child who is  a
    British citizen and whose maternal family are all present  and  settled
    here.

14. Having, by consent, set aside the decision Mr Basith indicated that  he
    did not intend to lead further  evidence.   Both  representatives  made
    brief  submissions.   Mr  Singh  submitted  that  the  child's  British
    citizenship was not a trump card.  Exceptional  circumstances  such  as
    poor immigration history could count against the Appellant.  Also,  the
    family would not be forced out of the UK.  There was  nothing  to  stop
    the Appellant seeking entry clearance.  Any separation from  his  child
    might be temporary.

15. Mr Basith's submission, in summary, was that it would not be reasonable
    to expect the Appellant's wife to go and live in Bangladesh.   She  was
    born in the UK, had lived her entire life here, her family are here  as
    is her work.  She would have no one in Bangladesh.  As  for  the  child
    she would not be able to exercise her rights as a British citizen  were
    she  to  live  in  Bangladesh.   She  would  also  lose  out   in   her
    relationships she has in the UK with her maternal family, who  are  all
    present and settled here.  If the mother elected not to  leave  but  to
    remain here with the baby the Appellant would not be able to apply  for
    entry clearance due to the income threshold requirement and her  having
    to look after the baby full time.

Consideration

16. The only right of appeal is against  the  refusal  of  a  human  rights
    appeal (s82 (1)(b) of the 2002 Act). The only ground of appeal is  that
    the decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (see s84
    (2)). The Respondent's decision is deemed to be a refusal  of  a  human
    rights claim. In such a case the  reasons  for  refusal  focus  on  the
    immigration rules even though the appeal is in relation  to  article  8
    only.


17. I must apply the Razgar-structured assessment (R (Razgar v SSHD  [2004]
    UKHL 27).

18. The first issue is family and  private  life.   There  is  family  life
    between the Appellant and his wife who he  married  in  November  2014.
    They have a child, a British citizen, who was  born  in  January  2016.
    Clearly there is family life with their child.  Ms S R,  his  wife,  is
    aged twenty seven and is a British citizen.  She has no children by any
    other relationship.

19. The Appellant has been in the UK since 2010.  His leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student was curtailed to expire in December 2013  because  he
    failed to enrol on his course.  An appeal was  dismissed  against  that
    decision and all appeal rights were exhausted in June 2014.   There  is
    nothing before me to indicate that in his time here he has  established
    any significant private life.

20. Ms R's position appears to be that she would not wish to leave  the  UK
    if her husband was removed but to remain here with  their  child.   The
    interference with family life would thus be between the  Appellant  and
    his wife and child. Such would  be  of  sufficient  gravity  to  engage
    article 8 (1).

21. The third and fourth Razgar questions focus  attention  on  the  public
    interest (is interference in accordance with  the  law/if  so  is  such
    interference necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
    national  security,  public  safety  or  the  economic   wellbeing   of
    society...)


22. I start with the statutory public interest considerations in  s117B  of
    the 2002 Act. With regard to s117B (1), the  Tribunal  is  required  to
    give appropriate weight to whether a person meets the provisions of the
    immigration rules when deciding on what  is  in  the  public  interest.
    Appropriate weight in  this  context  will  usually  mean  considerable
    weight because Parliament has entrusted the making of  the  immigration
    rules to the SSHD (see para 36-53 of Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    UKSC 60). If the Appellant meets the requirements of  the  rules,  then
    the public interest in expelling the Appellant must be very low because
    UK immigration policy permits those who meet the  requirements  of  the
    rules to stay. With regard to s117B(2) to  (6),  insofar  as  they  are
    reflected in the provisions of the rules, they will be wrapped up in  a
    consideration of s117B(1). Sections 117B(2) to  (5)  may  increase  the
    weight to be given to the public interest. Section 117B(6)  may  reduce
    it.


23. Whether in terms of Razgar third and fourth questions or of Part  5  of
    the rules the ultimate question is proportionality  and  the  balancing
    exercise.


24.  The Respondent in the refusal letter considered that the couple  would
    not face 'insurmountable obstacles' in family life  continuing  outside
    the UK.  I must now consider the additional fact that the couple have a
    British citizen child.

25. I first of all consider the best  interests  of  the  child.  The  best
    interests of a child  are  an  integral  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment. In making that assessment, the best interests  of  a  child
    must be a primary consideration, although not always the  only  primary
    consideration, and the child's best interests do not of themselves have
    the status of the paramount consideration. Further, although  the  best
    interests of a child can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of
    other  considerations,  no  other  consideration  can  be  treated   as
    inherently more significant.


26.  In assessing this child's best interests significant  weight  must  be
    given to the fact that the child is a British citizen  and  as  such  a
    qualifying child for the  purposes  of  s117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which provides that the public interest
    does not require the person's removal where they  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child (which is  not
    in dispute) and '(6)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the UK'. The same wording is contained  in  EX  1  (cc)  (ii)  of
    Appendix FM.


27.  Being a British citizen the child has rights which  she  will  not  be
    able to exercise if she moves to another country.  She  will  lose  the
    advantages of growing up and being educated in her own country, her own
    culture and her own language.  However nationality is not a trump card.
    The  tribunal  is  required  to  take  into  consideration   the   full
    circumstances. In this case the countervailing  circumstances  are  the
    need to maintain firm and fair immigration control,  coupled  with  the
    Appellant's poor immigration history and the fact that his  status  was
    unlawful when family life was created.  However,  it  is  important  to
    emphasise that the best interests of the child are to be determined  by
    reference to the child  alone  without  reference  to  the  immigration
    history or status of either parent.

28. In this case the best interests of the child must be to live in  family
    wherever they are located. It may well be that her best  interests  are
    for such to be as a family in the  UK.  However,  the  child,  born  in
    January 2016, is very young. She is not yet in education. It cannot  be
    said that her interests  have  any  social  or  cultural  or  religious
    dimension separate from her parents.  Nor can it be said that at such a
    young age there  is  any  great  strength  in  her  relationships  with
    extended family members. It is not indicated that she  has  any  health
    issues.  The focus of her life will be on her family.   I  can  see  no
    significant disruption to  her  going  with  her  parents  to  live  in
    Bangladesh and that at such a young age she will be able  to  adapt  to
    life there, including learn the language.  I  see  no  reason  why  her
    emotional  needs  and  the  stability  and  continuity  of   her   care
    arrangements cannot continue there.

29. As indicated the child, in the best interests  assessment,  is  not  to
    blame for her father's  immigration  misconduct.   However  it  is  not
    blaming the child to say that the conduct of the father should weigh in
    the scales when the general public interest  in  effective  immigration
    control is under consideration.  The principle that  the  sins  of  the
    father should not be visited upon  the  children  is  not  intended  to
    lessen the importance of immigration control or to  restrict  what  the
    court can consider when having regard to that matter. As indicated  the
    Appellant has remained unlawfully since 2014.

30. I conclude that there is nothing intrinsically illogical in the  notion
    that whilst the child's best interests may be for her to stay,  on  the
    evidence before me, it is not unreasonable to expect her to go (see  MA
    (Pakistan) and Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper  Tribunal  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705)(at [54]).

31. The mother's position is that she does not wish to  go  to  Bangladesh.
    She was born in the UK, has lived  her  whole  life  here  having  only
    visited Bangladesh once for a wedding.  She has  her  mother,  siblings
    and extended family here.  She has no  support  network  or  family  in
    Bangladesh.  She worked in retail until she went  on  maternity  leave.
    She along with others in the family  had  financially  supported  them.
    She would not be able to get work in Bangladesh.   They  would  not  be
    able to support their child.

32. Ms R did not give evidence before me. Even if her  claims  to  have  no
    connection with  Bangladesh  are  true,  I  do  not  see  there  to  be
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Bangladesh.   The
    Appellant is still a young man.  He has spent the vast majority of  his
    life in Bangladesh.  Having  come  here  to  study  he  clearly  speaks
    English as well as Bengali.  Although it is suggested in his  statement
    that ill health stropped him studying there is no  evidence  before  me
    that he currently has any health problems.  I can see no reason why, in
    these circumstances, he would not be able to  get  work  sufficient  to
    provide for his family.

33. Ms R chose to marry the Appellant and have their child despite  knowing
    he had no lawful status here.  It may well be that at  least  initially
    she might find it difficult to adjust to a country whose conditions and
    culture she is unfamiliar with.  It may well be that she would miss the
    practical and emotional support of her extended family here.   However,
    I do not see such problems of  readjustment  to  amount  to  the  'very
    significant difficulties' which could not be overcome or  would  entail
    very serious hardship (EX.2). I see no reason why she could not  easily
    keep in touch with  her  family  here  by  the  usual  means.   In  his
    statement the Appellant says he has no one to rely on in Bangladesh  as
    his father is in Saudi Arabia and his elderly mother is in  Bangladesh.
    He,  too,  did  not  give  evidence  before  me.  Even  if  his  family
    circumstances are as claimed, it is  unclear  why  he  cannot  rely  on
    himself to support his family through work. It does not appear that  he
    was financially independent in the UK but was largely dependent on  his
    wife's family. There seems no reason why they  could  not  continue  to
    give financial support as necessary.


34. He cannot satisfy paragraph 276 ADE (vi). He came here on  a  temporary
    basis having, as indicated spent almost all his life in Bangladesh.  He
    speaks Bengali. He has no health problems. He can support  himself  and
    his  family.  He  comes  nowhere  near  to  showing  'very  significant
    obstacles' to his integration there.


35. Further, on s117 it appears that he speaks English (s117 (2));  but  is
    not financially independent (s117 (3)). I can give little weight to any
    private life and to the relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner
    established at a time when he was in the UK unlawfully (s117 (4)); also
    to any  private  life  established  at  a  time  when  his  status  was
    precarious (s117 (5)).

36. I conclude that the Appellant cannot  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Such does not assist him in the assessment under Article 8.

37. As Mr Singh pointed out Ms R and the child are not being forced out  of
    the UK.  They are entitled to remain or can chose to go and remain as a
    family.  Such no doubt would be a difficult  choice.   However,  it  is
    their choice just as it was their choice to form a relationship,  marry
    and have a child in the knowledge that the Appellant's status here  was
    first precarious and then unlawful.   There  is  nothing  to  stop  the
    Appellant  making  an  entry  clearance  application.   No   up-to-date
    information  was  put  before  me  in  respect   of   the   maintenance
    requirements and it is not for me to speculate.

38. I do not see there to be any exceptional or compelling circumstances in
    this case.

39. In seeking to perform the balancing exercise I conclude for the reasons
    given that removal is not disproportionate to the public interest.

    The appeal fails.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction made.





Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
