
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20159/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 May 2015                         |On 3 June 2015                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY Upper Tribunal JUDGE dAVID taylor

                                   Between

                            miss kittiya khunnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Melvin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a 36 year old citizen of Thailand  who  has  appealed,
    with permission, against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Miles (promulgated on 9 February 2015) who dismissed her appeal against
    the respondent's decision of 28 April  2014  refusing  her  application
    under Article 8 ECHR on the basis of her private life.

2.   The appellant in this case has, unusually, made three  applications  to
    the Secretary of State, the third of which (made on 24 April 2014)  was
    for permission to remain on the basis of continuous lawful residence in
    the UK.  It is common ground, and indeed it was so held by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, that that application remains outstanding  and  no
    decision has yet been communicated on it by the Secretary of State.

3.   The first application by the appellant was made on  19  February  2014.
    It was accompanied by a cheque for the appropriate fee but  the  cheque
    was not honoured by the appellant's bank because the signature was  not
    recognised.  It seems that there were funds in the  account  but  -  as
    became apparent some time after the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    - the bank had not updated its signature records.  It appears that that
    information was not in evidence  before  Judge  Miles.   The  appellant
    accordingly made another application, in similar  terms  and  with  the
    correct fee, on 10 March 2014  immediately  after  she  knew  that  the
    cheque had not been cleared.  Unfortunately  for  her,  her  leave  had
    expired on 28 February 2014 and the refusal decision made it clear that
    in those circumstances there was no right of appeal.

4.   At  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the  issues  before  the  judge
    included the issue of whether the first two applications were valid and
    whether or not they attracted a right of appeal.  For the  reasons  set
    out particularly at  [15]-[18],   The  judge  gave  clear  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal and he found [18] that the first application:

         "was  properly  rejected  as  invalid  and   therefore   both   the
         application dated 10 March 2014 and that dated 24 April  2014  were
         separate stand alone applications and not variations of  the  first
         application.  It also follows that  those  applications  were  also
         both made when the  appellant  did  not  have  existing  leave  and
         therefore there was no right of appeal against the  refusal  of  10
         March application."

5.   Permission to appeal was  granted,  without  any  clear  reasoning,  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 7 April  2015.   Thus  the  matter
    came before me.

6.   Mr Melvin in his brief submissions relied on the grounds that had  been
    put forward by those previously instructed by the appellant.  The first
    and  main  ground  argued  essentially  that  by  making  the  original
    application on 19 February 2014 the provisions of  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 had the effect of continuing the appellant's leave
    to remain so that she was not out of time when she submitted her  later
    application of 10 March 2014.  Mr Melvin went on  to  submit  that  the
    failure to pay  the  first  cheque  was  entirely  that  of  the  bank.
    Evidence from the bank was produced to me apologising for  their  error
    but it is clear from the Tribunal file that such evidence had only come
    into being for the purposes of the Upper Tribunal hearing and  was  not
    in evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   In reply Mr Duffy, referring to the grounds, submitted that the  second
    and third grounds were irrelevant if, as he submitted, the first ground
    was of no merit and  that  the  invalidity  of  the  appellant's  first
    application made on 19 February 2014 had no effect and could not extend
    under Section 3C her leave which expired  on  28  February  2014.   The
    valid application made on 10 March 2014 was therefore made  at  a  time
    when the appellant had no outstanding leave.  The judge, he  submitted,
    was entirely  correct  in  dismissing  the  appeal  on  those  grounds.
    Although the judge  had  not  referred  specifically  to  the  relevant
    Immigration  Rules  it  was  clear  that  he  had  applied,  correctly,
    paragraph 34C of the  Rules.   My  attention  was  also  drawn  to  the
    relevant "Payment Guidance"  printed  on  the  application  form  which
    clearly warns an applicant against the consequences of funds not  being
    cleared.

8.   Having reviewed all the evidence and the  submissions  I  am  satisfied
    that there was no error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is perfectly clear from paragraph 34C of the  Immigration
    Rules that the appellant's first claim was invalid.  As such it  cannot
    be sensibly argued that the lodging of an invalid  claim  could  extend
    her leave under Section 3C.  In the circumstances her first application
    was a nullity and her later  claims  were  made  after  her  leave  had
    expired.  The fact that this was the fault of her bank regrettably does
    not assist her.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  any  error  of  law
and it therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
1 June 2015

