
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20198/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2016                 |On 29 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD IMRAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the  respondent  to  refuse  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  His  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    A E Walker ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 8 December 2015.

 2. No anonymity direction has been requested and none is required.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal but the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refused to admit the application, having refused to extend time for the
    out of time application.  The appellant applied to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  in  the
    following terms:

         "...

         3. The grounds are arguably made  out  that  the  Judge  failed  to
             consider a bundle sent to the Tribunal  by  recorded  delivery
             and received on 8 October 2015.   The  determination  (decided
             without a  hearing)  was  prepared  on  3  December  2015  and
             promulgated on 8  December  2015.  A  recorded  delivery  slip
             showing posting on 7 October 2015 and  a  'tracking'  document
             stating (whatever was sent) was  delivered  from  the  Central
             Leicester delivery office are enclosed with the grounds.   The
             FtT's back office is in Leicester. The fact that the file does
             not contain the bundle does not demonstrate that a bundle  was
             not received by the Tribunal. It is equally consistent with it
             having been received but, as can happen, it not  being  linked
             to the file.

         4. There is an  arguable  procedural  irregularity  which  warrants
             consideration by the UT.

         5. For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. The appellant did not attend the hearing. I was satisfied that  he  had
    been served with a notice of hearing at the address  he  cited  in  the
    application to this Tribunal for permission to appeal. No  request  for
    an adjournment has been received.  I considered adjourning the  hearing
    of my own motion but considered it was in the interests of justice  and
    fairness that the hearing should proceed in  the  appellant's  absence,
    particularly as the appellant had lodged  a  copy  of  his  bundle  and
    evidence of posting  with  his  applications  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to this Tribunal for permission to appeal.

 6. For the responden,t Mr Clarke submitted the copy documents produced  by
    the appellant as proof of posting  were  deficient  for  the  following
    reasons: the postcode cited as the address for delivery of  the  appeal
    bundle was not the same as that used by the appellant when he sent  his
    bundle of documents to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  support  of  his
    application for  permission  to  appeal.  The  box  numbers  were  also
    different. There  was  no  explanation  for  this.   In  addition,  the
    photocopy of the proof of posting did not identify the address to which
    the item was to be delivered; nor  did  the  screenprint  identify  the
    delivery address.

 7. I disregard the fact that the bundle purportedly sent to  the  FTT  for
    the appeal hearing is still not on the Tribunal file; this could be due
    to error and does not demonstrate the bundle had not been sent  by  the
    appellant as he claims.

 8. The appellant has not provided the original proof of posting. There are
    a number of photocopies on the Tribunal file but none of these  show  a
    complete copy of the proof of posting. The photocopy  of  the  document
    which cites the date of posting does  not  also  cite  an  address  for
    delivery.  The address for delivery is on a second photocopied page.  I
    give no weight to the fact that the postcode on the  proof  of  posting
    document is not the same as that used by  the  appellant  to  send  his
    appeal bundle to the FTT: I take judicial notice of the fact  that  the
    postcode cited on the second photocopied page of the proof  of  posting
    is that to which documents for appeals  to  the  FTT  should  be  sent.
    However, it remains the case that,  in  the  absence  of  the  original
    documents, it is not clear why the proof of posting has been copied  on
    two different pages when it constitutes one document. Nor is there  any
    explanation as to why the item was purportedly sent  from  London  when
    the appellant lived in Rochdale at the time.  I  note  the  screenprint
    showing a delivery by the central Leicester delivery  office  but  this
    does not cite the delivery address and given that neither of the copied
    documents which cite the date of posting/delivery and the Post Office's
    bar code also cite the delivery address, I am unable to find that these
    photocopies demonstrate the appellant had sent his bundle of  documents
    to the First-tier Tribunal to arrive, as directed,  "before  8  October
    2015".

 9. For these  reasons,  I  am  unable  to  find  there  was  a  procedural
    irregularity such as to amount to an error of law. It  was  appropriate
    for the FTTJ to determine the appeal in the absence of the  appellant's
    bundle.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

11. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed                                       Date        29 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
