
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/20346/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 June 2017                           |On 16 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                           Aamir Qamaruddin Abbasi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua of Morden Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  N
    M  K  Lawrence  promulgated  on  29  September  2016   dismissing   the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  12  May
    2015 to refuse to issue a Residence Card with reference to regulation 6
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12  November  1978.   He
    had applied for a residence card on the basis of being the spouse of  a
    'qualified person'.  He is married  to  Ms  Humaira  Saddaf  Abbasi,  a
    German national born on 18 November 1986 in Karachi.  It  was  said  in
    his application that his wife was exercising 'Treaty rights' by  reason
    of being self-employed offering tuition services.  The  Respondent  did
    not  accept  that  sufficient  evidence  had  been  provided  with  the
    application to demonstrate Ms Abbasi was economically active.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.   His
    appeal was dismissed for reasons  set  out  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    prepared by Judge Lawrence and promulgated on 29 September  2016.   The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 29 April 2017.


4.   I do not propose to go into any  great  detail  as  to  the  background
    circumstances of the application and appeal given that  Mr  Tarlow,  in
    light  of  the  discussion  that  has  taken  place  this  morning  and
    notwithstanding the contents of a Rule 24 response dated 22  May  2017,
    has helpfully and realistically  acknowledged  there  are  difficulties
    with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision that require it to be set
    aside and the Appellant be afforded the opportunity of a fresh  hearing
    of his appeal.


5.    It  seems  to  me  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   has
    unfortunately proceeded on the basis of two significant  misconceptions
    of fact sufficient to amount to an error of law.


6.   At paragraph 10 of the Judge's Decision he refers to the evidence  that
    was before him both in terms of supporting documents  and  the  witness
    statements of the Appellant and his wife, and says this:

         "In support of the  application  the  only  economic  activity  the
         sponsor [i.e. Ms Abbasi] claimed was self-employment.  The employed
         section is left blank.  I note that in her  witness  statement  the
         sponsor claims she has been both  employed  (part-time)  and  self-
         employed since November  2010.   In  support  of  her  claim  being
         employed she has provided P45s between pages A55 and A60  and  PAYE
         coding notice between pages  A61-A62  of  Bundle  A.   At  A55  the
         employer is said to be  X-Blade  Motor  Bikes  Ltd.   The  date  of
         leaving employment is said to be 25 September 2015.  At  A58  there
         is another P45.  The employer is said to be Focus  Care  Link  Ltd.
         The date of leaving is said to be 25 September 2015.  The  Tribunal
         has not been provided with any employment of  contract  with  Focus
         Care Link Limited."




7.   I am satisfied that the Judge proceeded upon a misapprehension of  fact
    both in respect of his view  that  the  Appellant  had  claimed  to  be
    employed by Focus Care Link Ltd, and also in respect of his  view  that
    the Appellant was claiming that she had been in employment (as distinct
    from self-employment) since November 2010.


8.   There is indeed a P45 in respect of Focus Care Link Ltd to be found  at
    pages A58-A60 of the Appellant's bundle.  However, this P45 relates  to
    the employment of the Appellant, Mr Abbasi, and does not relate to  any
    claimed employment by his wife with Focus Care Link Ltd.


9.   So far as the suggestion that  the  Appellant  had  claimed  to  be  in
    employment since November 2010, the source of the Judge's understanding
    appears to be at paragraph 2 of  Ms  Abbasi's  witness  statement.   At
    paragraph 2 she indicates her exercise of Treaty rights with particular
    dates in the following way:

         "September 2005 to July 2010    Student Full-time
         November 2010 to date  Self-employed and part-time employed".



10.  In support of the appeal before this Tribunal it has been contended  on
    behalf of the Appellant that the reference to being 'self-employed  and
    part-time employed' from 'November 2010 to date' is ambiguous, and does
    not inevitably mean that the Appellant was both self-employed and part-
    time employed throughout that period but rather that  that  is  how  in
    combination she exercised her Treaty rights since November 2010.


11.  I accept that there is such an  ambiguity,  and  moreover  that  it  is
    apparent that the ambiguity was not put to the Appellant or his wife at
    any stage before the First-tier Tribunal.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant and his wife intended to convey that she had exercised Treaty
    rights  through  a  combination  of   self-employment   and   part-time
    employment since November 2010, but did not intend to assert  that  she
    had been employed since November 2010.  Indeed, upon a consideration of
    all of the papers on file it  is  absolutely  clear  that  Ms  Abbasi's
    employment (as distinct from self-employment) was raised for the  first
    time in the grounds of appeal submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  by
    reference to her employment with X-Blade Motorbikes which was  said  to
    have commenced just a few days before the Secretary of State's decision
    letter of 12 May 2015.  There is no overt suggestion anywhere  else  in
    any of the statements or supporting documents of the Appellant claiming
    his wife to have been employed at any time prior to that.


12.  It follows that there are two significant misapprehensions of  fact  at
    paragraph 10 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  It is clear,
    in my judgment, from the contents of paragraph 11 that the  Judge  took
    these matters forward into an assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant and his wife.  Paragraph 11 refers to some of the  supporting
    documents and then, in part, says this:

         "Further, I note that if the sponsor  has  been  working  part-time
         since  November  2010  this  ought  to  have  been  stated  in  the
         application form and wages stated in the accountant's letter.   The
         period covered by this letter is from November 2010 to March  2015.
         The sponsor states that she has been  self-employed  and  was  also
         employed part-time over this period.   However,  I  note  that  the
         accountant's certificates do not make any reference  to  employment
         status of the sponsor for the stipulated period.   Further  I  note
         the SA302s only indicate income from self-employment and  not  from
         employment.  There is no record of any evidence of employed work or
         income thereof.  It appears the sponsor did not disclose  the  fact
         of employment to her accountant who in turn, quite  understandably,
         [did not disclose] it to HMRC.  The sponsor's apparent  failure  to
         disclose this  to  her  accountant  casts  doubt  on  the  accounts
         prepared by the appellant and the SA302s issued by  HMRC.   In  the
         circumstances I  am  unable  to  attach  any  weight  to  documents
         purporting to show employed status of the sponsor."




13.  It follows that the misapprehensions  of  fact  were  clearly  material
    considerations in the evaluation of some of the issues that  were  core
    to the outcome in the appeal.  In those circumstances  I  am  satisfied
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge must  be  set  aside
    for error of law.


14.  In those circumstances  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  give  further
    consideration to other aspects  of  the  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision. I do note, however, that Mr  Tarlow  in  the
    course of discussion realistically acknowledged that the absence  of  a
    written contract between Ms Abbasi  and  any  of  the  parents  of  the
    children whom she tutored was not inevitably fatal to her claim  to  be
    self-employed as a children's tutor.


15.  Be that as it may, the issues in this appeal do require to be  resolved
    by way of a further  hearing  and  it  is  common  ground  between  the
    representatives - and I accept as appropriate - that this  should  take
    place before the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set  aside  for  error
of law.


17.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade  before  any  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal other than Judge N M K Lawrence, with all issues at
    large.


18.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing


Signed:                                 Date: 15 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

