
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20512/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 November 2014                          |On 28 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           ogochukwu obinna ogbogu
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Legal Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shalliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal with the  leave  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibb who granted permission  to  appeal  on  20  October
    2014.  In his reasons for granting permission  he  recounted  that  the
    appellant was a citizen of Nigeria who was refused leave as  a  Tier  4
    Student dependant on 1 May 2014 and whose appeal  against  removal  had
    been dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  R  A  Cox  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8 September 2014.   The  First-tier  Judge
    recounted that the grounds (which were in  time)  complained  that  the
    judge erred in his approach to Article 8.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gibb went on to say that the appellant was not legally represented  and
    that he had read the determination carefully with an eye to  any  point
    of law not raised.

 2. He then said that he decided there was an arguable legal point  flowing
    from the case of Zhang [2013] EWHC  891  (Admin)  which  dealt  with  a
    similar issue under paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules.  In  Zhang
    it had been decided that the effect of  the  prohibition  on  switching
    from other categories to be  a  dependant  of  a  points-based  migrant
    breached Article 8.  The Secretary of State then changed  the  relevant
    paragraph of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")  to  allow  switching.
    Zhang predated the determination of this appeal by some months.  First-
    tier Judge Gibb went on to say that he did not criticise Judge Cox  for
    not being aware of Zhang, but nevertheless, if the same issues  applied
    directly, and if there was an acceptance by the Secretary of State that
    the relevant rule had to be changed, then this reflected  significantly
    on how much weight should have been given to immigration control in the
    proportionality assessment.  The issue of whether there was an error on
    a point of law therefore merited further consideration.  He  said  that
    the parties should be prepared to show when  and  how  the  Rules  were
    changed post-Zhang.

 3. We take the facts briefly from the determination.

 4. The appellant was a national of  Nigeria,  born  on  2  May  1986.   He
    appealed under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 against a decision taken by the Secretary of State  on  1  May
    2014 to refuse him leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant dependant and to give directions for his removal under  Section
    47 of the 2006 Act.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from the appellant and from
    his wife, Mrs Efe Victoria Ohihoin, who was also a Nigerian.  They  had
    been married in Luton on 3 July 2013.  The appellant and his wife  were
    not legally represented.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  sought  to  enable
    their evidence in the first instance  by  asking  them  open  questions
    before  permitting  cross-examination.    The   Tribunal   also   heard
    submissions. It took those into account, with the material set  out  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  The Tribunal also  took  into  account  the
    respondent's bundle which was in the usual form, and witness statements
    both by the appellant and by his wife,  which  they  adopted  as  their
    evidence-in-chief at the hearing.

 6. The appellant's immigration history was that  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2010 with a Tier 4 student visa in order to  study
    a Masters degree in Business Management, which he obtained.  After that
    he was granted a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Work visa valid until  a  date  in
    April 2014.  Before the expiry  of  that  leave  he  made  his  present
    application as the dependant of his wife, a Tier 4 student  with  leave
    until a date in 2017.  She first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  10
    October 2010 to study for a Masters  degree  in  Maritime  Law  at  the
    University of Hertfordshire.  She too entered on a Tier 4 student visa.
     She was then granted a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Work leave  until  February
    2014.  While that leave was current she sought a  placement  on  a  PhD
    research  course  but  received  no  positive  response  in  the   time
    available.  She therefore decided to study on a CIMA  plus  MBA  course
    for which she obtained a Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  and
    then made an in-time application for further leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 student.  That was  granted  and  it  was  at  that  stage  that  the
    appellant made his Tier 4 dependant application.

 7. The Tribunal then turned to the relationship between the appellant  and
    his wife.  They met first towards the end of 2010 in St.  Albans  where
    they were both studying.   The  relationship  developed.   They  became
    engaged in January 2013.  Neither of their  families  in  Nigeria  very
    much approved of the match despite their having travelled to Nigeria to
    meet each other's families and to "make peace".  There was a difference
    in age and tribal affiliation, and, in addition, the  appellant's  wife
    had been supposed to marry someone else on returning  to  Nigeria  from
    her studies.  Nevertheless the parties decided to  go  ahead  with  the
    wedding and thus  it  was  that  they  got  married  on  3  July  2013.
    Throughout the relationship the  appellant's  wife  has  suffered  from
    medical problems of some seriousness, details of which  were  given  in
    the  witness  statements   which   the   Tribunal   did   not   repeat.
    Unfortunately she had a miscarriage earlier that year.   She  concluded
    in her witness statement:

          "The appellant has  been  a  pillar  of  support  to  me,  we  are
         newlyweds who just lost our baby after trying for years and I  know
         I don't have a life without him.  Separating us will be detrimental
         to my health, academics and life in  general.   I  just  had  major
         surgery (open myomectomy) and just learning to get back on my feet.
          He bathes me, does the cleaning and most of the chores because the
         doctor advised against any form of heavy  lifting.   The  appellant
         works as a night care worker, returned home and cares for my  needs
         as well.  We don't have  any  support  from  family  since  we  got
         married without their consent.  We may not have much  but  we  have
         each other.  We are a family."

 8. It is apparent from the discussion of the Secretary of State's  reasons
    for  refusing  the  application  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   was
    considering an earlier version of the relevant paragraph of the  Rules,
    319C, than the version that was current at the time of the  application
    and the hearing and is current now.  It seems to us that  that  reduces
    the force of the observation made by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibb
    when he granted permission to appeal on 20 October 2014 because  it  is
    apparent to us that the current version of the Rules has  been  amended
    in order to take on board the point that was made by the Administrative
    Court in the case of Zhang.  So it seems to us firstly that  there  may
    have been an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal  in  that  it  was
    looking at the wrong version of the  Rules  but,  secondly,  that  that
    error was not material, and that the point made by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gibb when granting permission to appeal based on Zhang is not  at
    any rate directly engaged, precisely because the Rules have since  been
    amended to take on board the point made in Zhang.

 9. In Zhang Mr Justice  Turner  had  held  that  the  earlier  version  of
    paragraph 319C was not compatible  with  the  claimant's  human  rights
    because it required a person who was in  the  United  Kingdom  and  who
    otherwise satisfied paragraph 319C to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    apply for entry clearance if he or she had leave to be  in  the  United
    Kingdom in a category different from that of the spouse or partner of a
    Tier-4 student.  That particular requirement has been removed from  the
    current  version  of  the  Rules  under  which  this  application   was
    considered.  It was accepted by the appellant (see paragraph 6 of  form
    IAFT-1) that the appellant did not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  Prima facie the Rules have been drafted so  as  to  encapsulate
    the Article 8 considerations in the majority of  cases  and  they  have
    been specifically amended since the decision of  Zhang  to  accommodate
    the aspect of the then current Rules which  the  High  Court  held  was
    incompatible with the claimant's Article 8 rights  in  that  case.   It
    seems to us therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  have  been
    correct to decide, on the applicable version of  the  Rules,  that  the
    appellant did not qualify under the Rules.

10. The First-tier Tribunal then went on to consider Article 8 appreciating
    correctly that the Rules were not  a  complete  statement  of  all  the
    factors that might be relevant  to  the  Article  8  consideration  and
    dealing with the enquiry on what the Tribunal referred to as  "classic"
    Article 8 ECHR lines, while taking  into  account  the  five  steps  in
    Razgar.  While it might be interesting  for  us  to  speculate  on  the
    Article 8 compatibility or otherwise of  the  current  version  of  the
    Rules, we do not consider that it would be right for us to do so  given
    that the appellant is not here to prosecute the appeal this morning.

11. For those reasons therefore it seems to us that the appropriate  course
    is to dismiss the appeal.  There was an error of law  but  it  was  not
    material.  The appellant did not qualify under  the  Rules  and  as  it
    seems to us the consideration of the Razgar analysis by the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not disclose any error of law.  We dismiss this appeal.



Signed        Date: 27 November 2014

Mrs Justice Laing

