
[pic]
IAC

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20917/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                              Mr sarbjeet singh
                          (NO anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W. Malik, Counsel, instructed by M & S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                   NOTICE

      1. Mr Singh appealed against the refusal of the  respondent  to  issue
         the first appellant with an EEA residence card as confirmation that
         he is the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
         rights.

      2. The respondent refused  the  appellant's  application  for  an  EEA
         residence card on 1 May 2014.  The appellant appealed against  that
         decision.  His appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  joined
         with that of Rita Szabo, with whom he claimed to be  in  a  durable
         relationship.  Ms Szabo had appealed against removal directions  as
         the respondent was of the opinion that Ms Szabo was a party  to  an
         intended marriage of convenience with Mr Singh.

      3. On 26 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell  heard
         both appeals.  The appeal of Ms Szabo was allowed as Judge  Kimnell
         was not satisfied that the respondent had demonstrated  that  there
         was reasonable suspicion that the  intended  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience.  The judge purported to dismiss the appeal of Mr Singh
         as the judge was not satisfied that the evidence demonstrated on  a
         balance  of  probabilities  that  Mr  Singh  was   in   a   durable
         relationship with Ms Szabo.

      4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in relation to Mr  Singh
         was granted on 29 May 2015 on the basis that there was an  arguable
         question of jurisdiction given that the respondent's decision of  1
         May 2014  arguably  did  not  give  rise  to  a  right  of  appeal.
         Alternatively it was indicated that there was arguable merit in the
         assertion in the grounds that the correct course, having  made  the
         findings that the judge did as to the respondent not having  proved
         that the marriage was one of convenience,  was  for  the  judge  to
         refer the matter back to the respondent for a decision to be  taken
         under Regulation 17 of the EEA Regulations.

    Jurisdiction

      5. The matter came before me.  I considered the issue of jurisdiction.
          The respondent in the refusal letter dated 1 October  2014  stated
         that as the appellant's entitlement to rely on  the  provisions  of
         the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 could not
         be established there was no right of appeal against the decision.

      6. Although the appellant's grounds of appeal made submissions on this
         issue it does not appear to have been addressed by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

      7. Mr Whitwell adopted the Rule 24 response  and  submitted  that  the
         refusal letter clearly set out that Mr Singh had no right of appeal
         as his 'entitlement to rely on the provisions  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the  2006  Regulations)
         cannot be established there is no  right  of  appeal  against  this
         decision'.

      8. The relevant Regulation is 26(2A) of  the  2006  Regulations  which
         provides:

         'If a person claims to be in a durable  relationship  with  an  EEA
         national, he may not  appeal  under  these  Regulations  unless  he
         produces -

          a) a passport; and

          b) either-

               i) an EEA family permit; or

              ii) sufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of State that
                  he is in a relationship with that EEA national'

      9. Mr  Whitwell  conceded  that  the  appellant's  passport  had  been
         produced.   In  relation  to  Regulation  26(2A)(b)(ii)  Mr   Malik
         referred to the original EEA application and argued that there  was
         sufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of State that  he  was
         in a relationship, to the extent that the  appellant  had  a  valid
         right of appeal.  It was argued that this was over forty  pages  of
         documents.  However in the large part these were documents relating
         to either the appellant or Ms Szabo.  Although there were  3  pages
         of photographs and a number of documents were addressed  separately
         to the appellant and Ms  Szabo  at  the  same  address,  I  am  not
         satisfied that this when considered in  the  round  was  sufficient
         evidence to satisfy the Secretary of State that the  appellant  was
         in a relationship.

     10. Although Mr Malik conceded that there was more information provided
         on appeal and indicated that the appellant had been bailed to  live
         with  his  partner,  this  was  not  information  produced  to  the
         respondent for the purposes of the 1 May 2014 decision.

     11. I am not satisfied that any discretion open to the respondent ought
         to have been  exercised  differently.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant had no valid right of appeal against the 1 May 2014.

     12. In respect of Mr Singh there was no valid appeal before either  the
         First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.  I cannot  therefore  go
         on to consider the substantive grounds of appeal.  The grounds were
         also substantive  merit  as  although  the  judge  found  that  the
         respondent had not demonstrated the intended marriage  was  one  of
         convenience, the judge made detailed findings indicating  that  the
         parties were not in a durable relationship under Regulation 8(5) of
         the  2006  Regulations.   There  was  in  these  circumstances   no
         requirement to remit the case back to the respondent for a decision
         under Regulation 17, given those comprehensive  findings.   In  any
         event, such is academic given the lack of jurisdiction.

     13. Although Mr Malik raised before me that an FLR(O)  application  was
         still outstanding with the respondent, that is not a matter for the
         Tribunal.  As Mr Whitwell indicated the correct  course  of  action
         for Mr Singh, if he wishes to pursue the matter, is to make a fresh
         application to the respondent.

Decision

     14. No valid right of appeal.


Signed   Date: 27 October 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

