

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20147/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2015                            |On 11 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             JAMES CHINEDU EDEH

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Graceland
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (hereafter "the Secretary of State") against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith (hereafter "the judge"). On  12  May  2015  the
    judge allowed the appeal of Mr Edeh (hereafter "the claimant")  against
    a decision dated 3 April 2014 giving directions for his  removal  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.    The claimant came to the UK on 13 September 2000 with entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter as a visitor. On 21 January 2003 he  made  an
    out of time application for leave to remain as a spouse and a period of
    discretionary leave was granted from 3 November 2005 until  2  November
    2008. Leave to remain was subsequently extended to 8 September 2012. On
    21 December 2013 the claimant made an application for Indefinite  Leave
    to Remain ("ILR"). That application was refused  and  was  the  subject
    matter of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  claimant  argued  that  he  was
    entitled to ILR  because  he  had  accrued  six  years'  of  continuous
    residence with discretionary leave in accordance with the Secretary  of
    State's  policy.  Further,  the  claimant  argued  that  he   met   the
    requirements for leave on private life grounds  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE, and that removal infringed his human rights contrary to Article
    8 of the ECHR.

4.    The judge found the claimant could not benefit from the  Secretary  of
    State's policy because she was not satisfied that: (i) the claimant had
    accrued six years' continuous residence  with  discretionary  leave  to
    remain and, (ii) his marriage which was  the  subject  matter  of  that
    grant was no longer subsisting [26  to  28].  The  judge  proceeded  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. She referred to the  fact  that
    the  claimant  maintained  contact  with  his  family  in  Nigeria  but
    concluded that those ties  were  not  sufficient  to  defeat  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) when: (i) the claimant had established significant  ties  to
    the UK over a fifteen year period of residence; (ii) in respect of  his
    marriage, there may be a prospect of reconciliation and, (iii)  he  was
    working until April 2014 contributing to the  economy  and  had  gained
    some qualifications. The judge noted the claimant's father and siblings
    were in Nigeria but he had not visited that country for six years'  and
    there was no evidence that any of his family would be willing to  offer
    support were he to return [31]. The judge was thus satisfied  that  the
    claimant met the requirements of the relevant Rule.

5.    In the alternative, the judge considered  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules. She found that Article 8 was engaged and answered the third  and
    fourth questions posed in Razgar [2004]  UKHK  27  in  the  affirmative
    [33]. The issue was thus confined to that of proportionality. The judge
    had regard to the public interest considerations set out in  s.117B  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) (hereafter
    "the 2002 Act") and noted that the claimant  could  speak  English  and
    until he was dismissed from his employment was financially independent.
    She made reference to the claimant's previous grants of  leave  on  the
    basis of marriage and concluded in light of the above that  the  public
    interest considerations did not prevail in this case [34]. Accordingly,
    the appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights
    grounds.

6.    The Secretary of State lodged an appeal. Her pleaded case stated  that
    it was not clear why the judge was satisfied that the Immigration Rules
    were met and she failed to identify any "very significant obstacles" to
    integration in Nigeria. Further, it was  argued  that  the  judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for finding that the public interest  considerations
    were outweighed if the claimant  was  removed  to  Nigeria.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page found those grounds arguable and granted permission
    on 16 July 2015.

7.    The matter came before me to determine  whether  the  judge  erred  in
law.

Submissions

8.    On behalf  of  the  respondent  Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law. In amplifying the grounds he stated  that  the
    judge failed to consider whether there were  significant  obstacles  to
    the claimant's integration. He submitted that the question of what ties
    the claimant had retained to Nigeria was a consideration  but  not  the
    sole consideration.  He submitted  that  there  had  been  no  adequate
    consideration of Article 8 of the ECHR.

9.    Mr Jafar relied on his Skeleton Argument and submitted  that  the  "no
    ties" threshold under the Rules was a higher test to  the  "significant
    obstacles test". He submitted that the Secretary of State was advancing
    a  disagreement  with  the  decision.  No  grounds  of  perversity   or
    irrationality had been alleged. He submitted  the  judge's  conclusions
    were open to her on the evidence and that sufficient reasons  had  been
    given. He submitted the judge correctly directed herself in respect  of
    s.117A-B of the 2002 Act. He submitted  that  even  if  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the significant obstacles test, that the  error  was
    not material as the change in the Rules gave rise to a test carrying  a
    lower threshold than its predecessor.

10.   In reply Mr Duffy did not accept that the significant  obstacles  test
    was a lower test. He accepted the test was of a similar nature  but  it
    required the claimant to show what obstacles  prevailed.  He  submitted
    that the question of ties was a consideration but not a fait  accompli.
    He submitted the judge failed to provide reasons  for  concluding  that
    the decision was disproportionate. He stated that paragraph  33  was  a
    statement of the law and paragraph 34 considered s. 117B  of  the  2002
    Act, but the judge made no findings as  to  whether  the  claimant  was
    financially independent. He referred to AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC) and submitted that the judge's reasons in respect of Article
    8 were not sufficient.

Decision on Error of Law

11.   I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved
    the making of errors of law such that it has to be set aside.

12.   Notwithstanding the efforts of Mr Jafar to persuade  me  otherwise,  I
    am satisfied that there are difficulties in the judge's approach to the
    issues in this case. The claimant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 3  April  2014.  The
    refusal letter determined that  the  claimant  failed  to  satisfy  the
    requirements set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules,  those
    being the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
    the grounds of private life. The Rules in force  at  the  date  of  his
    application and at the date of the refusal letter provided as  follows:



       "1. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
       the grounds of private life in  the  UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
       application the applicant......
       (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (ii), is aged 18 years  or  above,  has
       lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any
       period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including  social,  cultural
       or family) with the country to which he would have to go if  required
       to leave the UK."
13.   That was  the  Rule  which  the  Secretary  of  State  determined  the
    claimant failed to satisfy.
14.   The judge's consideration  of  this  Rule  is  limited  to  two  short
    paragraphs : see [31 & 32]. Therein the judge found  the  claimant  had
    resided in the UK for fifteen  years.  He  was  married  to  a  British
    citizen and whilst he was estranged from  his  wife  there  remained  a
    possibility for reconciliation. He had through work contributed to  the
    economy until April 2014 and  gained  some  qualifications.  He  had  a
    father, brothers and sisters in Nigeria but he  had  been  absent  from
    than country for six years', and there was no evidence that any  family
    member would offer support on the claimant's return. He had established
    significant ties to the UK. The  judge  was  thus  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of the Rule were met.
15.   In reaching that  conclusion  the  judge  recognised  that  the  above
    version of the Rule was changed on 28 July 2014 which replaced the test
    of  "no  ties"  with  a  test  of  "very  significant   obstacles"   to
    integration. Although the explanatory statement  to  the  Statement  of
    Changes in the Immigration Rules states that the new wording represents
    a clarification  of  the  original  policy  intention,  rather  than  a
    substantive change, it seems to me  that  the  test  of  "no  ties"  is
    different from the  test  of  "very  significant  obstacles".  To  hold
    otherwise would  mean  that  the  Rule  change  would  be  otiose  -  a
    distinction without  a  difference.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    considered the correct test which is that which applied at the date  of
    application which accords with the introductory wording  of  the  Rule.
    The same version of the Rule applied at the date of decision which  was
    the subject of the appeal before the judge albeit  a  new  version  had
    been introduced by the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I do not consider that the new version  of  the  Rule  should
    inform the "no ties" test which was there in the Rules before the  July
    2014 amendments because of the difference  in  wording  and  substance.
    Whilst the judge therefore applied the correct test,  her  approach  to
    its application was flawed.
16.   In Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability;  ties)  [2015]  UKUT  00042
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal concluded inter alia that:

       "The requirement set out in paragraph 276ADE (vi) (in  force  from  9
       July 2012 to 27 July 2014) to show that a person "is aged 18 years or
       above, has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
       (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no  ties  (including
       social, cultural or family) with the country to which he  would  have
       to go if required to leave the UK", requires a rounded assessment  as
       to whether a person's familial ties could result in support to him in
       the event of his return,  an  assessment  taking  into  account  both
       subjective and objective considerations  and  also  consideration  of
       what lies within the choice of a claimant to achieve."

17.   Whilst the judge observed that she was  required  to  make  a  rounded
    assessment of all the relevant circumstances, I am not  satisfied  that
    she achieved this as her findings [set  out  in  para.  14  above]  are
    essentially restricted to subjective considerations. I consider that on
    the facts of this case more was required from  the  judge  to  make  it
    clear that she had had regard to all relevant considerations  including
    an objective consideration which in this case is  wholly  lacking.  For
    instance, the judge noted that the claimant has family in Nigeria  with
    whom he remains in contact and between 2006 and 2009 he made six visits
    to the country. The judge noted that there was no evidence  that  would
    indicate whether any family member would be able to  offer  support  to
    the claimant on return, but that observation upon  which  she  attached
    some weight reversed the burden of proof. It was for  the  claimant  to
    establish that no support would be available on return, and the lack of
    such evidence did not mean that that was the case objectively.

18.   Further, the judge's finding that  the  claimant's  familial  ties  to
    Nigeria are not sufficient to defeat the Rule when  other  factors  are
    considered is not sufficiently reasoned [32]. The judge appears to base
    this finding on her  conclusion  that  the  claimant  has  "established
    significant ties to the UK", but she fails to identify  the  nature  of
    those ties. The judge's findings at [31] do not adequately reason in my
    view the nature of the  ties  she  found  so  significant.  I  am  thus
    satisfied that the judge's decision under the Rules is deficient in its
    reasons and cannot stand.

19.   The judge considered Article 8 in the alternative. In this regard  the
    judge's consideration is also  vitiated  by  legal  error.  The  issued
    boiled down to the question of proportionality. The judge had regard to
    the fact that the claimant speaks English and that he was  until  April
    2014 financially independent. She referred to the fact that  there  was
    no evidence that the claimant was in receipt of public funds  and  made
    reference to previous grants of leave on  the  basis  of  his  marriage
    [34]. The judge thus concluded that removal was disproportionate.

20.   Firstly, the judge's reasoning is very brief and does  not  adequately
    address  the  issue  of  exceptional  circumstances.  Secondly,  I   am
    satisfied that the judge has not given proper consideration  to  s.117B
    of the 2002 Act. Whilst the judge noted the claimant speaks English she
    was  also  required  to  have  regard  to  the   claimant's   financial
    circumstances. Whilst she noted the claimant was  hitherto  financially
    independent, at the date of hearing, there was no evidence that he  was
    financially independent. The fact that there was no evidence indicating
    that he was in receipt of benefits did not  on  balance  determine  the
    question of financial independence. The judge further  failed  to  take
    into account the guidance given in the case of AM (Malawi) (supra),  in
    that the claimant could  not  on  account  of  such  factors  obtain  a
    positive right to a grant  of  leave  to  remain.  I  am  thus  further
    satisfied that the judge's decision contrary to Article 8 is  deficient
    in its reasons and cannot stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside. Having considered the submissions of the  parties,  I
find that the appropriate course in this  case  is  for  the  matter  to  be
remitted for hearing afresh by the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a  judge  other
than Judge Griffith.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                            Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

