
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20640/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 March 2014                                |On 23 April 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Sushma RANI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bagral, instructed by Gills Immigration Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sushma Rani, was born  on  25  October  1986  and  is  a
    citizen of India.  I shall hereafter refer to the  respondent  as  "the
    appellant" and to the Secretary of State as the "respondent"  (as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had appealed against a decision of the respondent made on
    14 February 2013 to refuse or vary her leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled here.  The First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Howard)  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  10
    January 2014, dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The reasoning in the determination is not always clear. The  issue  for
    the judge to decide under the Immigration Rules concerned paragraph 281
    of HC 395. The judge refers at [19] to what appears to be an unreported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal (OA/21093/2013) but he fails to  explain
    the relevance in that decision to the issue before him.  He  concluded,
    however, at [21] that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 281, presumably because she had not submitted  the  necessary
    English language certificate but this is also somewhat unclear.  I was,
    however, greatly helped at the Upper Tribunal hearing by both Ms Bagral
    and Ms Pal, for the respondent.  Ms Bagral told me that  it  was  clear
    from the papers which he had been sent by  her  instructing  solicitors
    that a valid English language certificate had  been  submitted  by  the
    appellant to the respondent but appears to have been overlooked both by
    the Secretary of State and the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Ms  Pal  did
    not disagree with that  submission.   Although  she  did  not  formally
    withdraw the appeal, but she did disagree with Ms  Bagral's  submission
    that Judge Howard should have allowed the appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. Given that the appeal should be allowed under the Immigration Rules,  I
    did not also determine whether the  appeal  should  have  been  allowed
    under Article 8 ECHR immaterial.  As a matter of formality, I have  set
    aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  and  have  remade  the
    decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 10  January
    2014 is set aside.  I remade the decision.  The appeal  in  respect  of
    the Immigration Rules is allowed.






Signed                              Date 10 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

