
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20319/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 20th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    L C C
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage
For the Respondent:    Appellant in Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, or her family because of the  minority  of
the appellant's husband's. For the same reason an  anonymity  direction  was
made at first instance. No public interest  is  served  in  identifying  the
appellant or her family.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Black, promulgated on  22  June  2015,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 21 July 1977 and is a national of Jamaica.

4.    On 16 April 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK under appendix  FM  and  paragraph
276 ADE, and decided to remove the appellant from the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Black  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision under the Immigration Rules.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7 September 2015  Judge  Grimmett
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The respondent asserts that the high test of insurmountable  obstacles
    is not met simply  by  virtue  of  possibility  of  disruption  to  the
    relationship of the appellant's husband with his minor children in  the
    UK. This point is arguable"

The Hearing

7.    Ms Savage, for the respondent, adopted the terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal and referred me to the case of Agyarko v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440.
Ms Savage emphasised [21] & [28] of that case, and  argued  that  the  judge
had failed to correctly apply the necessary test, and  so  had  fallen  into
material error of law by failing to acknowledge the high  threshold  created
by the expression "insurmountable obstacles".  She  argued  that  infrequent
and  irregular  contact  between  the  appellant's  husband  and  his  minor
children does not amount to an insurmountable obstacle to removal.

8.    The appellant was present. She was not  represented  and  was  clearly
nervous. I explained to the appellant that an appeal can only be made  on  a
point of law, & that an argument had been presented that the decision  which
had gone in her favour in June 2015 contains a  material  error  of  law.  I
told her that I understood that her position is that there  is  no  material
error of law contained in the decision and that I know that  she  wants  the
decision to stand. She confirmed to me that that was  her  position  &  that
she had nothing further to add.

Analysis

9.     This  case  turns  entirely   on   interpretation   of   the   phrase
"insurmountable obstacles" as it is used in paragraph EX.1(b) of the  rules.
The respondent accepts that the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship with her husband and that the appellant meets  the  eligibility
requirements of appendix  FM.  The  respondent  does  not  accept  that  the
appellant fulfils the criteria of paragraph 276 ADE because  the  respondent
believes that the appellant has not lost ties to Jamaica.

10.   The judge found that the appellant entered the UK  in  December  2001;
although she has remained in the UK since then she has  not  have  leave  to
remain in the  UK  since  30  September  2002.  The  judge  found  that  the
appellant and her husband had been living together since 2008,  and  married
in August 2012. The appellant's husband has two  children  from  a  previous
relationship  both  of  the  children  are  under  10  years  of  age.   The
appellant's husband enjoys contact to his two children each weekend.

11.   The judge found that the appellant husband is a  British  citizen  who
has never been to Jamaica, and that the impact of the respondent's  decision
would be to force the appellant's husband to  choose  between  severing  his
relationship with his  children  by  moving  to  Jamaica,  or  severing  his
relationship with his wife by remaining in the UK

12.   In R (on the application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA Civ 440 it  was  held
that the phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in paragraph EX.1 of  the
Rules "...clearly imposes a high hurdle to be overcome by an  applicant  for
leave to remain under the Rules. The test is  significantly  more  demanding
than a mere test of whether it would be reasonable to  expect  a  couple  to
continue their family life outside the United Kingdom".  "...The  phrase  as
used in the Rules is intended to have the same meaning as in the  Strasbourg
jurisprudence. It is clear that the European Court of Human  Rights  regards
it as a formulation imposing a stringent test in respect of that factor,  as
is illustrated by Jeunesse v Netherlands (see para.  [117]:  there  were  no
insurmountable obstacles to the family settling  in  Suriname,  even  though
the applicant and her family would experience hardship if forced to do  so).
"

13.    Paragraph  24  of  Agyarko  says  "the   "insurmountable   obstacles"
criterion is used in the Rules to define one of the  preconditions  set  out
in section EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before an applicant can  claim
to be entitled to be granted leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules.  In  that
context, it is not simply a factor to be taken  into  account.  However,  in
the context of making a wider Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it  is
a factor to be taken into account, not an absolute requirement which has  to
be satisfied in every single case across the whole range  of  cases  covered
by Article 8."

14.   At paragraph 26 of that decision "The mere facts that Mr Benette is  a
British citizen, has lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job
here - and hence might find it difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to  re-
locate to Ghana to continue their family life there - could  not  constitute
insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

15.   At [24] the Judge correctly takes guidance from the case  of  Agyarko.
At [25] & [26] he reminds himself of the cases of R (on the  application  of
Onkarsingh Nagre) [2013] EWHC 720  &  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -
correct approach) [2013]UKUT 640 (IAC). Having  correctly  directed  himself
in law the judge considers the impact of the respondent's  decision  and  at
[30] finds "... That the impact on the  children  is  such  that  there  are
insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant's  continuing  family  life  in
Jamaica"

16.   The decision made by the judge may be one  that  the  respondent  does
not like. It may be that  another  judge  considering  the  same  facts  and
circumstances might reach a different  conclusion.  But  in  this  case  the
judge has not misdirected himself in law and has  quite  clearly  considered
the  facts  and  circumstances  particular  to  the  appellant's  case  when
interpreting the phrase "insurmountable obstacles". It is at least  implicit
that  the  judge  distinguishes  the  facts  and   circumstances   in   this
appellant's case from the facts and circumstances applicable in the case  of
Agyarko.

17.   In R (on the application of Kaur) v SSHD [2015] EWHC  766  (Admin)  it
was held that the  SSHD  had  not  properly  considered  the  insurmountable
obstacles that a middle-aged wife and her husband would face if returned  to
India as the husband had lived in  the  UK  for  18  years,  was  a  British
citizen, was unlikely because of his age to find employment and they had  no
accommodation in India.

18.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that although a decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law
where the requirements to give adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
where there has been  no  misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-finding  process
cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been  taken  into
account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from the primary  data  were
not reasonably open to him or her.

19.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Nor
is it an error of law for a Judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue
under  argument.  Disagreement  with  a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  his  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of  law.  I  find  that  the  Judge's
determination when read as a whole set out findings  that  were  sustainable
and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

20.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed.




    Signed Date 19 October 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
