
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 September 2015                  |On 9 September 2015                  |
|Prepared on 4 September 2015         |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     F B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Weatherall, Counsel instructed by Harris & Green
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, born 23 March 1963, is a citizen  of  Pakistan.  She
         came to the UK as a family visitor with  a  valid  grant  of  entry
         clearance on 12 June 2006, granted as the result  of  a  successful
         appeal to the Tribunal at which both she and her sponsor, her niece
         Ms S gave evidence.  She  failed  to  leave,  or  to  apply  for  a
         variation of her leave, before the expiry of  that  leave  and  she
         thus became an overstayer on 12 December 2006.

      2. On 7 March 2013 the  Appellant  was  the  subject  of  a  visit  by
         Immigration Officers and served with an IS.151A as an overstayer.

      3. On 19 November 2013 the Appellant applied for a grant of  leave  to
         remain relying upon her Article  8  rights.  That  application  was
         refused on 16 April 2014, and a removal decision was also  made  on
         that date pursuant to s10 of the 1999 Act.

      4. The Appellant duly appealed against  those  immigration  decisions.
         Her appeal was heard on 16 September  2014  and  it  was  dismissed
         under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds in a  Decision
         promulgated on 7 October 2014 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Cope.

      5.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was refused by Judge Astle on 8 December 2014,
         but the renewed application to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 8 June 2015.

      6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 19 July 2015.

      7. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The decision under appeal

      8. The Appellant's application for leave was made on  the  basis  that
         she met the requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules as
         an adult dependent  relative,  alternatively  that  her  Article  8
         rights were such that she met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE
         and/or the requirements of Appendix FM, or that  her  circumstances
         were such that she should be granted DLR  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules because her removal was disproportionate.  The  substance  of
         that application was that the Appellant had lived with  her  niece,
         Ms S, and family since entry  to  the  UK,  was  settled,  and  had
         significant mental health issues which could be managed and treated
         in the UK, but not  in  Pakistan,  so  that  her  return  would  be
         disproportionate to any public interest the  Respondent  sought  to
         protect through her removal.

      9. The Respondent accepted that  the  Appellant  met  the  suitability
         requirements set out in Appendix FM, but was not satisfied that the
         Appellant had any relationship with an individual in the  UK  as  a
         parent or  as  a  partner.  Her  circumstances  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE because she had not lived  in  the
         UK for 20 years, and because she had not demonstrated that she  had
         no social cultural or family ties to Pakistan. On the contrary  the
         evidence relied upon in her 2006 appeal demonstrated that  she  had
         family ties and assets in Pakistan which  included  farm  land  and
         property in addition to the home she had lived in.

     10. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant had provided evidence to
         the effect that she suffered from Anxiety and Dysthymic Disorder, a
         learning disability, and depression. The Respondent was not however
         satisfied that she would be unable to access adequate medical  care
         upon return, or, that she suffered a life threatening ailment. Thus
         she did not meet the Article 3 threshold set out in N  [2008]  ECHR
         26565/05.

     11. The Appellant did not attend the hearing to give evidence, and  the
         Judge was informed by Counsel that the family had  been  unable  to
         persuade her to get out of  bed  and  attend  [4].  No  adjournment
         request was made to allow her to do so.

     12. The Appellant relied upon three separate bundles  of  documents  at
         the hearing which included GP notes, letters from the GP Dr  Lands,
         a  report  dated  31  July  2013  by  Dr   McGeown   a   Consultant
         Psychologist,  and  letters  to  the   GP   from   the   Consultant
         Psychiatrist Dr Gill  who  had  treated  the  Appellant  since  her
         admission to Roseberry Park Hospital.

     13. The Judge concluded that the Appellant's  niece  Ms  S  was  not  a
         reliable witness. She had been complicit in the Appellant's failure
         to leave the UK before the expiry of her leave, and  the  Appellant
         had continued to live as a member of her household long  after  she
         knew the Appellant's leave had expired. Her evidence concerning the
         Appellant's past circumstances in Pakistan was not consistent  with
         the evidence that she had given to the Tribunal in 2006. She had at
         various times claimed that when living in  Pakistan  the  Appellant
         was the carer for her own mother, and that the Appellant was  cared
         for full time by her own mother, and that the family in the UK  had
         no idea of the Appellant's problems prior to her arrival in the UK.
         Since Ms J's evidence echoed that of Ms S, the Judge concluded that
         she was not a reliable witness either.  Ms  J  is  the  Appellant's
         sister. The Judge did not hear evidence from one of the Appellant's
         brothers who also lives in the UK, or his wife.

     14. Whilst the  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  suffered  a
         psychotic episode sufficiently serious to  justify  her  compulsory
         detention under the Mental Health Act, and that  she  continued  to
         need daily medication, he was not satisfied that at the date of the
         hearing the Appellant's condition, or ability to care for  herself,
         had been accurately and honestly described by Ms S, or Ms J [33, 54-
         58]. The medical evidence indicates that the detention was from 6th
         -27th June 2014, and that upon discharge the Appellant returned  to
         living as a member of the household of Ms S.

     15. The Judge concluded that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
         were not met, and then considered the Article 8 appeal outside  the
         Immigration Rules. He accepted that the Appellant  had  established
         "family life" with Ms S and Ms J and their families for the purpose
         of Article 8, and that she had established a "private life" in  the
         UK. He took into account the provisions of s117A-D of the 2002 Act,
         and also considered the interests of the children of Ms  S.  Having
         done so he concluded that the removal decision was proportionate.




    The Appellant's challenge to the decision

     16. Paragraph 4 of the grounds  asserts  that  there  was  no  reliable
         evidence to support the Judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  was
         able to care for herself, and relied upon the evidence of the GP Dr
         Lands who had expressed the opinion on 5 August 2014 that it  would
         take several months for the Appellant to recover to a  level  where
         she would be able to give evidence.

     17. Paragraph 5 of the grounds asserts that there was an error  of  law
         in the Judge's failure to accept in full the evidence of Ms S  upon
         the issue of the Appellant's care needs, when her evidence was said
         to be consistent with the medical evidence relied upon. It goes  on
         to suggest that nursing notes in relation to  the  Appellant  might
         have assisted her to establish her case, but  that  the  Judge  had
         said that he did not require them.

     18. Paragraph 6 of the grounds asserts that there was  no  evidence  to
         suggest that the Appellant  was  party  to  any  deception  of  the
         Tribunal by Ms S during the Appellant's 2006 appeal, and  that  the
         Judge therefore wrongly punished the  Appellant  for  deception  to
         which she was not a party in rejecting the Article 8 appeal.

     19. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on
         the basis it was arguable that although the Judge had said that  he
         had considered all of the medical evidence it was arguable that  he
         may have failed to attach sufficient weight to an  important  piece
         of evidence from an independent health professional that might have
         had an material effect  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  If  the
         Appellant was  too  unwell  to  attend  court  following  a  recent
         psychotic episode it might call into question whether she  was  fit
         to be  removed,  and  thus  the  proportionality  of  the  proposed
         removal.  Although  that  was  considered  the  strongest   ground,
         permission was granted on all of the grounds.

     20. The Respondent's Rule 24 response was blunt;  there  was  no  legal
         error. Dr Land's evidence was expressly referred to  by  the  Judge
         and the weight that could be given to it was  properly  considered.
         The Appellant had suffered no mental health  illness  between  2006
         and 2013. The first consultation with any medical professional  was
         after she had been served with IS.151A. She, Ms S,  and  Ms  J  all
         knew full well during this  period  that  she  was  an  overstayer.
         Adequate reasons were given for the finding that neither Ms S,  nor
         Ms J were reliable witnesses either on the  issue  of  whether  she
         could care for herself, or  her  true  circumstances  in  Pakistan.
         Given  the  limited  extent  of  the  Appellant's  current  medical
         treatment (a reference to her medication) and  her  discharge  from
         hospital there was no question mark over her fitness to be  removed
         from the UK.

    Error of Law?

     21. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on the application of R) v Cardiff
         County Council [2011] EWHC 23, the importance of  the  approach  in
         Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318. Evidence, whether  oral  or
         documentary, does not carry with it a presumption of  authenticity,
         which specific evidence must disprove, failing  which  its  content
         must be accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of
         the evidence about its nature, provenance,  timing  and  background
         evidence and in the light of all the other evidence  in  the  case,
         especially that given  by  the  claimant.  That  is  precisely  the
         exercise the Judge sought to undertake.

     22. Given the disparity between Ms S' evidence to the Tribunal in  2006
         and her evidence in support of this  appeal,  the  failure  of  the
         Appellant to leave the UK prior to the expiry of her leave, and the
         admitted fact that throughout she had lived in the UK as  a  member
         of the household of Ms S there were obvious reasons for  the  Judge
         to approach the evidence of Ms S, and Ms J with caution.

     23. Ms Weatherall's  principal  argument  did  not  follow  the  course
         suggested by the grant of permission - instead she sought to attack
         the adverse credibility findings made in relation to Ms S,  and  Ms
         J, both as findings that should not have been made on the available
         evidence, and as findings that were in any event irrelevant to  the
         issue of what the Appellant's true care needs  were.  There  is  no
         merit in that approach. There was a  clear  disparity  between  the
         evidence that was given to the Tribunal in 2006,  and  the  picture
         that Ms S, and Ms J  sought  to  paint  before  the  Judge  of  the
         Appellant's likely circumstances upon return, although  neither  of
         them were prepared to accept to the Judge  that  the  Tribunal  had
         been actively and dishonestly misled in 2006.

     24. It was quite clear to the Judge that in 2006 the Tribunal had  been
         told that the Appellant was the sole carer for her elderly  mother,
         and not the other way around as was now suggested. The Tribunal had
         been told that the Appellant had  two  married  sisters  living  in
         Pakistan, and that she owned properties and farm land  in  addition
         to the interests she had in the home in which she  and  her  mother
         lived. They enjoyed an income from those  assets,  supplemented  by
         remittances from the UK which were adequate for their  needs.  This
         was not on the evidence given in 2006 a woman who upon return would
         need to live alone without family support and who would be  without
         a home or income. Ms Weatherall did not seek to  suggest  that  the
         Judge had misunderstood, or mistaken, the evidence given in 2006.

     25. Ms Weatherall accepted that in the circumstances of this appeal the
         Judge was right to approach their evidence with caution, but argued
         that if elements of the evidence of Ms S and Ms J were supported by
         the medical evidence those elements ought to have been  given  more
         weight. She accepted that the Judge had not rejected their evidence
         outright, and that he had sought to adopt a more nuanced approach.

     26. As the Judge identified the key disputed issue of fact was the true
         extent of the Appellant's care needs. In turn  the  reliability  of
         the evidence of Ms S and Ms J was  crucial  to  the  assessment  of
         those care needs, since the letters to the  GP  from  the  treating
         consultant did not shed light upon them, and since both Dr  McGeown
         and the GP were necessarily reliant upon the account  of  the  care
         needs that had been given to them by  Ms  S  and  Ms  J,  and  were
         essentially reporting what they had been told by Ms S and Ms J.  In
         particular the  Judge  appears  to  have  placed  weight  upon  the
         evidence contained within the letters from Dr Gill and his team  to
         the GP, because  that  team  had  the  opportunity  to  submit  the
         Appellant to extended observation whilst  an  in  patient.  Despite
         that opportunity there was no suggestion from Dr Gill of  his  team
         that at the low point in her psychosis the Appellant was unable  to
         feed herself, toilet herself, or dress herself, as Ms S  and  Ms  J
         claimed was still the case [35-36]. Even if that had been the  case
         at the low point in the psychosis it still begged the  question  of
         whether it was still the case at the date of hearing,  since  there
         had plainly been an improvement in her condition to some degree  or
         she would not have been discharged.

     27. Ms Weatherall accepted before me  that  the  Judge  had  accurately
         summarised the evidence contained within the letters from  Dr  Gill
         and his team to the GP, and that she was  unable  to  identify  any
         material element  of  the  medical  evidence  that  the  Judge  had
         overlooked.

     28. It follows that, despite the concern of the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         who granted the Appellant permission to appeal, the Judge  did  not
         overlook any part of the medical evidence, and,  that  he  did  not
         fail to properly consider the weight that could be given to it. The
         Appellant's capacity to give evidence  was  not  the  same  as  her
         ability to care for herself, or, her ability to  be  cared  for  by
         members of her extended family in Pakistan. The  evidence  did  not
         establish that the Appellant was too unwell to attend  the  hearing
         of her appeal. The only utterly reliable evidence before the  Judge
         in this respect was  that  she  had  failed  to  attend,  the  only
         evidence as to why she had not done so  was  that  which  had  been
         proffered to the Judge by  two  witnesses  he  had  given  adequate
         reasons for assessing as unreliable. Thus, whilst it  was  accepted
         that at the  date  of  the  hearing  the  Appellant  remained  upon
         medication to control her mental health the evidence  fell  a  long
         way short of establishing that she was too ill to be  removed  from
         the UK, or that if she was, she would neither be able to  care  for
         herself nor be cared for by members of her extended family.

     29. There is no proper basis for the assertion that the Judge  punished
         the Appellant for the deception practised by others, and I need say
         no more about this.

     30. In my judgement the Appellant has failed to establish any error  of
         law in the Judge's conclusion that the evidence relied upon did not
         establish   that   there   were   any   compelling    compassionate
         circumstances that meant the decision to remove  the  Appellant  to
         Pakistan, lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 7 October 2014 did not involve the making of an error of law  in
         the decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that  decision  to
         be set aside and remade. The decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  is
         accordingly confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    The Appellant did not seek anonymity before the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    and no request for anonymity is made  to  me.  Nevertheless  given  the
    issues raised by the appeal there does appear to  me  to  be  a  proper
    basis for the Upper Tribunal to  make  such  a  direction  of  its  own
    motion.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 4 September 2015
