
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20972/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 20 August 2013                             |On 20th August 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          TEMITOPE OMOLOLU PAULSON

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Miss L Beats, of Bruce Short, Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr M Mathews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 18 February 1981.

2) By letter of 21 September 2012 the  Respondent  refused  the  appellant's
   application for leave to remain under Tier 1 of the Points Based System.

3) The appellant claimed 15 points for an eligible award  under  Appendix  A
   and Table 10 of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent considered that no
   points fell to be awarded because the application was  made  on  3  April
   2012, but the date of award was 30 May 2012, and so it had not been  made
   at the date of application.

4)  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  did  not  agree  with  the
   submission that the appellant should be considered to have  been  awarded
   his degree at some earlier date, such as when  he  completed  his  course
   work and submitted his dissertation.  She thought that an  appellant  who
   had registered in  anticipation  of  receiving  his  award  had  not  yet
   received it, and dismissed the appeal by determination dated 16  November
   2012.

5) On 20 February 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted  permission  to
   appeal, on the view that while the appellant had  not  been  granted  his
   award at the date of his application, he had been granted it and had  put
   his full degree certificate before the respondent prior to her  decision.
   Failing submissions to the contrary, Judge Chalkley proposed to allow the
   appeal under reference to Khatel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00044.

6) SSHD v Raju, Khatel & 2 Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754 was decided  on
   25 June 2013.  Moses LJ was of opinion (paragraph 12) that  qualification
   under Table 10 required strict compliance with the  requirement  to  make
   the application within the period of 12 months from  the  time  when  the
   qualification  was  obtained.   The  question   was   not   whether   the
   qualification was obtained within 12 months  of  making  the  application
   (paragraph 14).  The Upper Tribunal had misconstrued paragraph 34G of the
   Immigration Rules, which is decisive of when an application is made.   An
   application is not continuing until the date of  decision.   Subsequently
   obtained evidence could not cure the defect in an application such as the
   present (paragraph 24).  Kitchin & Floyd LJJ agreed.

7) Miss Beats referred immediately to Raju and accepted that it was  against
   her case.  She asked for an adjournment, on her understanding  that  Raju
   is subject to further appeal.  She had  no  confirmation  of  whether  an
   appeal is pending.  She observed that apart from this case the  appellant
   has no other route to remain in the UK (which appears to be  correct,  at
   least in terms of applications which may be made "in country".)

8) Mr Mathews opposed that application,  on  the  basis  that  cases  should
   usually be decided as the law is understood to be.

9) I agreed with that submission, and declined to adjourn.

10) Miss Beats submitted that the  appellant  should  have  been  given  the
   opportunity of  submitting  further  information  under  the  "evidential
   flexibility policy",  referring  to  the  respondent's  guidance  and  to
   Rodriguez [2013] UKUT 00042.

11) I indicated that although the appellant  was  not  contacted  under  the
   terms of that policy, even if he should have been (which is doubtful)  it
   makes no difference.  He did not have  the  evidence  needed  to  succeed
   until well after his application.

12) Miss Beats said that  her  client  had  asked  for  the  opportunity  to
   address the UT himself, if his appeal appeared likely to be dismissed.  I
   declined to hear from him.  I  explained  that  he  had  the  benefit  of
   professional representation, and that everything that could  properly  be
   advanced on his behalf had been said.  It is understandable that he would
   be disappointed by the outcome, but it was legally unavoidable.

13) The appellant's appeal to the UT is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the FtT shall stand.

14) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                20 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
