







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20927/2014
                                                               IA/20974/2014
                                                               IA/20979/2014
                                                               IA/20982/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 10 November 2014                 |On 19 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Nabaraj Parajuli
                         Mrs Shardha Subedi Parajuli
                           Master Sumanyu Parajuli
                            Miss Suhana Parajuli
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Puar, counsel (instructed by MC Brothers and
Co)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience we shall refer to  the  appellant  as  "the
    Secretary of State" and to the respondents  as  "the  Claimants."   The
    Claimants are all citizens of Nepal and are members of the same family.
    The first two Claimants are husband and wife and the third  and  fourth
    Claimants are their children.


 2. The Secretary of State appeals with leave against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  20
    October 2014, allowed the appeals of first, second and third  Claimants
    under the rules and  the  fourth  Claimant's  appeal  under  Article  8
    (Family Life).


 3. The Claimants appealed the decisions of the Secretary of State dated 28
    April 2014 refusing the first Claimant's leave to remain as  a  student
    and the remaining Claimants as his dependants.


 4. A one stop warning was issued to the Claimants. They asserted in  their
    grounds that they had established a private life in the UK.


 5. The first Claimant stated that he arrived in the UK in  September  2006
    as a student and that the second and third Claimants followed him about
    six months later. The third Claimant was two years old at the time  and
    was nine years old at the date of the hearing.


 6. There was no challenge to the Secretary of State's  decision  regarding
    the first appellant's student application. He  had  not  been  able  to
    demonstrate that he met the requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(h)(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules. The Tribunal upheld  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal in that regard.


 7. Judge Ghaffar had regard to  the  claim  by  the  first  Claimant,  Mr.
    Parajuli, regarding the difficulty of his child,  the  third  Claimant,
    obtaining admission to schools in Nepal as well as the difficulties  he
    will experience as he has no writing or reading skills in Nepali (5).


 8. Moreover, the first Claimant had elderly parents in Nepal and could not
    provide support  to  the  family.  The  second  Claimant's  family  had
    relocated to America except for her elderly mother. Unemployment  rates
    are high in Nepal. The second Claimant works in the  UK  which  is  not
    something that they would be able to do in Nepal.


 9. The first Claimant referred to his eight years' lawful residence in the
    UK. He worked part time for Tesco [5].


10. Judge Ghaffar also had regard to the father's oral evidence that he had
    consulted more than 20 schools in Nepal and only received two  replies.
    He claimed that his son would struggle at school [6].


11. It was also established in evidence that the third Claimant had arrived
    in the UK in 2007. He and his father went for a visit to Nepal in 2010.
    The child  wanted  to  return  within  four  days.  He  was  unable  to
    communicate with his grandparents. There were no other  family  members
    there. The first Claimant confirmed that the schools he approached were
    private. If the children were to go to government schools,  they  would
    require Nepali to be spoken at all times. The first  Claimant  conceded
    during cross examination that he had been aware that at some  stage  he
    would have to return to Nepal.


12. It was also established that the second  Claimant  travelled  to  Nepal
    with the fourth Claimant in 2011 to visit her mother. That is the  only
    relative she has in Nepal.


13. Judge Ghaffar dismissed the first Claimant's appeal under the  relevant
    paragraphs relating to student applications.


14. He went on to consider their appeals pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules. He found that the third Claimant had been in the
    UK continuously since  his  arrival  here,  eight  years  ago.  He  had
    completed all his primary education  in  the  UK  in  English  and  was
    applying for entrance to a grammar school for the next  academic  year.
    [17]


15. He found that the child would struggle significantly to adapt  to  life
    and school in Nepal. He had adapted to life in the UK in the time  that
    he has lawfully resided in the UK. He therefore fell for  consideration
    under paragraph 276ADE(iv) on the basis that he is under 18 years  old;
    has lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years, and  whether
    it would be reasonable in the circumstances to expect him to leave  the
    UK.


16. Judge Ghafar found that, given his age and the fact that Nepal is not a
    place he knows apart from a short visit with his father some four years
    ago, it was unreasonable to expect him to adapt to life there.  He  has
    developed his private life in the UK and had formed  friends  here.  He
    thus found that it would be unreasonable to expect him to  relocate  to
    Nepal [17].


17. He found with regard to the remaining Claimants that there would not be
    "significant obstacles in their integrating in  life  in  Nepal"  [18].
    There would be difficulties but would not be significant as required by
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) which refers  to  there  being  "very  significant
    obstacles" to an applicant's integration  into  the  country  where  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.


18. Judge Ghaffar then considered the first two  Claimants'  appeals  under
    the "parent route". He set out the requirements of paragraph 19.  There
    were no suitability issues relating to the first and second  Claimants.
    They met the requirements of E-LTRPT 2.2-2.4.


19. He found that as  it  was  unreasonable  for  their  child,  the  third
    Claimant, to be required to leave the  UK  the  parents  also  met  the
    requirements under the rules [20].


20.  He  accordingly  allowed  the  first,  second  and  third   Claimants'
    immigration appeals [21].


21. With regard to the fourth Claimant, he found that she is the  child  of
    parents who are entitled to remain in the UK. However, in order for her
    to be granted leave to remain,  the  family  would  need  to  meet  the
    financial requirements, which they did not. Accordingly,  he  dismissed
    her immigration appeal [22].


22.  He  then  went  on  to  consider  whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances with regard to the fourth Claimant's appeal  outside  the
    immigration rules. On the  particular  facts,  he  found  that  he  was
    entitled to consider her claim outside the rules. He has ".....born  in
    mind the authorities of Gulshan and Nagre" [24].


23. The basis for that finding  was  that  the  fourth  Claimant's  family,
    namely her parents and  brother,  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules but  she  did  not.  She  is  only  four  years  old.
    Accordingly, her appeal could be considered under "conventional Article
    8 principles" [23].


24. The Judge then directed himself in accordance with Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27. The child  enjoyed  family  life  with  her  parents  and  brother.
    Refusing her leave to remain "....would result in  an  interference  in
    their family life" [24].


25. With regard to the issue of proportionality, the Judge had  'particular
    regard to s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014'. He found that  the  fourth
    Claimant could speak English and  is  financially  dependent  upon  her
    parents, who are financially independent [24].


26. He did not find it proportionate to remove her "......in the  light  of
    the  fact  that  the  rest  of  her  family  are  able  to  fulfil  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules" [24]. He moreover found that  it
    is in her best interests to remain in  the  UK  with  her  parents  and
    brother. Accordingly her removal would  result  in  a  disproportionate
    interference in their family life. Her appeal was therefore allowed  on
    human rights grounds [28].


27. On 6 November 2014, the Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to
    appeal against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    the basis that it was arguable that  the  Judge  did  not  have  proper
    regard to the relevant authorities including Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC
    74 and EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, and that
    the findings regarding reasonableness may be flawed.


28. The Secretary of State's reasons for appealing are set out  in  detail.
    It is asserted  in  ground  1  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    application of reasonableness "is misguided". Although it may be in the
    child's best interests to remain here with his family member to benefit
    from schooling and to maintain friendships, this does not mean that  it
    is unreasonable to require the third Claimant to leave the UK with  his
    family.


29. He could have no future right to access to education in the UK  outside
    of the ability of his parents to comply with the immigration rules.  In
    that respect, Zoumbas, supra, is relied on.  In  particular,  reference
    was had to paragraph 24 of that decision where the Supreme Court  noted
    that the children in that case were not British citizens, nor did  they
    have a right to future education and healthcare in the UK.


30. The Secretary of State also had regard to the Court of Appeal  decision
    in EV (Philippines). Mr Tufan submitted that the  length  of  residence
    does not constitute a trump card.


31. The Secretary of State  referred  to  paragraphs  59-61  from  EV.  The
    contention is that the parent Claimants could  not  succeed  under  the
    rules relating to students, and their  success  under  Appendix  FM  is
    wholly dependent upon the finding of reasonableness in respect of their
    son, the third Claimant.


32. It was not unreasonable to require him to leave the UK with the  family
    unit and to adjust to life in Nepal. Mr Tufan  contended  that  he  has
    extended  family  there  with  whom  he  maintains  contact,  such   as
    grandparents, who can assist him in settling into life  there,  as  can
    his parents.


33. It is further submitted that whilst the third Claimant may have spent a
    significant period of time in the UK, the duration of stay and  studies
    do not establish unreasonableness  'determinatively';  they  amount  to
    factors which must be considered. Even if he may find it  difficult  to
    adapt  to  life  in  Nepal   that   does   not   in   itself   indicate
    unreasonableness.


34. For the same reasons, the finding under Article 8  in  respect  of  the
    fourth Claimant are also flawed. It is reasonable and proportionate  to
    remove the whole family to Nepal as a unit. This does not constitute  a
    disproportionate interference with the right to respect for family  and
    private life.


35. Mr Tufan submitted that sections 117A, B  and  C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were in force. The provisions apply  to
    all appeals heard on or after 28 July  2014  in  respect  of  when  the
    application or immigration decision was made.  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge did not consider s.117 at all. The Judge's findings in respect of
    the third Claimant are set out in the  main  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    determination. Moreover, it was not clear when the child entered the UK
    and whether seven years had been completed. Even if  he  had  completed
    seven years, there was nothing unreasonable in requiring  the  Claimant
    to return with his parents, who have no right to remain.


36. On behalf of the Claimants, Mr Puar submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was now seeking to challenge the findings and  was  going  beyond
    the grounds of appeal contained in the reasons for appealing. There has
    never been any challenge to the facts as found. In particular,  it  has
    never been disputed that the third Claimant has  been  here  for  seven
    years. It has been accepted by the Home Office that the first  Claimant
    came in September 2006 and the remaining Claimants  six  months  later,
    namely March 2007.


37. The Judge was moreover entitled to accept the  evidence  given  by  his
    father that the third Claimant had been here for seven years as at  the
    date of application in April 2014.


38. Mr Puar submitted that the Judge has considered the claims of the first
    three Claimants under the Immigration Rules. He looked at the rules  as
    at the date of decision. He considered the  claims  under  Appendix  FM
    from paragraph 16 onwards. He had regard  in  particular  to  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) as it  applied  to  the  third  Claimant.  His  findings  at
    paragraph 17 are sustainable.


39. Having considered the third Claimant's  case  he  then  considered  his
    parents' applications under the parent  route  [19].  The  findings  at
    paragraph 20 are sustainable.


40. As the fourth Claimant could not satisfy the rules, the  Judge  had  to
    make  a  separate  assessment  as  to  the   proportionality   of   his
    contemplated removal. This assessment was undertaken in  the  light  of
    the fact  that  the  rest  of  the  family  were  able  to  fulfil  the
    requirements under the immigration rules.


41. In addition the Judge had express regard to s.19 of the Immigration Act
    2014 and made findings that the Claimant could speak  English  and  was
    financially dependent on  her  parents  who  are  in  turn  financially
    independent.


    Assessment


42. We have had regard to the grounds of appeal relied on by the  Secretary
    of  State.  The  assertion  is  that   the   Judge's   application   of
    reasonableness was "misguided". The basis of that  contention  is  that
    the third Claimant could have no future right to  access  education  in
    the  UK  outside  the  ability  of  his  parents  to  comply  with  the
    immigration rules. It is contended that  he  had  no  right  to  future
    education and care in the UK. Similarly, the Secretary of State  relied
    on EV (Philippines).


43. However, we note that in EV, none of the family  in  that  case  had  a
    right to remain in the UK. If the mother in that case were removed, the
    father had no independent right to remain. If the parents are  removed,
    then it was entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with  them
    [60].


44. However, Judge Ghaffar found that the third Claimant had been in the UK
    for seven years. That finding was not challenged as part of the lengthy
    grounds of appeal. It was the  application  of  reasonableness  to  the
    facts that were said to be "misguided" - paragraph 1(b) of the  reasons
    for appealing.


45. Accordingly, unlike the Claimant in  EV,  the  third  Claimant  had  an
    independent right to remain in the UK pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(iv).
    That was based on the finding that it would not be reasonable,  in  the
    circumstances found to exist, to expect him to leave the UK.


46. In the light of that finding the parents' claims were  then  considered
    under the parent route under the immigration rules. Judge Ghaffar found
    with regard to the  parents  that  there  were  no  suitability  issues
    applicable.  They met the requirements of E-LTRPT 2.2-  2.4.  Paragraph
    EX.1 applied. He found that there was a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with the third Claimant, who is under 18; the child is  in
    the UK; the child has lived continuously here for at  least  the  seven
    years immediately preceding the date of  application  and,  as  already
    found, it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.




47. It is asserted by Mr Tufan that the Immigration Judge did not  consider
    the provisions of s.117A, B and C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.


48. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 came into force on 28 July 2014.
    That amended the 2002 Act by introducing a new Part 5A containing s.117
    A, B and C. Those  provisions,  as  already  indicated,  apply  to  all
    appeals heard on or  after  28  July  2014  irrespective  of  when  the
    application or immigration decision was made.


49. However, part 5A only applies where the Tribunal considers Article 8(2)
    of the Human Rights Convention directly. The Immigration Rules  already
    contain the public interest question.


50. Insofar as the first three Claimants are concerned, therefore, Part  5A
    did not apply as the Judge upheld their claims  under  the  Immigration
    Rules themselves. He did not consider  their  claims  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention.


51. Insofar as the fourth Claimant is concerned, as already noted,  he  did
    have regard to s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 [24]. It was s.19  that
    amended the 2002 Act by introducing the new Part 5A.


52. There is no contention that the application of s.19 of the 2014 Act was
    not properly considered or given effect to by Judge Ghaffar.


53. With regard to the Article 8 findings of Judge Ghaffar,  the  Secretary
    of State has submitted that the findings were flawed, having regard  to
    the earlier and erroneous findings under the rules. If it is reasonable
    and proportionate to remove  the  family  to  Nepal  as  a  unit,  then
    findings with regard to the fourth Claimant could not be upheld.


54. We find that Judge Ghaffar was entitled to conclude on the basis of the
    evidence before him  that  the  first  Claimant  had  been  in  the  UK
    continuously since  his  arrival,  some  eight  years  ago.  The  first
    Claimant asserted that he arrived in the UK in September 2006  and  the
    second and third Claimants followed him  some  six  months  later.  The
    third Claimant was accordingly two years old at the  time.  As  at  the
    date of the determination, however, he was nine years old.


55. Judge Ghaffar has considered the fact that he has been  here  for  some
    seven years; that he  has  completed  his  primary  education  here  in
    English; that he is applying for entrance to a grammar school.  He  has
    only been in Nepal for a very short visit with  his  father  some  four
    years  ago.  The  Judge  found  moreover   that   he   would   struggle
    significantly to adapt to life and school in Nepal,  and  that  he  has
    adapted to life in the UK since he  has  been  here  and  that  he  has
    remained here lawfully.


56. In finding that it would be unreasonable  for  the  third  Claimant  to
    return, Judge Ghaffar also had regard to other factors as  referred  to
    in paragraph 5 of the determination. These include the fact that he has
    only been in Nepal for a very short visit with  his  father  some  four
    years ago; the difficulty of  the  Claimant's  obtaining  admission  to
    schools in Nepal;  the  difficulties  he  would  experience  having  no
    written or reading skills in Nepali; the fact that his father only  has
    elderly parents there who cannot provide support  to  the  family.  His
    father had consulted more than 20 schools in Nepal  and  only  received
    two replies. The child had  not  been  able  to  communicate  with  his
    grandparents and there were no other family members there.


57. His mother's family have relocated to America, apart from  her  elderly
    mother.  Unemployment rates are high in Nepal. His mother works in  the
    UK, which is not something that she would be able to do in  Nepal.  His
    father has worked part time for the last eight years.


58. We do not find that  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the third Claimant to leave the UK to  be  in  any
    way irrational or perverse. Those are findings that are sustainable  on
    the basis of the evidence before the Judge.


59. In the event the  consequent  findings  in  respect  of  the  remaining
    Claimants, including the Article 8 of the fourth Claimant are similarly
    sustainable.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of any material errors of law. The  decision  shall  accordingly
    stand.


    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Dated: 17/12/2014


    Deputy upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

