
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20870/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th May 2016                              |On 18th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                             MS FLORENCE SURAKAT
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Beach promulgated on  19  August  2015,  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  on  11
    March 2016.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 4. The appellant's claim is that she arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor during 2001 at the age of 15. She first applied  for  leave  to
    remain on 3 March 2010, shortly before giving birth to her first child.
    A further application made in 2010 was rejected and a third application
    was refused with no right  of  appeal.  During  2013,  the  appellant's
    second child was born.  On  24  April  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    reconsidered the appellant's application and that of her family at  the
    request of her previous advisors.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the  said  application  because  it  was
    considered  that  the  appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the  eligibility
    requirements of Appendix FM  because  her  partner  and  children  were
    ineligible because they are Nigerian nationals with no leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and  the  children  had  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for less than 7 years. Consideration  was  also  given  to  the
    appellant's  private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE  of   the   Rules,
    exceptional circumstances and section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, with the Secretary of State  concluding  that
    the appellant did not qualify for a grant of leave to  remain.  It  was
    particularly noted that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    claimed residence in the United Kingdom since 2001 and that the  health
    conditions mentioned in the application could be treated in Nigeria.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The  grounds  argued
    that the appellant was relying on paragraph  276ADE(vi)  based  on  her
    claim that she was brought to the United Kingdom aged 12  and  was  now
    aged 28.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant and her partner gave evidence at the hearing.  The  judge
    did not accept that the appellant and her partner had no ties, contacts
    or family in Nigeria or that there were  significant  barriers  to  the
    appellant's integration.  Her  appeal  under  Article  8,  outside  the
    Rules, was also dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The handwritten grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  argued,
    inter alia, that the judge erred as to the date  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision; that the judge ignored evidence to  substantiate  the
    appellant's claim that she entered the United Kingdom in  2001  at  the
    age of  15  and  that  the  judge  showed  bias  in  referring  to  the
    appellant's friends  as  people  of  "Nigerian  descent."  The  renewed
    grounds made similar points.





 9. While the appellant did not accept that her application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was late, she explained that owing  to  the  Christmas  postal
    delays, she had not received it until 4 January 2016. I note that it is
    dated 5 January 2016, albeit the Upper Tribunal stamped it as  received
    on 20 January 2016. The judge granting permission did  not  comment  on
    the timeliness issue.

10. Permission to appeal was, ultimately, granted on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's loose- leaf documents might have been overlooked, but  that
    it would be for the appellant to demonstrate that these documents  were
    before the judge and that any omission was material to the outcome.

11. The Secretary of State's response of 4 April 2016  indicated  that  the
    appeal was opposed and reiterated the points  made  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce in the grant of permission to appeal.

The error of law hearing

12. The appellant attended the  hearing  in  person  and  relied  upon  her
    grounds of appeal. I advised the parties that the documents in question
    were attached to the correspondence pin on the file and appeared to  me
    to have been received by the  First-tier  Tribunal  shortly  after  the
    appeal was lodged on 6  May  2014.  These  documents  dated  from  2001
    onwards and comprised of a record  of  the  appellant's  schooling  and
    qualifications in the United Kingdom.

13. Mr Bramble  accepted  that  this  evidence  had  not  been  taken  into
    consideration by the judge, but argued  that  it  would  have  made  no
    difference to the outcome of the appeal. He said that the appellant had
    still to attain 20 years residence and would need to  show  that  there
    were very significant obstacles  to  her  integration  in  Nigeria.  Mr
    Bramble relied on the judge's finding that the appellant's friends were
    of Nigerian heritage and she would have  their  support  on  return  to
    Nigeria. In terms of the proportionality assessment, he argued that the
    appellant had overstayed since entering the United Kingdom as  a  child
    and it would not materially change the outcome.

14. In response, the appellant complained that at the time her  application
    for leave to remain had been reconsidered by the  Secretary  of  State,
    she had acquired 14 years' residence in the United Kingdom. As for  her
    friends, these were people she had met in the United Kingdom  who  were
    born in this country and British citizens of Nigerian  background.  She
    said that it was unfair that the judge had not asked her if her friends
    could assist her to integrate in Nigeria. The appellant  stressed  that
    she had been brought to the United Kingdom as a minor; that she had  no
    family in Nigeria and that when she met her husband  he  had  leave  to
    remain. She is aggrieved that she was not permitted to be  a  dependent
    on her husband's former  status.  In  terms  of  her  overstaying,  the
    appellant stressed that she applied to  regularise  her  stay  in  2010
    because she wanted her own children to avoid the  hardships  she  faced
    growing up in the United Kingdom.




Decision on Error of Law

15. The judge erred in failing to note and consider an  extensive  quantity
    of  photocopied  documents  submitted  by  the  appellant,  which  were
    erroneously attached to the correspondence pin on the  IAC  case  file.
    Those documents provided an account of the appellant's early  years  as
    well a chronology of her education in the United Kingdom  supported  by
    documentary evidence including the  appellant's  GCSE  certificates.  I
    also find some merit in the appellant's complaint regarding the judge's
    comments about the ability of her friends to assist her to  reintegrate
    in Nigeria, about which she was not invited to respond at the  hearing.
    These errors were material for the following reasons.

16. Firstly, the judge's findings at [37]  take  issue  with  the  lack  of
    documentary evidence "to show that  the  appellant  attended  secondary
    school and College in the UK;" that the judge "would have  expected  to
    see some evidence confirming her time in the UK" and "she may not  have
    lived here since the age of 15 given the lack of  documentary  evidence
    to support this assertion."  I find that the repeated references to the
    lack of evidence which ought to be available combined with the  judge's
    rejection of the appellant's claim that she was brought to  the  United
    Kingdom as a minor, lead me to the conclusion that  these  issues  were
    pertinent to the judge's overall conclusions and had  this  information
    been noticed and considered by the judge, the outcome may not have been
    the same.

17. Secondly, the appellant's friends, all young people like the appellant,
    who wrote letters  in  support,  provided  copies  of  their  passports
    showing that they were British citizens, some of whom were born in  the
    United Kingdom. The judge's finding that these friends would be able to
    assist the appellant in integrating was based on an  assumption  rather
    than the evidence. Had this point been put to the appellant during  the
    hearing, she would have been able to state, as she did before me,  that
    these people were no better placed than she in terms of being  able  to
    assist with her integration in Nigeria.

18. Mr Bramble made no submissions as to the timeliness of the  application
    to the Upper Tribunal. I consider  that  the  appeal  was  most  likely
    brought in time, given the delays with the Christmas post at  the  time
    the refusal of permission from the First-tier was sent as well as  when
    the appellant sent her application to the Upper Tribunal.  However,  if
    am wrong in this, time for appealing is extended in view  of  the  fact
    that any delay was short, there are minor  children  affected  by  this
    decision; the respondent  does  not  claim  any  disadvantage  and  the
    appellant was and remains unrepresented in these proceedings.









Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing in front  of
any judge except Judge Beach.



Signed                                       Date: 13 May 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




























