
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20795/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers at Manchester        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2013                             |On 28 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                                     and



                           VICENCIO JALDO MENGULLO
                                                                    Claimant



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr  Mengullo,  is  referred
   to here for the sake of clarity as the claimant. For the same reason, the
   Secretary of State who is the appellant in  the  proceedings  before  the
   Upper Tribunal is referred to as the respondent.

2. The repondent appeals with permission against the determination of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes promulgated on 13 November 2012,  allowing
   the claimant's appeal against the decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State
   made simultaneously on 13 September 2012 to refuse to grant  him  further
   leave to remain and to remove him by way of directions under  section  47
   of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


3. The claimant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 6 May 1966.  He  was
   granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on  18  June  2007  as  a  work
   permit holder until  6  June  2012.  On  22  May  2013,  he  applied  for
   indefinite leave to remain, an application refused on 13  September  2012
   by reference to paragraphs 134, 276ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration
   Rules.

4. In addition to the decision to refuse to vary  the  claimant's  leave  to
   remain, the respondent took a decision on the  same  day  to  remove  the
   claimant from the UK by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
   Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

5. The claimant appealed against the decision and on 13  November  2012  the
   matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes  who  found  that
   the decision to refuse to vary the claimant's leave to  remain  had  been
   considered on the basis of paragraph 134 as amended on 20 July by Cm 8423
   [5] and by paragraphs 276 ADE and Appendix  FM,  introduced  by  HC  194,
   despite  the  changes  introduced  by  the  latter   being   subject   to
   transitional provisions [4].  He concluded that as the respondent had not
   applied the correct immigration rules, the decision was not in accordance
   with the law.

6. Judge Holmes  also  concluded  [7]  that  the  section  47  decision  was
   unlawful, relying on Patel v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 741 and Ahmadi (section
   47 decision: validity; Sapkota) [2012] UKUT00147, as  it  had  had   been
   made at the same time as the decision to refuse to vary leave.

7. The Judge allowed the appeals on the basis  that  the  decisions  by  the
   Secretary of State were not in accordance with the law [8]. He also  made
   a fee order in favour of the respondent.


8. The respondent appealed against the  decisions  on  the  basis  that  the
   judge had made a material error of law in  concluding  that  simultaneous
   service of a section 47 decision rendered the entire "decision" unlawful;
   that the variation decision was no affected by the absence  of  a  lawful
   removal decision;  and,  that  the  judge  should  have  dealt  with  the
   substantive merits of the appeal against the variation decision.

9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  24  September
   2012 by Designated Judge  Taylor  and  standard  directions  were  issued
   requiring, amongst other things, the appellant to  serve  any  additional
   material and a skeleton within 21 days, and for the respondent to file  a
   rule 24 letter within  28  days.  Neither  party  has  responded  to  the
   directions.




10. On 15 January 2013, I issued further directions, stating:

    It  is  my  provisional  view  that,  the  Rule  24  letter  from   the
    respondent's solicitors notwithstanding,  that  in  the  light  of  the
    decision  in  Adamally  and  Jaferi  [2012]  UKUT   00414,   that   the
    determination of the FtT Judge did involve the making of  an  error  of
    law in failing to make findings in respect of the  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave to remain and that the  appeal  should
    be allowed to the extent that it is  remitted  to  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J M Holmes for him to make a fresh determination  in  respect  of
    the appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave. It is proposed
    to take such a course of action without any further hearing unless  the
    Upper Tribunal  receives  within  five  working  days  of  the  written
    submissions supported by cogent arguments to the contrary.

11.  There is on file no response to these directions.  I am satisfied  that
   both parties are content  for  me  to  determine  the  matter  without  a
   hearing, and that I am able to  do  so  on  the  material  before  me.  I
   therefore decided so to do.


Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?


12. The  judicial  headnote  in  Adamally  &  Jafferi  (section  47  removal
   decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414provides:

    When a removal decision purportedly under  s  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 is made concurrently  with  a  decision
    refusing further leave:


 i) the s 47 decision is unlawful, but
ii) the decision refusing leave is a separate decision, that
iii) requires determination;
iv) s 85(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 brings  the
    two decisions into one appeal, but
 v) s 86 of that Act allows  and  requires  the  determination  to  reflect
    differences in outcome.


13. I am satisfied that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law  when  he
   concluded, in effect that the decision to refuse to vary leave to  remain
   and the decision to remove pursuant to s47 of the 2006 Act could  not  be
   made in the same document.

14. I consider also that the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  determine
   substantively the appeal under the immigration rules. It was incumbent on
   the judge to make findings as to  which  provisions  of  the  immigration
   rules were applicable and to make findings as to whether the requirements
   of the relevant rules were met. I therefore set the decision aside.

   Directions

15. I consider that, following Adamally & Jafferi the appropriate course  of
   action would be for the case to be remitted to the First-tier to be heard
   by Judge J M Holmes. I am satisfied also that in all  the  circumstances,
   that is  the  appropriate  course  of  action.    I  therefore  make  the
   following directions:-


    1. The matter is remitted to First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes.
    2. The appeal is to be allowed in so far as it relates to  the  decision
       under section 47
    3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge is to determine the grounds  of  appeal
       raised in relation to the refusal to vary  the  claimant's  leave  to
       remain and to decide whether  the  appeal  falls  to  be  allowed  or
       dismissed in so far as it relates to that decision
    4. The fee award is set aside.
    5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge must determine whether any fee award is
       appropriate when he has concluded his determination
    6. If the parties wish to rely on any further documentation, it must  be
       served on the First-tier Tribunal and on the opposing  party  7  days
       before the next hearing.

Signed                                  Date:  21 August 2013
[pic]
J K H Rintoul
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


