
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20325/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 July 2017                  |On 21 July 2017                   |
|                                 |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                            Mr MEHMET MAYBARSKAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Authorised Representative
      (Immigration Legal Services)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Landes on 9 June 2017 against  the  determination
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed who had dismissed the  appeal
           of the Appellant  seeking  settlement  outside  the  Immigration
           Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds on the grounds of  his  marriage
           to a British Citizen.  The decision and reasons was  promulgated
           on 28 November 2016.


      2.    The Appellant is  a  national  of  Turkey.   The  Appellant  had
           entered the United  Kingdom  lawfully  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
           Student Migrant in 2009, with leave to enter for 6  months.   He
           failed to leave the United Kingdom  after  his  application  for
           further leave to remain was refused.  He remained in the  United
           Kingdom unlawfully from 11 January 2010.  In April 2010  he  met
           his British Citizen wife whom he married on 9 November 2013.  It
           was accepted that the Appellant was unable to meet the financial
           requirements of Appendix FM. The judge found that  the  marriage
           was genuine and subsisting, as indeed had not been challenged by
           the Secretary of State, but that it was not unreasonable for the
           wife to relocate to Turkey with the Appellant to continue  their
           family life there.  She would have access to support in the form
           of her husband and his family, and could remain  in  contact  by
           modern means of communication with  her  own  family  who  would
           remain supportive.  There were no insurmountable  obstacles  and
           there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances.    There   was   no
           disproportionality in Article 8 ECHR terms  when  the  balancing
           exercise was performed.  The judge dismissed the appeal on  that
           basis. (There was no discussion of Chen [2015] UKUT 00189  (IAC)
           and the impact of temporary separation.)


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted on a limited basis  because  it
           was considered arguable that the judge had erred by  failing  to
           consider  whether  the  effect  of  a  move  to  Turkey  on  the
           Appellant's  wife's   mental   health   would   amount   to   an
           insurmountable  obstacle  for  proportionality  purposes   under
           Article 8 ECHR.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.






      Submissions


      5.    Mr Hodson for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary he sought to argue that the  judge
           had  completely  failed  to  address  the   central   issue   of
           insurmountable obstacles.  The judge had applied the wrong test,
           as had been pointed out in the grant of  permission  to  appeal.
           Agyarko [2017] UKSC  applied  to  reasonableness.   The  judge's
           findings could not be related to  reasonableness.   He  had  not
           dealt properly with the medical  evidence.    The  determination
           should be set aside and remade.


      6.    Mr Clarke for the Respondent relied on the rule  24  notice  and
           submitted that there was plainly no material error of law.    It
           had been accepted that Appendix FM had  not  been  met  and  the
           judge's Article 8 ECHR findings were open to him. The  substance
           of Agyarko had been applied.  The judge had found as a fact that
           the Appellant's wife would have  support  available  to  her  in
           Turkey.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           generous, and failed to reflect the fact that the appeal was  in
           reality  a  misconceived   one,   with   very   weak   evidence.
           Unfortunately it is typical of many appeals seen in  the  First-
           tier Tribunal and again in the Upper Tribunal involving  couples
           seeking to rely on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   Had  the  Appellant
           returned to Turkey in 2010 as he should have done, he would have
           been able to enter the United Kingdom to join his wife under the
           far less stringent provisions of the now repealed paragraph  281
           of the Immigration Rules.  Those Immigration Rules were replaced
           by from 9 July 2012 by the much  more  demanding  provisions  of
           Appendix FM.   There was no evidence that those provisions could
           not with appropriate efforts be complied with.  The  Appellant's
           wife complained in her witness statement that it  would  take  a
           long time to comply with Appendix FM but  provided  no  evidence
           about any attempts to do so in the past.   The  current  unhappy
           situation was created by the parties.  Compliance with  the  law
           is not a matter of individual choice.  Time and money have  been
           wasted seeking the impossible,  when  obvious  and  satisfactory
           solutions were available.


      8.    The live issues before the  judge  were  not  indicated  by  the
           grounds of appeal attached to the Appellant's Notice  of  Appeal
           to the First-tier Tribunal.  They  were  generic,  uninformative
           and largely incomprehensible.  Such  grounds  fail  to  serve  a
           client's interests and are a breach of the overriding objective:
           see the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, rule 2.


      9.    Despite the lack  of  assistance  which  the  Notice  of  Appeal
           provided, it was obvious to the judge that the issues before him
           were whether family life could be lived in  Turkey  and  whether
           that would be proportionate in Article 8 ECHR  terms,  in  other
           words, whether there would be  "insurmountable  obstacles":  see
           the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   Although  the   judge   is
           criticised for failing to apply  Agyarko  (above),  that  useful
           guidance was not  available  to  him,  as  the  Supreme  Court's
           decision was issued in February 2017, months after  the  judge's
           (regrettably  delayed)  promulgation  of   his   decision.    As
           indicated below, however, the judge  in  substance  applied  the
           principles further explained in Agyarko.


      10.   The evidence before  the  judge  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
           consisted of two principal items, the Appellant's wife's witness
           statement and a letter from her GP.  The witness  statement  all
           too typically of this appeal  failed  to  comply  with  standard
           directions.  The paragraphs were not numbered.  That is  another
           breach of the overriding objective.  On page 3 in an  unnumbered
           paragraph  the  Appellant's  wife  stated  that  she  had   been
           suffering from depression for 6 years and that  her  family  had
           been  her  rock  and  that  her  husband  had  provided  "useful
           support."  Although she stated that she had been under the  care
           of a psychiatrist and a psychologist, the only medical  evidence
           placed before the tribunal was a brief letter from  her  GP,  Dr
           Timothy Reed.  Dr Reed stated that her family had been of  great
           and continuing support, and  stated  that  the  lack  of  family
           support  available  in  Turkey   "is   likely   to   result   in
           deterioration in Mrs Selcuk's mental health."   The  letter  was
           very short of detail and gave little indication of  the  current
           seriousness  of  the  Appellant's  condition.   There   was   no
           discussion of any medicines currently prescribed, the dosage  or
           their effect,  let  alone  their  availability  in  Turkey.  The
           obvious inference is that the  illness  is  no  longer  serious,
           otherwise the doctor would have said so.  The letter was plainly
           written  to  support  his  patient's  appeal.   There   was   no
           discussion of the benefits of the Appellant's  company  for  his
           wife.  There was no discussion of Mrs Selcuk's ability to  study
           at tertiary level (as she had been doing)  or  her  own  insight
           into her condition.


      11.   The Appellant also produced a serious of colour  photographs  of
           his family life with Mrs Selcuk.  These show a variety of  every
           day family events.  These invariably  show  Mrs  Selcuk  looking
           cheerful and smiling, leading a  normal  life.    This  was  the
           evidence  the  Appellant  chose  to  produce.   No  doubt  these
           photographs properly informed  the  judge's  findings  of  fact,
           i.e., that Mrs Selcuk's depression is under control.


      12.   The judge's formal findings are mainly set out at [8] and [9] of
           the decision and reasons.  Although the judge does not say so in
           express terms, it is clear from [2] and [3] of the decision that
           he  is  addressing  the  live  issues   for   Article   8   ECHR
           proportionality,  i.e.,   whether   there   are   insurmountable
           obstacles to family life being led in  Turkey.   It  might  have
           been useful had the judge been more explicit, but any  error  of
           law here is not material as the context shows the  issues  being
           addressed.


      13.   It must be remembered as part of the judge's analysis  that  Mrs
           Selcuk is of Turkish heritage, and has relatives of her  own  in
           Turkey such as her grandmother.  Although Mrs Selcuk was born in
           London, she chooses as is her right in a free society to  remain
           within Turkish culture, as  is  for  example  indicated  by  her
           traditional Turkish dress: see the photographs.  It was  perhaps
           too obvious for the judge to say  that  adaptation  to  life  in
           Turkey was not shown to be a serious  problem  for  her,  albeit
           without certain advantages she has in the United Kingdom.


      14.   The judge examined the evidence before him of the impact of  the
           Appellant's wife's depression on  living  with  her  husband  in
           Turkey.  Again this might with advantage  have  been  done  more
           explicitly, but the substance  is  clear:  the  Appellant  would
           continue to have at least adequate support, primarily  from  her
           husband (in his witness statement  at  page  3  he  pledged  his
           "eternal support" for her) but also from his family  in  Turkey.
           The judge also found, as was open to  him,  that  the  Appellant
           could remain in contact  with  her  own  family  in  the  United
           Kingdom by various modern means.  There  was  no  evidence  that
           they could not visit her there.   All  of  these  findings  were
           based on the evidence, and are logical and sustainable.  Indeed,
           as Mr Clarke pointed out, in substance they follow the  guidance
           set out at [42] and [43] of Agyarko (above).


      15.    There  was  no  suggestion  that  the  experienced  judge   had
           misunderstood any of the evidence.  Section 117B of NIA 2002 was
           adequately applied to the findings of fact.  The  Appellant  had
           been in the United Kingdom precariously for some 6 years by  the
           date of the hearing and his wife was well aware of his  lack  of
           status.   He  was  not  financially  independent.   Mr  Hodson's
           submissions, like the onwards grounds, amount to  no  more  than
           disagreement with the judge's decision.


      16.   The tribunal finds that the onwards appeal has no substance  and
           that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision
           challenged. Plainly the Appellant  and  his  wife  have  several
           reasonable options open to them for the  continuation  of  their
           family life, i.e., to live together in Turkey or to travel there
           together on a visit  while  entry  clearance  is  sought  or  to
           separate on a temporary basis while the Appellant obtains  entry
           clearance on the terms prescribed by the Immigration Rules.




      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 20 July 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




