

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/20209/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On:  2nd March 2016                      |On: 8th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                             THE HON LORD BURNS
                    (sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge)

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     BK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Lewis, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
                       Greenwood Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D.  Clarke Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan  born  on  the  1st  January
    1977. He appeals with permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Denson)[2] to dismiss his appeal against a decision  to
    refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom[3], and in so doing cancel
    his indefinite leave to remain.




    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 and sought  asylum.
    He thereafter failed to attend an interview and the claim was  rejected
    on non-compliance grounds. The Appellant  lodged  an  appeal  with  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and when he attended the hearing in  October  2004
    he did so on his own with no legal representation.  The Adjudicator was
    Mrs P.M Hands. Having heard the Appellant's evidence, she found that he
    had been a member of the Taliban, whose duties had included "harassing,
    detaining and killing people".   Mrs Hands found the Appellant to be  a
    credible witness, but did not find his fear of return to Afghanistan to
    be well-founded. The country background  material  indicated  that  the
    situation for rank and file members, "particularly those  coerced  into
    working for the Taliban to save their lives and livelihood",  was  that
    they were being accepted back into Afghan society. She found that there
    was no risk of serious harm, and dismissed the appeal.

 3. The Appellant did not seek to challenge that decision. In January  2007
    he was removed from the United Kingdom. Once back  in  Afghanistan,  he
    made an application for entry clearance  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled here, namely his British wife CH. That  application
    was successful and he re-entered the United Kingdom on the  2nd  August
    2007.  On the 22nd September 2009 he was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain (ILR).

 4. The Appellant subsequently made  an  application  to  naturalise  as  a
    British citizen. By way of letter dated 20th  December  2011  this  was
    refused on the following grounds:

         "The evidence you gave  at  your  asylum  appeal  was  that  whilst
         serving  the  Taliban  you  were  responsible  for  the  detention,
         beating, torture and  murder  of  people  on  the  orders  of  your
         commander.


         These acts amount to  war  crimes  of:  murder,  torture,  unlawful
         confinement, wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to
         body or health. In addition, these acts amounted to crimes  against
         humanity of: murder, imprisonment and torture. As a result of  your
         personal involvement in war crimes and crimes against humanity, the
         Secretary of State is not satisfied that you are a person of  'good
         character' for the purpose of the British Nationality Act 1981.


         You admitted to participation in the torture of prisoners. Acts  of
         torture are outlawed under the United Nations  'Convention  against
         Torture  and  Other  Cruel,  Inhuman  or  degrading  Treatment   or
         Punishment. As a result of your personal  involvement  in  torture,
         the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you are  a  person  of
         'good character' for the purpose of  the  British  Nationality  Act
         1981.


         The Secretary of State has considered your claim  to  have  carried
         out these crimes on the orders of your superior  officer.  However,
         the Secretary of State  does not consider this to be a defence  for
         your actions on the grounds that the orders to detain, torture  and
         murder people were manifestly unlawful, as set out in Article 30 of
         the Rome Statute (1998)."


 5. Notwithstanding the terms of  that  letter,  it  would  seem  that  the
    Secretary of State took no action to curtail or cancel the  Appellant's
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


 6. In 2012 the Appellant, now divorced from CH, flew back  to  Afghanistan
    to get married.  He returned to  the  United  Kingdom,  from  where  he
    sponsored an application made by his new wife for entry clearance.   In
    September 2013 he went back to Afghanistan to be there for the birth of
    his daughter.

 7. On the 24th September 2013 he flew back to Heathrow.  On arrival he was
    questioned by an Immigration Officer about the circumstances  that  led
    to  his  obtaining  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Officer
    suspended the Appellant's ILR pursuant to Schedule 2 of the Immigration
    Act 1971 and granted  him  Temporary  Admission  (TA)  pending  further
    investigation.

 8. By the 17th April 2014 the investigations were complete. The  Secretary
    of State, in a letter of that date, cancelled the Appellant's  ILR  and
    formally refused him leave to enter the  United  Kingdom.   The  letter
    states that the Appellant had employed deception, or failed to disclose
    material facts, on three occasions. Those  occasions  were  i)  in  his
    application for ILR,  ii) his application for British  citizenship  and
    iii) in an interview dated 20th March 2014. The Secretary of State  had
    regard to the evidence recorded by  Adjudicator  Hands  and  contrasted
    this with Appellant's negative response to the following questions, put
    for instance in his application for ILR:

         8.3 In times of either peace or war have you or any dependants  who
         are  applying  with  you  ever  been  involved,  or  suspected   of
         involvement, in War Crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide?


         8.4 Have you or any dependants who are applying with you ever  been
         involved in, supported or encouraged terrorist  activities  in  any
         country?


         8.5 Have you or any dependants who are applying with you ever  been
         a member of, or given support to, an organisation  which  has  been
         concerned in terrorism?


         8.6 Have you or any dependants who are applying with you  ever,  by
         any means or  medium,  expressed  views  that  justify  or  glorify
         terrorist violence or that may encourage others to  terrorist  acts
         or other serious criminal acts?


         8.7 Have you or any dependants  who  are  applying  with  you  ever
         engaged in any other activities which might indicate that  you  may
         not be considered to be persons of good character?

 9. The Secretary of State directed herself to the legal definitions of war
    crimes and crimes against humanity and having  done  so  was  satisfied
    that the activities that the Appellant described to  Adjudicator  Hands
    met these criteria.   It  was  found  that  in  replying  "no"  to  the
    questions set out above, the Appellant had made a "blatant  attempt  to
    deceive the Home Office". The Appellant's explanation that he  did  not
    fully understand the  questions,  and/or  that  he  genuinely  did  not
    believe himself to be guilty of the crimes listed,  was rejected.   The
    letter goes on to make the same points in respect  of  the  Appellant's
    application for British citizenship. As to the interview  conducted  as
    part of the current investigation it is noted that the Appellant denied
    having ever told Adjudicator Hands  that  he  had  killed  or  tortured
    anyone. The Appellant attributed the mistake to there  having  been  an
    Iranian Farsi interpreter at court rather than one speaking his  native
    Dari.  The  Secretary  of  State  found  the  Appellant  to  have  used
    deception/failed to declare material facts and therefore cancelled  his
    ILR pursuant to Schedule 2 (A)(8) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The
    letter goes to address the Appellant's human rights claim,  founded  on
    his parental  relationship  with  his  British  son,  C.  Although  the
    Respondent accepts that there is a family  life  with  C,  interference
    with it is found, in all the circumstances, to be proportionate.


10. That was the basis of the decision appealed to the First-tier Tribunal,
    and the determination begins by setting out that legal  framework.  The
    Tribunal then directs itself in the following terms [at 6]: "The burden
    of proof is on the Appellant. The standard of proof is on  the  balance
    of  probabilities...".   The  determination  makes  reference  to   the
    determination of Adjudicator Hands, the Appellant's oral  evidence  and
    the Respondent's material. Judge Denson concludes that, notwithstanding
    the generally positive credibility  assessment  made  by  the  previous
    Tribunal, he cannot accept that the Appellant is now telling the truth.
    He rejects the Appellant's denials that he was a willing member of  the
    Taliban and finds  that  he  has  committed  appalling  acts  including
    torture which would fall within the definition of war crimes or  crimes
    against humanity.  The Appellant's pleas that he was forced to work for
    the Taliban are expressly rejected in the following terms:

         "31. The Appellant  as  stated  above  has  attempted  to  try  and
         disassociate himself from the evidence  he  gave  at  the  previous
         hearing which I find goes against his credibility as a  witness  of
         truth. He has stated that he was forced to join the Taliban  as  if
         he did not do so his family  would  be  killed.  I  note  that  the
         previous Adjudicator in her determination made a different  finding
         in that she stated "His father was old and  fragile  and  therefore
         the commanders insisted that he send the  appellant  to  fight  for
         them. If he did not do so his family would have been  left  without
         food". No mention whatsoever was made at his previous appeal of his
         family being attacked or possibly killed  by  the  Taliban  if  the
         appellant did not comply with  what  was  in  effect  their  forced
         conscription".

11. The Appellant's claim  that  his  evidence  to  Adjudicator  Hands  was
    mistranslated is expressly rejected,  since  the  determination  itself
    shows there to have been a Dari, nor Farsi, interpreter.  This  section
    of  the  determination  concludes:  "Given  the  above   findings   and
    conclusions, I find that the appellant  has  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof to show that he has not made false  representations  or
    material facts have not been disclosed...".


12. In considering Article 8 the First-tier Tribunal appears to accept that
    the Appellant enjoys an Article 8 family life with his British son, but
    finds that the Appellant has manipulated this situation  by  increasing
    his contact with his son once notified  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    intention to cancel his ILR. In all the circumstances  the  Appellant's
    removal is found to be proportionate.




    Error of Law

13. Permission was granted on the ground that  whatever  other  errors  the
    determination might contain, the reasoning was arguably fatally  flawed
    for a failure to apply the proper burden of proof.


14. On the 7th December 2015 the matter came before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce. The Respondent was that day  represented  by  Senior  Presenting
    Officer Ms Savage who agreed that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong  in
    law to have considered, at paragraphs 6 and  37,  that  the  burden  of
    proof in respect of an allegation of deception fell on  the  Appellant.
    Her instructions were nevertheless to argue that any such error was not
    material: the decision would have been the same no matter  what  burden
    of proof the Tribunal had applied.  Ms Savage pointed to  paragraph  31
    of the decision (set  out  above)  to  submit  that  the  Tribunal  had
    expressly rejected the Appellant's evidence that he had been forced  to
    join the Taliban under duress and as  such  did  not  consider  himself
    culpable.  That finding would have been the same no  matter  where  the
    burden lay.

15. Judge Bruce set the decision aside. Whilst it may be that  a  Tribunal,
    properly directed as to the appropriate standard and burden  of  proof,
    would have reached the  same  conclusion,  that  was  by  no  means  an
    inevitability. As Mr Lewis has set out in  his  detailed  grounds,  the
    Appellant had provided an explanation for the answers he  gave  on  the
    various forms, and it was his case that he had honestly believed  those
    answers to be true. In short, he avers that he did not believe  himself
    to have ever committed a war crime, a crime against humanity or an  act
    of terrorism.   It was not for the Appellant  to  show  that  this  was
    true, rather it was for the Respondent to show  it  to  be  false.   In
    those circumstances, where that  fundamental  principle  has  not  been
    recognised, the determination could not stand.

16. It should further be noted  that  paragraph  31  of  the  determination
    contains  an  unfortunately  incomplete  summary  of  the   Appellant's
    evidence before Adjudicator Hands. Judge Denson  finds  there  to  have
    been "no mention whatsoever" of duress in that  earlier  determination,
    but this is simply not correct. The determination of Adjudicator  Hands
    makes repeated reference to the  Appellant  having  been  coerced  into
    joining the Taliban:

        . "local commanders continually threatened him and told him  to  go
          and join the war" [8a]
        . "Commander Ghulam would gather  all  the  children  together  and
          force them to go to war. If you refused to go voluntarily then he
          forced you to go. [The  Appellant]  had  seen  children  who  had
          refused to go being killed in front of their parents" [8b]
        . "he was only following the orders of his commander at  the  time"
          [12]

    That the Appellant was not a voluntary  participant  in  the  Taliban's
    activities is central to the  ratio  of  Adjudicator  Hands'  decision,
    since she finds  there  to  be  no  risk  of  harm  to  former  Talibs,
    "particularly those who were coerced to working for the Taliban to save
    their lives and livelihood" (emphasis added) [at 38].

17. Following the error of law decision Mr Lewis requested that the  matter
    be adjourned to be remade at a later date, since the  Appellant  wished
    to call witnesses who were not available. Ms Savage had no objection to
    this.




    The Re-Making


    The Hearings


18. When the matter came back before Judge Bruce on the 26th  January  2016
    the Respondent faced some difficulty. The Senior Presenting Officer who
    had prepared the case had been taken ill overnight and  Mr  Kotas,  who
    appeared, had had little time to prepare. The Respondent made a request
    for an adjournment. Mr Kotas submitted that this was a matter  regarded
    as being of significant importance by the  Home  Office.  He  submitted
    that there were "complex legal issues including an  accusation  of  war
    crimes" and he had not had time or instructions to prepare submissions.
    Mr Lewis for the Appellant opposed the adjournment  request.  This  was
    principally because two additional witnesses had attended  the  hearing
    and wanted to give evidence. They were the Appellant's ex-wife  CH  and
    her mother Mrs H. They had both had to make arrangements and travel  in
    order to attend the hearing and may not be able to do so again.  Having
    heard the submissions Judge  Bruce  decided  that  the  hearing  should
    proceed to be part- heard.  The evidence of the witnesses  simply  went
    to Article 8. Their testimony could be heard and recorded and Mr  Kotas
    would have no difficulty  in  preparing  cross  examination  since  the
    matter raised by section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 was a simple factual one: does  the  Appellant  have  a
    genuine  parental  relationship  with  his  son  and  would  be  it  be
    reasonable for this British citizen child to leave the UK?    Mr  Kotas
    agreed that with some time he could deal with the Article  8  evidence.
    Mr Kotas was given some time to read the papers and prepare  his  cross
    examination. This enabled the evidence of the witnesses CH and Mrs H to
    be heard. The hearing was then adjourned part heard.


19. On the 2nd March the case resumed before the present panel.  Mr  Clarke
    was provided with a typed transcript of the oral evidence of CH and Mrs
    H. We heard oral evidence from the Appellant and detailed  and  helpful
    submissions from both parties. We reserved our decision.



    The Evidence

      CH

20. CH adopted her letter dated 9th November 2014 and gave  oral  evidence.
    Her testimony is as  follows.   CH  was  in  a  relationship  with  the
    Appellant from 2005 to 2010. They were married in 2007 and divorced  in
    2011. They have a son together, C, who was  born  on  the  21st  August
    2007. C had a stroke in 2009 and has had ongoing  health  issues  as  a
    result[4]. CH is now in a new relationship and has  another  child,  A.
    She does not live with A's father.  She maintains a  good  relationship
    with the Appellant and relies on him for support with  C,  particularly
    since A was born.


21. In her oral evidence she explained that when  she  found  out  she  was
    pregnant for the first time the Appellant "went ballistic". He did  not
    want to have a child.  He said that he was not in a position  to  be  a
    father. She booked in to have the pregnancy terminated. When she had  a
    scan she was told that it was twins. She could not go through with  the
    abortion.  She told the Appellant and he was not happy about it but  it
    "gradually grew on him". Then at 18 weeks CH miscarried  and  lost  the
    twins. Both she and the Appellant were devastated.   Their relationship
    continued but CH lied to the Appellant. She told him that she was using
    contraception but she wasn't.  She  explained  that  looking  back  she
    realises that she was grieving for her babies. When she found out  that
    she was pregnant again she was dreading telling the Appellant. She knew
    he would not be happy about it.  She  avoided  the  subject  until  his
    arrest and detention forced her hand - she was about 5  weeks  pregnant
    when he was detained and after this she had to tell him.

22. The Appellant came back to the UK about three weeks before C was  born.
    He has "not left his side since" - he has been more of  a  mum  than  a
    dad. In response to questions from Mr Kotas CH clarified that  she  did
    not mean that comment literally - obviously the Appellant has left  his
    side, but she just meant that he has been there for his son.  He  is  a
    "wicked dad" (ie an excellent father): "he's not one of those dads  who
    sods off for a year then decide to come back".   CH  says  that  during
    her pregnancy and the early years  of  C's  life  she  "doted"  on  the
    Appellant and their relationship was good.

23. CH takes full responsibility for the breakdown of their  marriage.  She
    explains that when C was 2 years old he had a stroke. He was in and out
    of hospital for months and the strain of this was  too  much  for  her.
    When C finally came home she started falling apart:

         "When he came home I think it all hit me - the grief and everything
          - all the stress hit me at once. I was going home being horrible
         and drunk. During that period he was excellent as a dad - my son
         wouldn't be where he is now without him.   He looked after him when
         I was off the rails".

24. As for the position today CH confirmed that C lives with her full  time
    although he sees his father frequently during the average week. At  one
    time he had him afterschool every Tuesday but now he has him  overnight
    every Tuesday and  at weekends. He regularly pops round. Because of his
    stroke C needs a lot of extra support. He has physiotherapy every night
    at home and still has to attend the hospital on a regular  basis.   His
    dad does a lot of  other  physical  activities  with  him  designed  to
    increase his strength. For  instance  he  takes  him  to  football  and
    swimming.  He takes him to all his hospital appointments. The  hospital
    is 5-6 miles away and CH does not drive. Its quite a walk  to  the  bus
    stop and C gets really tired.  The Appellant has his  own  taxi  so  he
    does all of that.  CH described C's relationship  with  his  father  as
    "unbreakable" and added:  "he's 9 in  August.  They  have  always  been
    tight. If his Dad was not to be here - I don't even want to think about
    how he would be. He dotes on him. He would be devastated if Dad left"


25. CH says that the Appellant takes a lot of responsibility as far as  C's
    education is concerned.  He often takes him to school  in  the  morning
    especially in the winter when it is cold. Again, sometimes  its  better
    that C gets a lift because his legs get tired. A goes to  nursery  just
    past the school and CH takes him there in his pushchair but it is  hard
    for C to make that walk every day, so the Appellant picks  him  up.  He
    has  a  good  relationship  with  C's  teachers.  CH  contrasted   this
    involvement with her own: she told Mr Kotas that she does not even know
    the name of all of C's teachers because she gets confused as there  are
    so many of them in the classroom. She knows one of them because she  is
    C's specially allocated 'learning mentor' but the Appellant knows  more
    of them and is familiar with C's needs and achievements at school.  She
    could not comment on why the Appellant was unable to name  C's  teacher
    at his interview in 2014 save to say that there are a lot of staff  and
    it can be confusing.

26. Mr Lewis asked CH if she has ever known the Appellant to be  dishonest.
    Her answer was unequivocal:

         "He's always been honest. He has always told me the truth. He's
         never been disloyal to me. No reason not to trust him ever. He'd do
         anything for anyone - he's lovely"

27. CH stated that she would not permit C to go  and  live  in  Afghanistan
    with his father: "no way!! I wouldn't even let him on a boat to  Kent".
    In cross examination she added that she would not permit her son to  go
    because it is too dangerous and there would no  medical  care  for  him
    there.



    Mrs H

28. The Appellant further relied on the evidence of  CH's  mother,  Mrs  H.
    She adopted her letter dated 25th October 2014 and gave oral evidence.


29. Mrs H was candid in her evidence that  when  her  daughter  brought  an
    older Asian man home in the summer of 2005, she was not happy.  She  is
    not racist but was worried about what his motives might  be.   When  CH
    fell pregnant the Appellant was not enthusiastic. He had wanted her  to
    "get rid" of the baby. This made Mrs H really dislike him. They  had  a
    big row on the seafront and she slapped him. Asked if  this  was  still
    her view of the Appellant Mrs H said  that  now  things  have  changed:
    things happen over the years and you get a different perspective.   She
    had initially been suspicious of him, that he may have been using CH in
    order to stay here,  but when he was opposed to the idea  of  having  a
    baby it made her think otherwise. Mrs H explained  what  then  happened
    when CH discovered that she was pregnant with twins:

         "When it transpired it was two babies she was beside herself she
         didn't know how she was going to cope  - then he seemed to step up
         his game. He went from rejection to acceptance"

    When problems developed in the pregnancy the  Appellant  was  there  to
    support CH. He was with her when she was told that the babies had died,
    and when she had to deliver them.

30. When the Appellant was arrested and faced with  return  to  Afghanistan
    they were all devastated but CH fought hard to get him back to the  UK.
    She travelled to see him  in  Dubai  and  then  they  were  married  in
    Pakistan. She supported his visa application for return to the  UK.   C
    was born just three weeks after the Appellant arrived back.


31. The Appellant and CH lived together for 2-3 years.  They  were  married
    and in the beginning they were very happy. Mrs H was unable to remember
    precise dates but she believes that they split up when C was about 3 or
    4 years old.  Mrs H squarely blames her  daughter  for  this.   In  her
    written evidence she describes how her daughter "went off the  rails  a
    bit - she as out all night clubbing and drinking excessively...she  was
    everyone's worst nightmare". In her oral evidence she  recognised  that
    this had been a very difficult period for her  daughter,  dealing  with
    the grief of losing her children and the trauma of how  they  had  died
    and been delivered: "she wasn't mature enough. Her heart  is  in  right
    place. She wasn't grown up enough to deal with  it".    It  was  during
    this period that Mrs H changed her perspective on the Appellant. He was
    very supportive of CH and would come to Mrs H to  seek  advice  on  how
    best to deal with her behaviour and how he could try and help her.

32. Mrs H said that she would now trust the Appellant 100%. She  has  never
    known him to be dishonest or disloyal.


33. In respect of the Appellant's current relationship with C her  evidence
    was that the Appellant's removal would "really  set  [C]  back".   They
    have a really good bond.  He regularly sees him. He does a lot  of  the
    school runs and other activities.  She said of the Appellant:

         "He's a brilliant father. It's a shame they are not together. [C]
         dotes on his dad. He's 100% great dad I can't fault him. He was
         there - I saw him when the babies were born, when he was removed,
         when [C] was born -  when he had his stroke - I have witnessed his
         reactions. I have seen how he stuck with it. A lot of men would
         have walked away.


         [The Appellant] stimulates [C]- he's very weak on one side. [The
         Appellant] does a lot of stuff [CH] is unable to do because of her
         youngest. He takes him swimming, fun factory etc. He gives him
         emotional stability. He wouldn't be the little boy he is today if
         its wasn't for his dad".

34. Finally Mrs H was asked  about  the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's
    involvement with his son was in  some  way  cynical  or  recent,  being
    designed to boost his chances on appeal. She was quick to respond: "yeh
    I read that I think it was a load of rubbish. He shows genuine love  to
    that little boy".




    The Appellant


35. The Appellant adopted his witness statements both dated 19th  May  2015
    and gave further evidence before us.  He did not use an interpreter and
    at times questions had to be repeated.  We  were  satisfied  that  with
    these clarifications the Appellant was  able  to  understand  and  make
    himself understood, although his English was far from fluent.


36. The Appellant states that he told the truth to Adjudicator Hands at his
    asylum appeal.   He is from a village in  Paktia  province  which  came
    under the control of the Taliban. He was forced to  join  them  because
    they threatened those who refused with violence and death. That was the
    only reason he joined. He did not want to hit people,  or  to  threaten
    them. He only did so because he was in fear for himself and his family.
    The Appellant denies having told Adjudicator Hands that  he  killed  or
    tortured people. The extent of his activities  with  the  Taliban  were
    that he was required to go round the doors and ensure that someone from
    each house had given a man or boy to join the Commander's  unit.  Those
    who were reluctant were put under pressure. He admitted to  Adjudicator
    Hands, and before us, that during these visits  he  and  other  Taliban
    members would hit, kick, punch and pull men who were refusing to  come.
    The Appellant stressed that this was because  he  was  afraid  himself.
    Just before he had joined the Commander's unit  he  had  been  held  in
    detention for  two  nights  and  during  that  time  he  had  witnessed
    prisoners bound by their wrists and ankles being beaten on the  "palms"
    (ie soles) of their feet.  He could hear their screams. This  had  made
    him afraid. He was afraid for his family in particular his  father  who
    was in the village and was elderly. He did what he was told.


37. Mr Clarke put it to the Appellant that he had  told  Adjudicator  Hands
    that he had killed people. She has recorded  at  paragraph  35  of  the
    determination "his duties included  harassing,  detaining  and  killing
    people under the instruction of his commander".  The  Appellant  denies
    that this was his evidence. He said that he has no doubt that Commander
    Ghulam did kill and torture people but that he  had  never  done  these
    things. He believes that his evidence may have  been  misunderstood  or
    mis-recorded in the determination because he was assisted  by  a  Farsi
    speaker from Iran, as  opposed  to  a  Farsi  (ie  Dari)  speaker  from
    Afghanistan.  Mr Clarke referred the Appellant to the note taken by the
    Presenting Officer on  the  day  of  the  hearing  which  contains  the
    following exchange:

         Q. That why you don't want to go back?
         A. Yes, that's 1 reason and the fact that we did a lot of  terrible
            things eg when we were with Commander Rasoul we  did  a  lot  of
            harm to people, we did harm to the Hazara people.


         Q. We - do you mean you?
         A. Under order of commander.


         Q. You committed acts?
                   A. Yes, ordered at night to [illegible - possibly  "kill"
or "torture"]
                 people

         Q. Anything else to tell me?
         A. I want to get an education I am fond of the English language and


            once I learn I want to start a proper education...


         Q. How far along are you learning English?
         A......

    He put it to the Appellant that he had admitted to  killing  people  at
    night. The Appellant said that he had not said that he  killed  people,
    but those were the kinds of things Commander Ghulam  Rasoul  did.   The
    Appellant added that his English had been "non existent"  at  the  time
    and that he had no idea how his evidence  was  being  conveyed  to  the
    Tribunal.


38. The Appellant explained that at that time there was no choice but to co-
    operate with the Taliban. They had started in the  south-west,  on  the
    Pakistan border, and had swept across the whole country.   His  village
    was a small  pocket  of  Dari  speaking  Shi'ite  Muslims  in  a  large
    population of Sunni Pathans. They were therefore especially vulnerable.
     He stated that numerous members of his family died in the war. All  he
    saw was violence when he was in Afghanistan - he was a victim too.


39. Asked about the specific questions that he had been  asked  on  various
    forms and at interview the Appellant was very clear.  He  had  answered
    "no" to questions like "have you committed war crimes" because  as  far
    as he is concerned  he  had  not.  He  was  17  at  the  time,  he  was
    frightened, and he did what he did in fear for himself and his  family.
    If he was asked the  same  questions  today  he  would  give  the  same
    answers.  He does not  consider  himself  to  be  a  terrorist,  a  war
    criminal, and having committed crimes against humanity, or being of bad
    character.  The Appellant disagreed with Mr Clarke's suggestion that he
    had ticked "no" because he was trying to hide his past. He pointed  out
    that he had voluntarily divulged all of this information  to  the  Home
    Office and Tribunal during the course of his asylum case - it  made  no
    sense for him to later try and conceal it.  He  ticked  no  because  he
    believes that to be the correct answer.

40. Mr Clarke put to the Appellant that in fact, on his  own  evidence,  he
    had not been under the control of Commander  Ghulam  Rasoul  the  whole
    time. He had told Adjudicator Hands that he was able to see his parents
    periodically when on 'home leave'. The Appellant agreed that  this  was
    so. He was occasionally allowed to visit his parents' home.  He  denied
    that this had given him an opportunity to escape  however.  He  pointed
    out that at that time the Taliban had been  in  control  of  the  whole
    country and they had checkpoints everywhere, particularly on the  roads
    leading to Pakistan.  It was only when a  rival  warlord  attacked  the
    Taliban positions in Paktia that the Appellant and his family were able
    to take the chance to flee.

41. The Appellant confirmed that his relationship with his son is a  strong
    one. He sees him on numerous occasions during the week and  loves  him.
    He knows that his son loves him and he cannot imagine life if they were
    apart.  He confirmed  that  he  takes  his  son  to  hospital  for  his
    appointments, and that he plays an important role in his son's physical
    rehabilitation.



    Documentary Evidence

42. The Appellant's bundle contains  a  great  many  character  references,
    evidence of his private and family life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    determination of  Adjudicator  Hands  and  documents  relating  to  his
    various applications. We have not considered it necessary to set  these
    materials out in any detail. Where they have been particularly relevant
    to our deliberations, they are mentioned therein.


    Our Findings

      The Revocation: Deception

43. The power to revoke on entry a grant of indefinite leave to  remain  or
    enter is contained in Schedule 2  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   An
    immigration officer may suspend  a  persons  leave  to  enter  for  the
    purpose of establishing whether that leave was obtained  as  result  of
    false information given by him or  his  failure  to  disclose  material
    facts. Under section 2(8)  an  officer  may,  upon  completion  of  his
    investigation, cancel leave to enter or  remain.   It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of the Respondent that  the  burden  of  proof  in  establishing
    deception lies on the Respondent and that the standard of proof lies at
    the higher end of the spectrum of a balance of probabilities,  that  is
    to say that the  ordinary  civil  standard  applies  but  can  only  be
    discharged with the production of cogent evidence.


44. The evidence that the Respondent relies upon is set out in the  reasons
    for refusal letter dated 17th April  2014.  The  case  rests  on  three
    central submissions.

45. First, the Respondent relies on the findings made by Adjudicator  Hands
    that the Appellant "followed the  instructions  of  his  commander  and
    harassed, arrested, detained, tortured and  killed  people"  [paragraph
    40]. Those findings were based on the Appellant's credible evidence  at
    the time. Mr Clarke asked us to weigh alongside the  determination  the
    written note of the Presenting Officer on the day.

46. Second, the Respondent points to  the  three  occasions  in  which  the
    Appellant was required to make declarations as  to  his  character  and
    history, and on each he denied having been involved  in,  or  suspected
    of, involvement in  war  crimes,  crimes  against  humanity,  genocide,
    terrorism or being otherwise not of good character.  For  this  we  are
    referred to the application forms dated 6th July 2009  (in  respect  of
    his application for indefinite leave to remain) and 19th May  2011  (in
    respect of his application for British nationality) and  the  interview
    arising from this investigation conducted on the 20th March 2014.

47. Third the Respondent asks the  Tribunal  to  find  that  the  Appellant
    cannot reasonably have believed that he was entitled to tick  the  "no"
    box in response to the questions about his character and history.   The
    Respondent here points to the Appellant's admissions in the  course  of
    his asylum case that he feared  the  consequences  of  his  actions  in
    Afghanistan (ie that the local populace would take revenge against  his
    inhumane treatment) and that in 2011 the Appellant was  put  on  notice
    that the Secretary of State regarded  him  as  having  committed  these
    acts: she said so when she refused to grant him British nationality.

48. We begin then, with the determination promulgated in 2004 in respect of
    the Appellant's asylum appeal. There was no appeal lodged  against  the
    decision of Adjudicator Hands, and although we note that the  Appellant
    was  at  that  time  unrepresented,  we  are  bound   to   treat   that
    determination as an authoritative judgment of matters as they stood  at
    that date: Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00712.  We  are  entitled  to
    depart  from  the  findings  in  that  determination  only  in  certain
    circumstances, for instance where new  evidence  has  emerged.  In  his
    submissions Mr Clarke specifically asked us to consider the findings of
    Adjudicator Hands alongside the verbatim note taken by  the  Presenting
    Officer, now available to us after the Appellant made a 'subject access
    request' to have them disclosed.

49. We have read that careful handwritten note alongside the evidence as it
    was recorded in the determination[5].   We have also had regard to  the
    Appellant's evidence before us.  Having done so we  find  that  in  the
    course of his asylum appeal in 2004 the Appellant made admissions  that
    he joined the Taliban, and took part in  the  forcible  recruitment  of
    others when he hit, threatened, kicked and punched  the  victim.  Judge
    Hands found those assertions to be credible, and having heard from  the
    Appellant ourselves we are satisfied that  he  is  telling  the  truth.
    These matters are  consistently  recorded  in  the  determination,  the
    written note and the oral evidence before us. We are further  satisfied
    that the Appellant took part in these actions because he was afraid for
    himself and his family. The matter of coercion is raised in  all  three
    sources, and there is no evidence to the contrary.  The  Appellant  has
    consistently and  credibly  stated  that  he  only  took  part  in  the
    activities that he did because he was in  fear.    On  the  balance  of
    probabilities we are satisfied that this is the  case.   We  note  that
    before us the Appellant  added,  in  response  to  questions  from  the
    Tribunal, that his village was an anomaly in Paktia:   the  inhabitants
    were Shia, albeit ethnically Pathan. As a minority they were  therefore
    particularly vulnerable when militias came to  choosing  victims.  This
    evidence was consistent with our finding that the Appellant was  forced
    to join the Taliban. He was a very young man (he is  uncertain  of  his
    age at the time but estimates it to have been seventeen) and when  each
    household was required to give 'tribute' he was the only candidate, his
    father being relatively elderly.


50. We cannot be satisfied that the Appellant killed  or  tortured  anyone.
    In contrast to the foregoing matters the three sources  before  us  are
    entirely inconsistent on this  point.  The  Respondent  relies  on  the
    findings at paragraph 35 and 40 of the determination.  Here Adjudicator
    Hands records the Appellant's evidence as being that he  "followed  the
    instructions  of  his  commander  and  harassed,  arrested,   detained,
    tortured and killed people".   Whilst we must take those findings as  a
    Devaseelan starting point, we are bound to say that this record is  not
    borne out by the note of the Presenting Officer.  Nowhere in that  note
    is it recorded that the Appellant claimed to have  tortured  or  killed
    anyone.  The closest it comes is in the exchange Mr Clarke  highlighted
    in his cross-examination of the Appellant, where  in  response  to  the
    question "you committed acts?" the answer is recorded "yes, ordered  at
    night [illegible] people". The word that cannot  be  read  may  be  "to
    kill", and it may be "torture". We do not exclude the possibility  that
    it might be  something  else  entirely  but  given  the  way  in  which
    Adjudicator Hands made her findings we assume  it  to  be  one  or  the
    other. We find there to be a marked distinction between  being  ordered
    to do something, and actually  doing  it.   Mr  Clarke  points  to  the
    context in which the answer  was  given,  in  response  to  a  question
    specifically probing the Appellant's actions, and we  have  given  that
    some weight. It  would  however  appear  from  what  follows  that  the
    Presenting Officer on the day did not interpret that answer in the  way
    that Mr Clarke now does.  One would think that if  a  witness  made  an
    admission to having committed crimes against humanity, or came close to
    it, any competent Presenting Officer would clarify any  ambiguity,  and
    would seek further confirmation or detail. What happens  next  in  this
    exchange is a discussion  about  how  far  the  Appellant  has  got  in
    learning English.  Mr Lewis submitted that it would be "astonishing" if
    a cross examination turned from war  crimes  to  English  lessons.   He
    further submitted it to be telling that nowhere in  the  determination,
    or the handwritten note, is there any indication that consideration was
    given to excluding the Appellant  from  the  Refugee  Convention  under
    Article 1F, as one would expect if such admissions had  been  made.  We
    agree.


51. We have further placed some weight on the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    himself. We bear in mind that Adjudicator  Hands  found  him  to  be  a
    credible witness, and having had the opportunity of  hearing  him  give
    evidence ourselves, we find no reason to disagree.  The  Appellant  was
    candid in his admissions about what he did do with the Taliban, but  he
    was vehement in denying that he ever killed anyone. As for  torture  it
    is a matter of degree whether the press-gang assaults  described  could
    reach that threshold. The Appellant himself explained that he had  been
    unsure what the word meant, until the present proceedings  necessitated
    it being explained to him, but he did not, for  instance,  deliberately
    inflict pain on someone in detention.    Having  considered  the  three
    sources of evidence we cannot be satisfied that the Appellant did  kill
    or torture anyone, or that in the course of his asylum appeal  he  made
    any claims to that effect.  We bear in mind that the Appellant was  not
    represented in 2004 and there was no-one there to re-examine  him.   We
    also bear in mind that even taking the Appellant's asylum claim at  its
    highest it was one that was bound to fail since there was no  objective
    risk to him in Afghanistan at the time. That may be some explanation as
    to why the determination made findings with a broad brush, but it would
    appear from the Presenting Officer's note that it was not one justified
    on the actual evidence.


52. We are satisfied that the Appellant did tick "no" to all the  questions
    highlighted in the application forms and that during the course of  his
    interview  maintained  this  position.  We  note  that  before  us  the
    Appellant confirmed that were he required to answer the same  questions
    about war crimes and terrorism today he would give the same answers.

53. The ultimate question for  our  evaluation  is  whether  the  Appellant
    sought to deceive when he gave the  answers  that  he  did.  Mr  Clarke
    accepts that in assessing that question we are guided by the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773.   It  is  for  the
    Respondent to show that the answers given were false,  and  were  given
    with dishonest intent.

54. In order to establish that the answers given were false the  Respondent
    has referred us to various international instruments which  define  war
    crimes and crimes  against  humanity,  and  in  what  circumstances  an
    individual can reasonably claim a defence of duress (see  for  instance
    the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court).   The Respondent
    submits that the Appellant cannot show himself to have had a legitimate
    legal defence to the actions in question and that as a matter of law he
    was therefore guilty of those offences.  Similarly we were referred  to
    domestic legislation defining "terrorism". As to the alleged  deception
    the Respondent submits that the questions put covered a broad range  of
    activities. Whilst it is  readily  understandable  that  the  Appellant
    denied having been involved in genocide, it is less easy to see how  he
    can have denied being involved in war crimes, given the  basis  of  his
    asylum claim. He wanted asylum because he was afraid of retribution for
    all the terrible things he had done.   It is also the  case  that  from
    2011 the Appellant knew these to be matters of concern when he received
    the negative response to his application for naturalisation.

55. The Appellant's defence is that whilst he knows  he  did  "bad  things"
    that he is not proud of, he did them as a teenager  facing  threats  to
    himself and his family. He does not regard himself as culpable  of  any
    of the matters rehearsed in the questions.   It  is  further  submitted
    that he did not fully understand the nature of the questions asked  and
    that where it might be arguable that the answer given  was  false,  for
    instance in him having been "involved" in a terrorist organisation,  it
    was not an attempt to deceive.  He submits that he has never  tried  to
    hide the fact that he claimed asylum, and that at all times he  assumed
    the Respondent to be aware of the basis of that claim.


56. We have considered the submissions made in the round with the evidence.
    We note the following chronology. In 2004 the Appellant claimed asylum,
    and as we have set out, made certain admissions as  to  his  activities
    with the Taliban.  Neither  the  Respondent  nor  Tribunal  raised  any
    suggestion that he should be excluded from the Refugee Convention as  a
    result. The Appellant was removed. He made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance on the basis of his marriage to CH, and in  that  application
    made full disclosure of the fact that he had claimed asylum in the  UK,
    had been refused and removed. He subsequently  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain and again, the facts of the asylum claim were known  to
    the Secretary of State. ILR was granted with no issue raised as to  the
    Appellant's character. It was only in 2011  when  his  application  for
    naturalisation  was  refused,  that  the  matter  of  the   Appellant's
    character was raised. He was told that because of his claims about  his
    involvement  with  the  Taliban  he  was  not  of  sufficiently   "good
    character" to merit British nationality. The Respondent took no  action
    however to revoke the Appellant's ILR. In 2012  the  Appellant  visited
    Afghanistan and re-entered the United Kingdom  without  difficulty.  It
    was only in September 2013, upon return from a second  trip,  that  the
    Appellant was subject to investigation for matters  that  had  at  that
    point been known to the Respondent for some 9 years.  During those nine
    years there were,  by  our  calculation,  five  opportunities  for  the
    Respondent take some action against the  Appellant  and  to  raise  the
    matters that she now does. That is not to say  that  there  arises  any
    waiver or estoppel, but we regard this chronology as being  helpful  in
    giving some context to the Appellant's evidence about his state of mind
    when he answered the questions in the way that  he  did.    We  make  a
    further observation about context. That is that the Appellant  was,  at
    all material points, without  any  legal  representation.  His  English
    before us was intelligible, but far from fluent. There were  points  at
    which questions had to be rephrased and when  we  had  to  ask  him  to
    clarify  his  answers.  This,  alongside  the  lack  of  legal  advice,
    highlighted for us the possibility that the  Appellant  was  not  fully
    cognisant of the importance of the questions that he was answering,  or
    the nuances therein.

57. The first question to receive the Appellant's negative response was  as
    follows:

        In times of either peace or war have you or any dependants who  are
        applying with you ever been involved, or suspected of  involvement,
        in War Crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide?


    As  we  note  above  the  Respondent   produced   before   us   various
    international instruments containing the  legal  definitions  of  these
    terms.  We found these submissions to be  of  diminished  relevance  in
    light of our acceptance that the Appellant  did  not  kill  or  torture
    anyone and that the actions that he did undertake were performed  under
    duress. We accept that he joined the Taliban because he was  afraid  of
    death or torture (of himself and family  members)  and  that  at  their
    highest  his  activities  included  hitting,  punching,   kicking   and
    intimidating other villagers.  If those activities  could  fall  within
    the definition of 'war  crime'  or  'crime  against  humanity'  we  are
    satisfied that the Appellant did have a legal defence in that the  harm
    he feared was greater than the harm inflicted. We are further satisfied
    that the Appellant genuinely believed, and believes, himself non-guilty
    of these crimes for the reasons he explains in his evidence.

58. The second, third and fourth questions relate to terrorism:


         Have you or any dependants who are  applying  with  you  ever  been
         involved in, supported or encouraged terrorist  activities  in  any
         country?


         Have you or any dependants who are applying with you  ever  been  a
         member of, or given support to,  an  organisation  which  has  been
         concerned in terrorism?

        Have you or any dependants who are applying with you ever,  by  any
        means or medium, expressed views that justify or glorify  terrorist
        violence or that may encourage others to terrorist  acts  or  other
        serious criminal acts?

    In respect of these matters we were referred  to  domestic  legislation
    defining terrorism, and to the schedule  of  organisations  defined  as
    such by, for instance,  the UK and US governments.    Again,  we  found
    these authorities to be of  limited  assistance.  Whether  or  not  the
    Taliban were on a list of proscribed organisations at the relevant time
    is not pertinent to the Appellant's state of  mind  when  he  gave  the
    answers that he did.   The question is whether he believed  himself  to
    have been involved in, encouraged, supported,  glorified  or  justified
    terrorist acts. For the reasons we have given above we accept  that  he
    did not.  We accept his evidence that he did not ideologically  support
    the Taliban.

59. The final question reads:


         Have you or any dependants who are applying with you  ever  engaged
         in any other activities which might indicate that you  may  not  be
         considered to be persons of good character?


    That question appeared on two application forms, completed in 2009  and
    2011. It is the Appellant's case that he  considers  himself  to  be  a
    person of good character and that when he completed those forms it  did
    not occur to him that the Respondent thought otherwise. We accept  that
    to be the case.  We  note  that  the  Appellant  is  supported  in  his
    assertion of good character by his ex-wife, her mother and the  written
    statements of 16  other  witnesses  who  refer  to  him  as   "honest",
    "loyal", "compassionate",  "hardworking",  "trustworthy"  and  "a  good
    guy with  a  big  heart".    It  was  not  until  his  application  for
    naturalisation was refused in December 2011 that he could possibly have
    known that the Respondent took a different view.    We  have  read  the
    2014 interview with care and we cannot see that this adds  anything  to
    the Respondent's case. The bulk of the interview is  taken  up  by  the
    interviewing officer  putting  the  findings  of  Judge  Hands  to  the
    Appellant, and the Appellant denying that he ever  killed  or  tortured
    anyone.  The Appellant further explains therein that he had  not  fully
    understood the questions when he completed the form and that he had not
    thought himself to be of bad character. That was precisely the evidence
    he gave before us, and having regard to the evidence  overall,  we  are
    satisfied that he was telling the truth.

60. Having considered all of the evidence in the round we are not satisfied
    that the Respondent has demonstrated that the Appellant used  deception
    at any point in his application forms of 2009 or 2011 or in the  course
    of the investigation into this matter. We find that the burden of proof
    has not been discharged.



    Conducive revocation?


61. At paragraph 43 of the reasons for  refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of
    State says the following:


         "Regard has been given to the suitability requirements. As  already
         stated in this letter, based on  the  evidence  you  provided,  the
         adjudicator in your asylum appeal determination dated  15  November
         2004 concluded  and  accepted  that  you  had  harassed,  arrested,
         detained, tortured and killed people as a member  of  the  Taliban.
         For these reasons, the  Secretary  of  State  considers  that  your
         presence in the UK is undesirable and not conducive to  the  public
         good and you therefore fail to fulfil S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM"


62. Before us Mr Clarke acknowledged that this matter had not  featured  in
    the hearing of the appeal thus far since it was plain on  the  face  of
    the letter that the writer had applied the wrong legal provision. There
    was no ambit to refuse the Appellant with reference to the  suitability
    requirements in Appendix FM since he had not made an application  under
    that heading. Mr Lewis confirmed that the Appellant  nowhere  contended
    that he should  have  leave  maintained  or  granted  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration Rules relating to Article 8.


63. We are not prepared  to  treat  paragraph  43  of  the  refusal  as  an
    alterative basis  upon  which  to  consider  revoking  the  Appellant's
    indefinite leave. That was not the  way  it  was  put  in  the  refusal
    letter, nor the way in which the Secretary of State's case has been put
    hitherto. Insofar as the 'suitability" requirements under  Appendix  FM
    might be engaged that is not a matter for us,  but  we  note  that  the
    broad scope of the allegations made at paragraph 43 are not  borne  out
    by our findings.


    Article 8

64. Given our conclusions on the matter of revocation it is  not  necessary
    for us to make findings on the  Appellant's  alternative  human  rights
    claim but we do so for the sake of  completeness.    If  the  Appellant
    retained, as a matter  of  law,  his  settled  status,  our  Article  8
    analysis would be brief indeed: it would be confined to observing  that
    the Respondent could not possibly show his removal to be reasonable  or
    proportionate.  We therefore approach Article 8 on  the  basis  of  the
    alternative: if we  are  wrong  in  allowing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision to revoke, and the Appellant is  without  any  lawful  status.
    This  will  inevitably  have  ramifications   for   our   analysis   of
    proportionality: for instance, in assessing the public interest in  the
    maintenance of immigration control we will proceed on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant has never had any valid leave.

65. The Appellant accepts that he cannot meet the requirements  of  any  of
    the immigration rules relating to  Article  8.   He  does  not  have  a
    'partner' in the UK and since C lives with his mother the Appellant has
    no claim as his 'parent': there is therefore  no  prospect  of  success
    under Appendix FM. In respect of private life the Appellant cannot show
    that he meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE because there are no
    significant obstacles to his integration in Afghanistan:  he  presently
    has a wife and daughter living in Kabul, he speaks the language, has  a
    cultural familiarity with the country and he has no protection needs.

66. Mr Clarke submitted that there were not good reasons to go on  to  look
    at Article 8 beyond those Rules, which reflect the Secretary of State's
    view as to where the balance should be struck between the rights of the
    individual and the  public  interest.   We  are  satisfied  that  there
    manifestly are good reasons to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules:
    the Appellant is the parent to a British child with whom  he  does  not
    live. This is not a situation covered by either Appendix FM  or  276ADE
    and is a paradigm illustration of how this part of  the  Rules  do  not
    form a 'complete code'[6].

67. There is a  family  life  shared  by  the  Appellant  and  his  son  C.
    Although  the  Respondent  had  initially  taken  the  view  that   the
    relationship with C might be  opportunistic,  Mr  Clarke  realistically
    declined to make submissions to that effect.   The  evidence  given  by
    the Appellant's ex-wife CH, her mother Mrs H and the Appellant  himself
    was compelling and wholly credible. The fact that these witnesses  were
    prepared to come to court on more than one occasion  to  speak  to  the
    level of the Appellant's parental commitment was striking. Mrs H was  a
    particularly impressive witness. She was candid in saying that she  had
    initially viewed the Appellant with  hostility,  and  detailed  in  her
    evidence as to how that view changed. As his former  mother-in-law  she
    had little to gain from coming and giving the evidence that she did. We
    are satisfied that she did so because  she  firmly  believes  that  her
    grandson needs his father.    We are equally satisfied that this  child
    is not going to leave the United Kingdom, because he  lives  here  with
    his mother and little brother. There would therefore be an interference
    with the Appellant's family life if  he  were  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and Article 8 is engaged.


68. We are satisfied that the Secretary of State has the power  in  law  to
    make the decision that she has, and that it is taken in pursuit of  the
    legitimate aim of protecting the economy.

69. In addressing  proportionality  we  must  have  regard  to  the  public
    interest  factors  set  out  in  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. These do not form an  exhaustive  list
    of the material considerations but are a  statement  of  those  matters
    which  Parliament  considered  to  be  of  particular   importance   in
    determining Article 8 'outside of the rules'.

70. Mr Lewis relies on the final part of s117B which provides:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

71. The meaning of this section has recently been  analysed  in  Treebhawon
    and others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC).  The  panel
    (President McCloskey J, Upper Tribunal Judge Francis) found that in the
    context of the section as a whole, and on  the  plain  meaning  of  the
    text, section 117B(6) provides a complete answer  to  the  question  of
    proportionality. The focus for enquiry is whether it is  reasonable  to
    expect a qualifying child to leave the UK with  the  parent  with  whom
    they share a substantive relationship.  If it would not  be  reasonable
    for that child to leave, the public  interest  does  not   require  the
    parent to go, no matter what conclusions may have been reached  on  the
    matters set out at s117B(1)-(5).

72. We have already found there to be a family life between  the  Appellant
    and his son: there is therefore a genuine parental relationship.  C  is
    British, lives with his British mother and brother, attends  school  in
    the UK and is entitled to the regular  medical  attention  that  he  so
    clearly requires.   We find  as  fact  that  it  would  not,  in  these
    circumstances,  be  reasonable  for  C  to  leave  the  UK.    Applying
    Treebhawon, the Appellant would succeed in his Article 8 claim.

73. Mr Clarke asked us not to apply Treebhowan.  He  made  two  alternative
    submissions as to  why.  First,  he  asked  us  to  find  that  section
    117B(6)(b) had no application here since there is no expectation that C
    will leave the UK. He submitted that on  a  true  construction  of  the
    words the question of reasonableness does not arise for such  a  child.
    With respect, we found this argument rather difficult to  follow.   The
    effect of it would be that s117(6)(b) would offer protection to parents
    whose children faced removal  with  them,  but  not  to  parents  whose
    settled children were  staying  here.  Given  that  the  focus  of  the
    provision is the protection of the  parental  relationship  this  makes
    little sense.   We are not satisfied that anything turns on  the  words
    "to expect". The meaning of the entire phrase is  clear.  Would  it  be
    reasonable for this child to leave the UK?  For  the  reasons  we  have
    given, accepted by the Respondent, we find that it would not.

74. Second, Mr Clarke asked us to  consider  proportionality  as  a  whole,
    treating  s117B(6)  as  just  one  factor  relevant  to  the  balancing
    exercise.  Whilst Treebhawon is a decision of the President, and  as  a
    reported  decision  is  guidance  which  carries  much  force,  we  are
    conscious that the construction therein is subject to challenge by  the
    Secretary  of  State.  We  therefore  agree  to  consider  Mr  Clarke's
    submissions as an alternative.

75. We have regard to the fact that the maintenance of immigration  control
    is in the public interest. The Appellant entered the  UK  in  2004  and
    having  failed  in  his  bid  to   secure   international   protection,
    overstayed. He subsequently secured entry clearance as  a  spouse,  and
    indefinite leave to remain: (considering this matter in the alternative
    scenario that our conclusions about these applications are wrong) these
    were grants of leave that he was not  entitled  to  because  they  were
    obtained by deception.  This is a matter which weighs heavily in favour
    of the public interest in refusing leave.

76. It is in the public interest that persons who seek leave  to  enter  or
    remain  can  speak  English,  and  that  they  are   financially   self
    sufficient.  Parliament  believes  that  both  of  these  factors   aid
    integration, and the Appellant provides a good  illustration  why.  His
    ability  to  speak  English  has  enabled  him  to  meet  and  found  a
    relationship with a British  woman,  and  as  the  evidence  before  us
    clearly shows, he is well integrated into her family  even  though  the
    marriage itself is over. That relationship no doubt provided  the  spur
    for the Appellant to be financially  self  sufficient:  he  is  a  self
    employed taxi driver and we are told that he has never  claimed  public
    funds. His employment further aids his integration.

77. It matters not whether the Appellant's status could be characterised as
    'unlawful' or 'precarious' for the purpose of 117B(4) and  (5):  either
    way  we  must  attach  little  weight  to  the  private  life   he  has
    established in the UK.  Those sub-sections do not, we note, impact upon
    the weight to be attached to the Appellant's family life with his  son.
    This rightly formed the centrepiece of  the  submissions  made  on  his
    behalf.

78. Mr Lewis pointed first to the quality  of  the  relationship,  and  the
    particular vulnerabilities of C. Like many boys of his age, C loves his
    father, and enjoys a strong bond with him. Unlike many  other  boys  of
    his age C suffers from ongoing physical  challenges  arising  from  his
    stroke, which mean that he is more dependent on  his  parents  than  he
    might otherwise be. The consequences of his stroke are that he requires
    physical and psychological support over and above  that  which  another
    child may not need. For instance, in order to improve  his  mobility  C
    must undertake regular physiotherapy: it was  the  consistent  evidence
    before us that it has been the Appellant who has undertaken much of the
    responsibility for this work. CH told us how he will  drive  C  to  and
    from his regular appointments, and how  he  will,  on  a  frequent  and
    regular basis, ensure that C has physical activity  that  supports  his
    recovery, such as swimming. These are activities that CH is not herself
    able to do (at any rate with much frequency) since she now has  another
    child to look after.  It was the evidence of Mrs H that C "wouldn't  be
    the little boy he is today if its wasn't for his dad". That is evidence
    we have given substantial weight to. We accept that the  Appellant  and
    his son share a strong bond and that the Appellant  provides  well  for
    his son's particular needs. He plays a significant role in C's life and
    gives substantial support to his ex-wife in this respect.


79. We remind ourselves that in our evaluation of  the  Appellant's  family
    life we must  also  take  into  account  the  rights  of  other  family
    members[7] and  in  our  assessment  of  the  evidence  we  have  given
    substantial weight to the dependence that C has  on  his  father.    We
    find that it would be wholly contrary to C's  best  interests  for  his
    father to be required to leave the United Kingdom.

80. We have  taken  all  of  these  matters  into  account.  The  two  most
    significant of the competing factors in this balancing exercise are the
    Appellant's failure to declare his past involvement  with  the  Taliban
    and his family life with his son. Having given due weight to the public
    interest in removing persons who are not entitled to  leave  to  remain
    under the  Immigration  Rules  we  are  quite  satisfied  that  on  the
    particular facts of this case the Respondent cannot show  the  decision
    to be proportionate. C was born in 2007, after the Appellant  had  been
    given entry clearance. We have been told of  no  good  reason  why  the
    matters now raised by the Respondent as to the Appellant's Taliban past
    were not raised then. Had they been so, and the Appellant refused entry
    on that basis, his family life C would not have developed  in  the  way
    that it now has. Similarly had he not been granted ILR in 2009, or  had
    his status been revoked after the refusal of  naturalisation  in  2011,
    his relationship with his son would not be as strong as  it  is  today,
    some seven  years  later.   C  would  have  been  an  infant  when  the
    interference took place, and his mother would not have had another baby
    to look after at the time. The position today is very different.  C  is
    now nine years old and extremely close to his father.  His  mother  has
    more  demands  on  her  time  and  has  naturally  become  increasingly
    dependent upon  the  Appellant.   having  taken  all  of  the  relevant
    factors, including those matters set out in Part V of the NIAA 2002, we
    are satisfied  that  it  would  not  be  proportionate  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom today, or  to  refuse  him  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.




    Decisions


81. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


82. We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on all grounds.

83. In view of  C's young age we make a direction for anonymity having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders:


      "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant
      is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
      or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
      direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings".




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     7th
                                 March 2016






                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 11th August 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Parkes
[2] Determination promulgated 26th May 2015
[3] Decision dated 17th April 2014
[4] The Appellant's bundle contains a large volume of medical evidence
relating to C but since none of this is contested it is not set out herein.
[5] Unfortunately we have not had access to the Record of Proceedings.

[6] Unlike the rules on deportation of foreign criminals considered in MF
(Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192
[7] Beoku-Betts (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39

