
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20866/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2016                           |On 10 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              shashi kala awai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr A Fouladvand, MAAS


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Wyman allowing the appeal of the claimant on the grounds that she
    qualified for indefinite leave to remain under the Rules on the grounds
    of continuous lawful residence for a period of ten years.

 2. The claimant made the application while she still  had  a  considerable
    period of unexpired limited leave to  remain.  So  it  was  an  upgrade
    application and the appeal  against  the  refusal  was  effectively  an
    upgrade appeal. At the  time  of  the  decision  and  the  hearing  the
    claimant was here with  extant  leave  to  remain,  a  point  which  is
    acknowledged in the refusal letter.

 3. The relevant facts are that on 22 October 2010  the  claimant's  appeal
    rights  were  exhausted  in  respect  of  the  refusal  of  a  previous
    application. On 29 November 2010 the claimant submitted an out of  time
    application for leave to remain on the basis of her human rights  under
    Article 8, ECHR. The application was refused with no right of appeal on
    5 January 2011. The  Secretary  of  State  received  a  reconsideration
    request and on 4 April 2011 the decision to refuse leave to remain  was
    maintained. On that day the claimant was served with removal papers  as
    an overstayer.  There was then a considerable gap of many months before
    on 1 December 2011 the claimant submitted an out of time application as
    a spouse of a settled person. The application was refused with no right
    of appeal on 10 May 2012.

 4. On 4 September 2012 the claimant applied for judicial  review,  and  to
    cut quite a long story short eventually the claimant was successful  in
    her judicial review application. On 23 October 2013 her judicial review
    claim was conceded and the claimant was granted leave to remain on  the
    basis of family life valid from 22 November 2013 until 22 May 2016.

 5. In the refusal letter  written  in  response  to  the  application  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  continuous  lawful
    residence of ten years, the contention of the Secretary  of  State  was
    that the claimant was without lawful leave between 23 October 2010  and
    21 November 2013, a period of approximately three years and twenty nine
    days.  As such the period of continuous lawful residence was considered
    to have been broken at this point.

 6. The claimant's appeal against this decision  came  before  Judge  Wyman
    sitting at Harmondsworth on 29 April 2016. Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.

 7. In her subsequent decision, the judge noted the immigration history  to
    which we have referred.  At paragraph [36] she  noted  that  eventually
    the claimant was granted leave to remain on the  basis  of  her  family
    life.  She continued in paragraph [37] as follows:

         However during this period from 2010-2013, the [claimant]  was  not
         removed from the United Kingdom, did not leave the UK and  was  not
         convicted of any offence.  I  therefore  find  that  she  did  have
         continuous  residence  during  this  period  of  three  years  from
         November 2010 onwards.

 8. The judge then turned to consider the much shorter period  of  38  days
    during which the claimant accepted that she did not  have  valid  leave
    i.e. from 22 October 2010 until 29 November 2010.  The judge found that
    the claimant had a good excuse on medical  grounds  for  the  delay  in
    making a fresh application, and that therefore the period  of  38  days
    without leave should not be  treated  as  interrupting  the  period  of
    continuous lawful residence, applying the relevant Home  Office  Policy
    Guidance.

 9. We do not consider it necessary to review the finding which  the  judge
    made on the shorter period of 38 days.  The key issue  is  whether  the
    judge was right  in  law  to  hold  that  the  claimant  qualified  for
    indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  the  facts  set  out  in
    paragraph [37] and the answer to that question is  plainly  no.  Whilst
    the claimant was continuously resident in the UK during that period she
    was not continuously lawfully resident  as  she  was  not  enjoying  3C
    leave.  She did not have any existing leave and by virtue of the  fresh
    application being made out of time in November  2010,  the  application
    could not possibly give her leave that she did not otherwise enjoy. The
    judge also overlooked the point that this first out of time application
    was refused with no right of appeal, and there was then a very long gap
    before the appellant made her second application which was also out  of
    time.

10. This is why the question of whether the Secretary of State should  have
    exercised discretion with regard to the  claimant's  initial  delay  in
    making the first out of time application is academic, because the first
    application failed and there was then a lengthy gap before  the  second
    application was made.  So, on any view, this was not something that the
    appellant could  appeal  against  retrospectively;  and  there  was  no
    question of the Secretary  of  State  being  called  upon  to  exercise
    retrospective discretion so as to transform what was a long  period  of
    illegal residence in the United Kingdom as an overstayer into a  period
    of lawful residence.

11. By way of resistance  to  the  error  of  law  challenge  made  by  the
    Secretary of State, Mr Fouladvand submits that the principle of  common
    law fairness justifies the judge's approach.  Since  the  claimant  was
    eventually granted leave to remain, he submits that the slate should be
    treated as being wiped clean, not only going forwards but also  looking
    backwards.  But ultimately what  matters  is  the  application  of  the
    Rules. The Rules are very  clear  as  to  what  the  position  is.  The
    claimant does not qualify for indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the
    Rules.

12. Mr Fouladvand also raises the question of whether  this  appeal  raises
    wider Article 8 issues.   We  are  satisfied  that  it  does  not.  The
    Secretary of State advisedly did not look beyond the narrow question as
    to whether the claimant qualified for indefinite leave to remain  under
    the Rules.  This was because she did not want to prejudice the claimant
    in respect of any future application she might wish to make  to  extend
    her leave to remain on a different ground.  There  is  also  no  cross-
    appeal in respect of the First-tier Tribunal  judge's  approach,  which
    was to confine her deliberations to the narrow question of whether  the
    claimant qualified for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  long
    residence rule.

13. So we find that this  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be
    allowed, and that we should remake the decision in her favour.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have dismissed the appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

