
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20809/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 14 August 2017                |On: 21 August 2017                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    [A B]
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N O'Brien, counsel (instructed by Dotcom
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on [ ] 1982. She  appeals
      with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      who dismissed her appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  to
      refuse her application for leave to remain on the basis of family  and
      private life.

   3. In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
      stated that it was arguable  that  the  Tribunal  '...  erred  in  its
      assessment of the best interests of the children and consequently  the
      assessment of the reasonableness in expecting the child to  leave  the
      UK'.  Further,  the  Tribunal  failed  to  take   into   account   the
      difficulties and the medical problems of the younger child in relation
      to paragraph 276ADE  (1)(vi).  The  child  suffers  from  sickle  cell
      anaemia.

   4. Mr O'Brien, who also represented the appellant before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, submitted that the appellant herself had been in the UK  for
      nearly 16 years. She had two children, both of whom were born  in  the
      UK. The elder child had lived  here  for  over  seven  years  and  was
      accordingly a "qualifying child" under the 2002 Act.

   5. The younger child was suffering from sickle cell anaemia and had  been
      under the care of a consultant paediatrician since birth. In 2016  she
      had been admitted to  hospital  on  several  occasions  with  symptoms
      related to her illness.

   6. Her consultant paediatrician stated that there  might  be  a  lack  of
      appropriate  facilities  in  Jamaica  such  as   access   to   complex
      antimicrobial therapy, safe blood components and paediatric  intensive
      care. He stated that it would be in the best interests  of  the  child
      for her to remain here.

   7. The younger child also had a  speech  impediment  which  affected  her
      ability to communicate and make herself understood. She has been given
      support with her  speech  and  language.  The  school  understood  her
      medical  needs  and  related  difficulties.  There  was  a  dearth  of
      specialist staff in the institutions delivering services for  children
      with disabilities  including  a  shortage  of  speech  therapists.  In
      addition, such persons encounter discrimination and access to  schools
      which include at primary level - COR, 15 January 2013, 23.36.

   8. Mr O'Brien submitted that the Judge's vague acknowledgement  that  the
      child's condition required to be monitored and that she may require  a
      blood transfusion did not make it clear that she had fully  considered
      and carefully weighed the very specific  information  provided  by  Dr
      Wilkey.

   9. The Judge stated at [29] that whilst the medical facilities may not be
      as good as in the UK, she was satisfied that medical treatment for the
      younger child is available  as  is  speech  and  language  development
      support. However, she did not  in  fact  consider  all  the  available
      evidence including that provided by the respondent's own COIR document
      and Dr Wilkey's opinion.

  10. It was insufficient to state at [41] that the children were  protected
      by being in the care of their mother with  whom  they  had  lived  all
      their lives. The younger child's removal  would  deprive  her  of  the
      opportunity to enjoy the  services  of  the  UK's  public  health  and
      education services. She was a child who had lived in the  UK  for  her
      entire life  and  was  suffering  from  significant  conditions.  This
      affected her welfare and development which  would  continue  into  the
      foreseeable future.

  11. He submitted that the Judge acknowledged that "significant weight" was
      to be given to the fact that the elder child had been in  the  UK  for
      seven years and that "strong reasons" are required to justify  removal
      in  those  circumstances  [39].  However,  there  is  nothing  in  the
      determination to indicate that she had acted on this  acknowledgement.
      No strong reasons are identified.

  12. Nor did the Judge consider the knock on effect of the younger  child's
      condition on her elder  brother.  The  Judge  took  an  unduly  narrow
      approach to the question of the best interests of the children, simply
      stating that their interests are protected by being  in  the  care  of
      their mother with whom they had lived all their lives.

  13. Mr O'Brien submitted that in effect, the Judge's findings read like  a
      simple proportionality assessment appropriate  and  applicable  to  an
      adult, but which did not properly deal  with  the  assessment  of  the
      children's  best  interests  in  the  circumstances.  Accordingly  the
      Article 8 assessment was flawed.

  14. The older child is a  qualifying  child.  There  has  been  no  proper
      assessment of whether it is reasonable to expect him to leave  as  per
      MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [102]. The respondent's policy is
      set out in MA and requires that strong reasons be  used  for  refusing
      leave to a child who satisfies the seven  year  residence  requirement
      [46].

  15. On behalf of the respondent Mr Tarlow submitted  that  the  Judge  did
      take into account of the circumstances of the  child.  The  Judge  has
      done enough. Although dealing with the matters briefly, she dealt with
      the child's medical condition [27] as well as problems at school.

  16. She found that medical treatment is  available  for  children  and  in
      particular the younger child and that the appellant was likely  to  be
      supported financially by family and friends  from  the  UK  and  close
      family members in Jamaica.  The Judge was accordingly entitled  to  be
      satisfied that there would not be very significant obstacles to her re-
      integration into Jamaica under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

      Assessment

  17. The younger child suffers from sickle cell anaemia and has been  under
      the care of a consultant paediatrician since her birth on 18  November
      2011. Dr Wilkey considered her disease to be  severe.  She  will  need
      close monitoring and follow ups which may not be provided in  Jamaica.
      She is likely to need a blood  transfusion  and  transcranial  Doppler
      monitoring to assess a stroke risk. There are other consequences which
      could follow including organ damage.

  18. She had been admitted to hospital on several occasions  with  symptoms
      relating to her illness. In particular, Dr Wilkey  stated  that  there
      may be a lack of appropriate facilities in Jamaica so it would  be  in
      her best interests to be permitted to remain here.

  19. The child also has a speech impediment which has affected her  ability
      to communicate and make herself understood.  Her  school  has  a  good
      understanding of her difficulties and her strengths. She has a  speech
      and language therapist. The school will understand her  medical  needs
      and related difficulties. Her schooling has  enabled  her  to  develop
      communication and other social skills.

  20. There is force in Mr O'Brien's submission that the Judge's approach to
      the issues relating to the complex health and educational needs of the
      child was a general assessment of whether removal  was  proportionate.
      However,  the  child's  health  and  education  problems   and   needs
      constituted  a  significant  part  of  any  assessment   relating   to
      reasonableness.

  21. The impact of the decision to remove  also  potentially  affected  her
      elder brother who himself has been here  for  over  seven  years.  His
      circumstances are also required to be taken into account  in  deciding
      whether it is reasonable to expect him to leave.

  22. In assessing the best interests of the younger child the Judge did not
      properly grapple with the problems relating to the specialised  nature
      of  her treatment in the UK and its availability in Jamaica; nor  were
      her educational  needs  properly  factored.  The  child's  health  and
      education needs raised specific and important questions  which  needed
      to be addressed.

  23. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the
      decision.

  24. The parties were agreed that in the circumstances the case  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.  I  find  in
      the circumstances that it is appropriate to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
      remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross)  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made before another Judge.


      Anonymity direction made.


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


      Signed                             Date 20 August 2017

