

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20839/2014
                                                               IA/20809/2014
                                                               IA/20820/2014
                                                               IA/20824/2014
                                                               IA/20828/2014
                                                               IA/20832/2014
                                                               IA/20835/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th November 2014                          |On 13th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           JAMAL ALI DAW ELFORJANI
                            TAHA JAMAL ELFORJANI
                              TASNEEM ELFORJANI
                               TAGWA ELFORJANI
                               ADIM ELFORJANI
                              GHAFRAN ELFORJANI
                          AISHA ABDULRAHMAN A MAKRM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Marshall of NBS solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellants appeal a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
        dismissed their appeals against a decision by the Secretary of State
        refusing to grant them leave to remain in the UK on the  grounds  of
        Article 8, their length of  residence  and  against  a  decision  to
        remove them pursuant to s47 Immigration Asylum and  Nationality  Act
        2006.


     2. Permission to appeal had been sought, and permission granted, on the
        basis that the First-tier Tribunal judge had


        a) failed to direct himself properly as regards paragraph 276ADE in
           relation to the children who had been in the UK for a period  in
           excess of 7 years;
        b)  failed  adequately  to  consider  the   situation   in   Libya,
           restricting himself to whether  there  was  an  Article  3  risk
           rather than as a part of the consideration under Article 8;
        c) had failed to consider whether there were arguably good  grounds
           for considering the appeal "outside the Rules"  whereas  he  had
           considered whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
           appellants' family life continuing outside the UK.
        d) That the First-tier Tribunal judge should  have  considered  the
           appeal though the prism of the Rules including  EX.1.  and  then
           considered whether there existed  good  grounds  to  go  outside
           these rules.


     3. The appellants submit that when applying the law  the  judge  should
        first of all have considered the reasonableness  of  the  children's
        return to Libya bearing in mind the importance of  the  decision  to
        the welfare of the children; that the children are the key issue (as
        acknowledged by the judge) and proper consideration should have been
        given both inside and outside the Rules.


     4. In a Rule 24 response the Secretary of State opposes the appeal  and
        although acknowledging that the judge could  have  "provided  better
        signposts", submits that it is clear when read holistically that the
        judge appropriately directed himself and  made  findings  consistent
        with the policy guidance set out in the IDIs.


     5. The judge sets out the evidence  and  information  before  him.  The
        appellants assert that the judge failed  to  have  consideration  to
        material matters and in particular the extensive information  before
        him concerning the position of the children  and  the  situation  in
        Libya.


    Background


     6. The appellants are a father and mother with their five children. The
        principal appellant is the father  and  the  other  appellants  make
        their application and appeal as, in  essence,  his  dependants.  The
        father first came to the UK as a student in 2003  utilising  a  visa
        valid until 17th February 2004 and subsequently extended until  31st
        October 2004. He left the UK prior to expiry of his leave to remain.
        He returned on 18th March 2006, again as a student, and was  granted
        extensions of leave to remain until 30th January 2014. His wife, who
        had also been in the UK with her husband during the currency of  his
        earlier leave to remain and left at the same time as him, arrived in
        the UK on a visa valid  from  1st  April  2006  and  her  leave  was
        extended in line until 30th January 2014. Of the five children three
        were born in Libya (in August 1999, November 2000 and  March  2002).
        These three children accompanied their parents on each trip and were
        granted leave to enter and remain in line. The youngest two children
        were born in the UK (in November 2003 and May 2006).  Of  these  the
        older of the two had leave to remain in line with  the  parents  and
        left and returned with  them.  The  youngest  child  has  not  lived
        anywhere other than the UK. All the children had lived in the UK for
        a continuous period of  7  years  and  10  months  on  the  date  of
        application.


     7. The children have all been educated in the UK, the older children to
        a limited extent in Libya. The father has impressive  qualifications
        and has worked in the UK as an advisor for  Npower  in  the  UK  and
        whilst in Libya he worked as a part time  accounting  teacher  at  a
        private university in Tripoli and for the National Oil Corporation.


    Error of law


     8. Before the First-tier Tribunal it was agreed that the  issue  before
        the  judge  revolved  mainly  around  the  children.  There  was  no
        challenge to the evidence called on behalf of the appellants and  no
        dispute as to the factual matrix.


     9. The judge refers to the Country guidance case of AT  and  Others  CG
        [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) and to the respondent's  guidance  as  regards
        travel to Libya. He finds that the appellant and his family  do  not
        fall within one of the groups identified, as being at risk and  this
        finding is not challenge by the appellants.  The  finding  that  the
        father and mother have family members in Libya and  that  they  have
        not suffered any loss or are  at  any  special  risk  has  not  been
        challenged. The judge accepts that the children have been in the  UK
        in excess of 7 years and that they will  have  put  down  roots  and
        integrated into life in the UK, particularly the older children.  He
        also finds that they have no significant experience of life in Libya
        and that in terms of  language  they  use  English  as  their  first
        language amongst themselves and their friends. The judge  refers  to
        it being up to the respondent to decide when and if  removal  should
        take place.


    10. The judge concludes that the family is close  and  makes  a  finding
        that there was no evidence that would suggest that


        "...  subject to the  current  domestic  situation  in  Libya,  this
           family  as  a  whole  could  not  integrate  rapidly   into   an
           appropriate community with family and be able  to  access  their
           own academic needs. Indeed there is no evidence before  me  that
           that could not be the case."


    11. He then goes on to conclude that


        "...  there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being
           conducted abroad albeit initially the situation may be difficult
           for the family as a whole".


    12. It is difficult to see on what basis the judge  has  concluded  that
        the family can be removed to Libya given that he refers  to  removal
        being subject to the current domestic situation in  Libya.  This  is
        not a finding that it is proportionate to remove the family and that
        it is only their choice not to leave that is  preventing  them  from
        going. He does not identify what that situation is or how it impacts
        on the removability of the children and the family. If the situation
        in Libya is such that it would not be reasonable or proportionate to
        remove children at the date of the hearing then  the  appeal  should
        have  succeeded.  Issues  such  as  non  removability,  strife   and
        disruption and the stage  at  which  the  children's  education  has
        reached are relevant factors that appear to  have  been  before  the
        judge and yet he does not appear to have taken  these  matters  into
        account.


    13.  Although  Mr  Diwyncz  said  he  could  do  little  to  defend  the
        determination, he relied upon the Rule  24  response  and  submitted
        that when the determination was read as a whole it was apparent that
        the judge had considered all relevant matters.


    14. I do not agree. I am satisfied that  the  judge  erred  in  law.  He
        failed to provide adequate reasons for the findings reached  and  in
        particular failed to address relevant evidence.


    15. I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  to
        be heard afresh, in accordance with  the  Practice  Direction  dated
        25th September 2012 of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber First tier
        Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
heard afresh.

    Consequential Directions


    The appellant's to notify the First-tier Tribunal 21 days prior to  the
    date of the hearing whether they require an interpreter and  if  so  in
    which  language/dialect.  If  such  notification  is  not   given,   an
    interpreter will not be booked.



                                        Date 6th November 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
