
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/20373/2015
                                                               ia/20377/2015
                                                               ia/20381/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th August 2016                        |On 24th August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                       Amarpreet [K] (first Appellant)
                       Jatinder [S] (second Appellant)
                           [s k] (third Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms N. Ahmad of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are all citizens of India.  The first  Appellant  who  I
    shall refer to as the Appellant was born  on  [  ]  1984.   The  second
    Appellant, who I shall refer to as Mr [S] is her husband and  was  born
    on [ ] 1983.  The third Appellant, [SK] is the couple's  child  and  he
    was born on [ ] 2011.  The Appellants appeal a decision  of  Designated
    Judge Manuell sitting at Richmond on  5th  January  2016  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against decisions of  the  Respondent
    dated 18th May 2015.   Those  decisions  were  to  refuse  to  vary  by
    extending the Appellant's  existing  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and the second and  third
    Appellants' leave as her dependants.  Their original applications  were
    made on 10th September 2014.

2.   The Respondent refused  the  applications  because  the  Appellant  had
    failed to provide a CAS (Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies letter)
    from a licensed Sponsor.  The CAS produced  with  her  application  was
    assigned by University Tutorial College which was not on the  register,
    its licence having been revoked.  The Appellant was informed of this on
    12th March 2015 and granted 60 days to obtain a new  Sponsor  and  CAS.
    The Appellant did not do so and  thus  did  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules.  As she had not provided a valid CAS the Respondent also decided
    that the Appellant had failed to  meet  the  maintenance  requirements.
    All three applications were refused.

3.   The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision on form  IAFT-
    1 dated 29th May 2015 giving as her representatives Messrs Maalik &  Co
    in Southall.  The grounds of appeal were brief.  The essence  was  that
    the Appellant averred that she had provided the relevant  documents  in
    support of her application and  the  Respondent  could  have  requested
    further documents if  required.   The  Respondent's  decision  was  not
    therefore in accordance with the law.  Nor had the Respondent given any
    consideration to the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  The  Appellant  was
    said to be in the process of obtaining further documentary evidence  to
    support her appeal and such evidence "will be provided in due  course".
    The appeal was described as "a holding appeal in  order  to  allow  the
    Appellant  adequate  time  to  submit  all  available  information  and
    documentary evidence in relation to her appeal".

4.   Some time later on 17th November 2015 the Tribunal sent  out  a  notice
    of hearing on form IA37 to the Appellant and to Maalik & Co  indicating
    that the Appellant's appeal would be heard on Tuesday 5th January  2016
    at 10 a.m. at Richmond Magistrates' Court, The Court  House,  Parkshot,
    Richmond, Surrey TW9 2RF.  The Appellant was asked to ensure  that  she
    arrived fifteen minutes prior to the hearing. Following  the  issue  of
    form IA37 the Tribunal received a letter from Maalik &  Co  dated  25th
    November 2015 in which they indicated they were no longer instructed by
    the Appellants.

The Proceedings at First Instance

5.   When the matter was called on for hearing on 5th January there  was  no
    appearance by the Appellants nor any  application  made  to  Designated
    Judge Manuell in person for an adjournment.  No evidence had been filed
    on the Appellants' behalf which was a breach of the Tribunal's standard
    directions. The Designated Judge was satisfied that notice of the time,
    date and place of the hearing had been duly served  on  the  Appellants
    and the matter could be fairly and justly determined in their absence.

6.   The Designated Judge held that there was  no  dispute  that  University
    Tutorial College had had its licence revoked and thus  the  Appellant's
    application faced refusal.  The Appellant had been granted 60  days  to
    obtain a new and compliant CAS but had  not  done  so.   There  was  no
    discretion that could have been exercised  by  the  Respondent  in  the
    Appellant's favour as there  were  no  circumstances  which  "could  be
    sensibly described as compelling".  The appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules failed because the Appellant had failed to produce a  valid  CAS.
    The decision was thus in accordance with the law for the reasons he had
    explained.  As to Article 8, there would be no  interference  with  the
    Appellants' family life as they would be removed together.   There  was
    no evidence the Appellant could not study elsewhere or leave the United
    Kingdom and make a fresh entry clearance application if she  wished  to
    pursue further studies in this country.  The Article 8 claim failed  on
    proportionality grounds.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Appellants appealed against the decision  arguing  that  their  new
    solicitors  Messrs   Farani-Javid-Taylor   Solicitors   had   made   an
    application for an adjournment of the 5th January date six days  before
    on 30th December 2015. That application for  an  adjournment  had  been
    received by the Tribunal who had acknowledged  receipt.   For  whatever
    reason that application had not been before the  Designated  Judge  and
    therefore had not been considered by him.  There was therefore a breach
    of procedural fairness in the Tribunal going  ahead  with  the  hearing
    when an application for an adjournment had been made but not dealt with
    by the Tribunal.  There was also an error of law in the decision as the
    Designated Judge had  failed  to  mention  Section  117B(5)(a)  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  when  assessing  the
    proportionality of the interference in the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

8.   The application for permission to appeal came before  Designated  Judge
    Murray on 31st May 2016.  She refused permission to appeal writing:

         "The Judge had no adjournment request before him.  It is clear from
         the evidence that although an adjournment request had been made  an
         adjournment had not been granted  so  in  these  circumstances  the
         Appellants or the Appellants and their representatives should  have
         attended the hearing centre on the day of the  hearing.   They  did
         not.  There was no error made by the Judge when he heard  the  case
         in the Appellants' absence.  The Judge correctly states that no CAS
         had been issued to the first Appellant so the application under the
         Rules could not succeed.  The first Appellant  had  been  given  60
         days to obtain a CAS and had not done  so.   The  decision  was  in
         accordance with the law.  With regard to Article 8 the Judge  dealt
         with this within the Rules.  Relevant case  law  was  quoted.   The
         Judge's decision is  properly  explained  and  there  was  no  good
         arguable case for considering Article 8 outside the  Rules.   Based
         on what was before the Judge there was no need to  mention  Section
         117B.  The Judge explained the Appellants' options at paragraph  12
         of the decision [that the Appellant could make a fresh  application
         in-country within 28 days without facing the danger of removal]. "

9.   The Appellants renewed their application for permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal pointing to the fact that Designated  Judge  Manuell  did  not
    have an application to adjourn before him.  The applicant had  produced
    fax transmissions and emails sent to the Tribunal and confirmation that
    the adjournment request had been received.  An adjournment request made
    for the attention of the Judge was both faxed and  emailed  and  should
    have  been  considered.   There  was  no  notice  on  the   Appellants'
    solicitors' file that an adjournment had  been  refused.   This  was  a
    simple case of the Tribunal being provided with documents which did not
    reach the Judge.  The First-tier Judge should have noted this error and
    granted permission to appeal.   The  Appellant  had  taken  substantial
    steps to ensure that an adjournment application was  submitted  to  the
    First-tier.  This was not a case where an adjournment request had  been
    refused.  It was  a  procedural  error  which  was  in  breach  of  the
    overriding objective to deal with a case fairly  and  justly  including
    ensuring so far as practical that the parties were able to  participate
    fully in the proceedings.

10.  Dealing with the substantive appeal, the grounds argued that the  Judge
    had failed to carry out a Section 117 assessment which would have  been
    in the Appellants' favour given that they were a  well-educated  family
    lawfully residing in the United Kingdom with no  criminal  convictions.
    In the case of Forman [2015] UKUT 00412 the  Upper  Tribunal  had  held
    that where the provisions of Section 117B arose, the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal must demonstrate that the Section had been given full  effect.
    The renewed application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 28th June 2016.  In a  very  brief
    decision he gave permission stating:

         "It is arguable that the Judge's decision is flawed  by  procedural
         error since although he was unaware of it an adjournment  had  been
         made but no decision had been made on it."

The Hearing Before Me

11.  Counsel for the Appellants submitted that the solicitors had written  a
    letter to the Arnhem Support Centre in Leicester on 30th December 2015.
     That letter (a copy of which was in the court file) stated that Farani-
    Javid-Taylor had been instructed by the Appellants for the  hearing  on
    5th  January  2016  but  they  wish  to  make  an  application  for  an
    adjournment.  They were not in a position to prepare and represent  the
    Appellant on 5th January because her  file  had  been  misplaced.   The
    solicitors had moved office and a large number of  clients'  files  had
    been misplaced in the process.  Although none of  the  files  had  been
    permanently lost and all would be properly allocated  eventually,  this
    would take four to six weeks.  This  request  for  an  adjournment  was
    being made as a matter of last resort, the solicitors having made their
    best endeavours to locate the Appellant's file.  The  alternative  that
    the Tribunal should provide the solicitors with the papers  would  also
    take some time therefore the case was not ready.

12.  The letter referred to Rule 21 of the Procedure Rules 2005  (which  had
    been repealed by the 2014 Procedure Rules).  The  Appellant  relied  on
    the Upper Tribunal decision in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418.  The question
    was whether the refusal of an adjournment deprived the  affected  party
    of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where  an  adjournment  refusal  was
    challenged on fairness grounds it was important to recognise  that  the
    question for the Upper Tribunal was  not  whether  the  First-tier  had
    acted reasonably, rather the test to be applied was that  of  fairness.
    Was there any deprivation of the  affected  parties  right  to  a  fair
    hearing?  If the Tribunal refused an adjournment request such  decision
    could in principle be erroneous in law in several respects, failing  to
    take  into  account  material  considerations;  permitting   immaterial
    considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a fair  hearing;
    failing to apply the correct test and acting irrationally.  The  letter
    sought an adjournment to the next available date after six weeks.   The
    refusal of  an  adjournment  would  not  be  proportionate  and  should
    therefore be granted.

13.  Counsel submitted that this request should have  been  put  before  the
    Designated Judge.  Although Designated  Judge  Murray  had  said  while
    refusing permission that the representatives should still have been  at
    the hearing, nothing had been returned by the Tribunal stating that the
    adjournment was not granted.  That was the reason  why  the  solicitors
    did not attend.  They did not know what had happened.   The  overriding
    objective applied.  The Appellants were willing to  attend  and  indeed
    wanted to attend.  The case was not prepared on time as the  solicitors
    took over the case late in the day.  The representatives had not  heard
    either way from the Tribunal.  They were not told that the  adjournment
    request had been denied.  That resulted in the failure to attend.  They
    had presumed that the information requesting the adjournment  would  be
    before the Judge hearing the appeal.

14.  In reply, the Presenting Officer submitted that  the  case  of  Nwaigwe
    was not authority for the proposition that in every case in  which  the
    Appellant failed to obtain an adjournment there  would  be  unfairness.
    In this case the Appellant and her representatives had failed to attend
    even though there was no  indication  that  the  adjournment  had  been
    granted.  In any event it was a weak case.  It was bound to fail  under
    the Immigration Rules as the Appellant had no CAS and had  put  forward
    little  information  under  the  human  rights  claim.   There  was  no
    procedural unfairness.

15.  Finally in response Counsel argued that the merits of the appeal  could
    not be determined without a hearing and this appeal  did  have  merits.
    In any event the Appellant had the right to a fair trial under  Article
    6 (the Presenting Officer interjected at this point to say that Article
    6 did not apply to immigration proceedings).


Findings

16.  The Appellant had submitted what was  described  as  a  holding  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse to vary leave back  in  May
    2015.  For reasons which are not entirely clear the Tribunal then  sent
    out a notice of hearing approximately six months later in November 2015
    indicating that the case would come up for a full oral hearing  in  two
    months' time, in January 2016.  There is no doubt in this case that the
    Appellants have received  all  relevant  notices  sent  to  their  home
    address in Southall.  What does seem to have happened is that  although
    they instructed Messrs Maalik & Co  to  file  the  original  notice  of
    appeal against the Respondent's decision,  they  did  not  continue  to
    instruct that firm but, again apparently, very late  in  the  day  they
    approached another  firm  of  solicitors,  Messrs  Farani-Javid-Taylor,
    possibly as late as the Christmas break.

17.  Messrs Farani-Javid-Taylor applied for an  adjournment.   According  to
    their letter of 30th December they were not in a position to  represent
    the Appellants properly because they had mislaid the  Appellants'  file
    whilst moving offices.  They did not  say  when  this  move  had  taken
    place, only stating that the head office had "recently moved".  Thus to
    have a file in their name the Appellants must have  instructed  Farani-
    Javid-Taylor prior to the move whenever that was.

18.  The solicitors wrote a letter and it appears sent a copy  by  email  to
    the Tribunal's administrative office.  I was shown on Counsel's  laptop
    the copy of an email sent by the Customer  Service  Department  of  the
    Tribunal on 31st December acknowledging the solicitors'  correspondence
    and saying that it would be dealt with in due course.  This was only an
    acknowledgement.  It was not even an indication  that  the  adjournment
    request had been looked at by anyone.

19.  Given that this was the holiday period and a relatively few days  prior
    the hearing, it is not perhaps  surprising  that  the  letter  of  30th
    December did not make its way before Designated Judge Manuell.  As  far
    as he was concerned the Appellants had failed to attend and  there  was
    no good reason why they had failed to attend.

20.   The  Appellants'  argument  in  essence  is  that  simply  because  an
    adjournment request had been made the case should not  have  proceeded.
    I cannot accept that argument.  Unless and until the Appellants  and/or
    their representatives were told that an adjournment  request  had  been
    granted, it had not been granted.  In other words unless and until they
    were told that an adjournment had been allowed the  position  was  that
    there was to be no adjournment.  The only  sensible  course  of  action
    which any competent solicitor would have taken in that eventuality  was
    to have attended the hearing on 5th January and renewed the application
    for an adjournment orally.  That was both the correct procedural course
    and also the only courteous course of action.  These  solicitors  chose
    not to do so.  They simply assumed that if they had  written  a  letter
    asking for an adjournment it would be granted and there was no need for
    them to attend.  That was if I may say  an  extraordinarily  complacent
    attitude to take.  No solicitor can properly assume that an application
    has been granted until they hear that.

21.  The Appellants' alternative argument appears to be  that  even  if  one
    accepts that the Appellants' solicitors are at  fault,  the  Appellants
    should not suffer thereby.  I do not accept that argument either.  This
    was the Appellants' appeal and they had a duty to prosecute it.  I  was
    not told that the Appellants' solicitors had specifically  advised  the
    Appellant not to attend the hearing, but I  would  venture  to  suggest
    that any solicitor who told his client not to attend  in  circumstances
    where he himself did not know whether the hearing  was  going  to  take
    place or not, would potentially be laying himself open  to  the  charge
    that his conduct was well below the standard which it was reasonable to
    be expected.  It might be argued that these Appellants  had  been  ill-
    served by their new solicitors who on their own admission  had  mislaid
    the Appellants' file.  In the  absence  however  of  an  indication  of
    specific advice from the Appellants' solicitors to the Appellants  that
    they were not to attend the hearing (I asked Counsel if there  was  any
    such indication and she  informed  me  that  she  did  not  know),  the
    decision not to attend must also have been shared  by  the  Appellants.
    This was their hearing, there was a duty on them to prosecute their own
    appeal, they should have attended but  they  did  not.   No  reasonable
    explanation has  been  given  for  the  non-attendance  of  either  the
    Appellant or the solicitors at  the  hearing  before  Designated  Judge
    Manuell and I agree with the comments made by Designated  Judge  Murray
    when refusing permission to appeal (see paragraph 8 above).

22.  The test of whether  to  grant  an  adjournment  is  one  of  fairness.
    Crucially if an adjournment is refused, can the party who has made  the
    application for an adjournment still receive a fair hearing?   In  this
    case the adjournment request was not refused, no decision was taken  on
    it because it was made so late in the day that it was  still  somewhere
    in the system when the case was called on for hearing.  The  result  of
    that was that the Appellants and her representatives were not denied  a
    fair hearing because all they had to do was come along to the  Tribunal
    and present their case or, alternatively,  renew  orally  the  previous
    application for an adjournment.   The  case  of  Nwaigwe  is  primarily
    concerned with applications for adjournment which are made and refused.
     In this case an application for an adjournment was made but it was not
    considered.  The obvious step  would  have  been  for  the  Appellants'
    solicitors to have contacted the Tribunal on say the 4th  January  2016
    (the  first  day  back  after  the  holiday)  to  enquire  whether  the
    application  for  an  adjournment  had  been  safely  received   and/or
    considered so that they  could  advise  their  clients  accordingly  on
    whether to attend or not.  The solicitors could  have  sent  a  fax  to
    Hatton Cross/Richmond Magistrates' Court making the same enquiry.  They
    could potentially have made the same enquiry the following day, the 5th
    January although that of course was the day of the hearing.  It appears
    however that none of these steps were taken.  The solicitors simply sat
    back and thought that because they had written a letter to the  central
    administration of the First-tier Tribunal there was nothing further for
    them to do.  As I have indicated that was conduct  below  the  standard
    which one could reasonably expect but I do not consider that the  fault
    lay such with the solicitors that the Appellant should nevertheless  be
    entitled to have the decision of the Designated Judge set aside on  the
    grounds of procedural error.  The  Appellants  could  and  should  have
    attended their hearing.

23.  The Appellant  has  never  explained  why  her  appeal  ought  to  have
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules.  Nor has there been  any  proper
    argument advanced  as  to  any  potential  error  in  Designated  Judge
    Manuell's consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.  The point made
    in the grounds of onward appeal  regarding  Section  117B  is  somewhat
    obscure to say the least.  As past Tribunal Authority has demonstrated,
    that an Appellant speaks English and would not be a burden on taxpayers
    etc. are not in themselves grounds to grant an application  and  it  is
    difficult to see how the  Appellants'  appeal  under  Article  8  could
    possibly have succeeded.

24.  I appreciate the point that if the Appellant can demonstrate  that  she
    has been deprived of the right to a fair hearing then  that  of  itself
    means that she is entitled to have the decision of the Designated Judge
    set aside and the matter re-heard in the First-tier.  I merely make the
    point as to the merits to indicate that in fact  this  is  not  a  case
    which is strong on the merits but rather the appeal is on a very narrow
    basis, namely whether  solicitors  were  entitled  to  assume  that  an
    application for an adjournment would be granted.  For the reasons which
    I have given above, they were quite  wrong  to  make  that  assumption.
    Their client was not deprived of a fair hearing, she  deprived  herself
    of a fair hearing by failing to attend her hearing on 5th January.

25.  Thus the fact that  Designated  Judge  Manuell  did  not  consider  the
    solicitors' letter of 30th December does not in my view indicate  there
    was any material error of law.  It was perfectly open to the  Appellant
    and her solicitors to attend and renew the application in circumstances
    where they had not heard from the Tribunal  that  any  application  had
    been granted.  The Designated Judge was  not  aware  that  any  further
    request had been made,  such  as  a  request  for  information  on  the
    progress of the application for an adjournment because no such requests
    were made.  Whilst it would have been administratively better  for  the
    letter of 30th December to be married up to the court file,  given  the
    holiday period it should have been obvious to the solicitors that  they
    needed to do rather more than simply send a letter to one part  of  the
    Tribunal and hope that it would reach another part within a very  short
    space of time.  I do not consider there has been any breach of the duty
    of fairness nor any material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the
    Designated  Judge  to  proceed  with  hearing  on  5th  January.    The
    conclusions he came to were properly open to him (as I  have  indicated
    very little of any substance has been said on  the  alleged  merits  of
    this appeal).  I therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and I dismiss the Appellants' appeal.

Appellants' appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 23rd day of August 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee awards.


Signed this 23rd day of August 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

