
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/20670/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 May 2017                            |On 20 June 2017                |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                               MR ALAN BUCKMAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the  Respondent:     Mr  S  Khan,  Counsel  instructed  by  Mordi  &  Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision, the Appellant is referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   On 13 March 2017, I concluded that the  Original  Tribunal  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara) erred in law in a decision promulgated on  26
    September 2016 in that the judge allowed the  appeal  under  Article  8
    ECHR. The Secretary of State appealed  that  decision.     The  judge's
    adverse decision in relation to the claim under paragraph 276ADE(1)  of
    the Immigration Rules was, for reasons given, was that the evidence was
    not sufficient to show he had been in the United Kingdom  the  required
    twenty years.  The judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  had
    established with evidence that he had  been  here  continuously  twenty
    years.

3.   There was no cross appeal seeking to reargue  the  issue  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

4.   I decided that the judge had failed to  give  sufficient  and  adequate
    reasons to show why Article 8 ECHR  was  engaged  and  why  there  were
    exceptional and compelling circumstances that showed this  was  a  case
    where  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   was   disproportionate.
    Accordingly the matter was relisted for hearing on the issue of whether
    the Article 8 claim succeeded in the  context  of  the  application  of
    Sections 117A-C of the 2002 NIAA.

5.   Before me a range of evidence was paraded not  just  on  the  issue  of
    Article 8.  The Claimant argued once again that  he  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom in 1983 and he had not left.  He also  argued  that  the
    implications of removing him, given that he had left his  home  country
    of Ghana aged about 9 and come to the UK aged about 12, meant  that  he
    was now, at the age of 47, left with no private life in Ghana, no  ties
    to Ghana and he had not set foot in the country for many years.

6.   His cousin, Eileen Buckman, confirmed  that  she  was  related  to  the
    Claimant through her grandfather.  She confirmed that the Claimant  had
    lived with her since 1988.  She confirmed the support he gave  her  and
    the part he played in her life.

7.   Grainne Forson gave evidence of knowing the  Claimant  before  he  left
    Ghana, as a child, and that she had met the Claimant about 30 years ago
    at a party in the UK and they  had  known  each  other  throughout  the
    years. She identified that she had seen the Claimant on a regular basis
    and this had always been the case since the 1980s.

8.   In addition, a Mr Ash who gave evidence of having  known  the  Claimant
    for about 30 years and knowing Miss Eileen Buckman  well.   Mr  Ash  it
    seemed  to  me  gave  balanced  and  credible  evidence,  untainted  by
    exaggeration or elaboration.

9.   Their evidence, including that of the Claimant, was  tested  by  cross-
    examination.

10.  The fact is that the Claimant has, for most of the years  he  has  been
    in the United Kingdom, had no status to remain and such time as he  was
    here and working was during periods when he was pursuing various  means
    to remain.  I find, on the evidence, that when told not to work he  has
    complied.   The  Secretary  of  State  therefore   did   consider   the
    application on the basis of Article 8 private  life  considerations.  I
    note that the Secretary of State did not refuse  the  claim  under  the
    Immigration Rules by reference  to  the  Claimant's  'suitability'  for
    leave to remain but simply on the period  of  the  calculation  of  the
    twenty years in the UK.

11.  It seems to me that there was evidence to show, albeit not  perhaps  as
    cogently as the Secretary of State would wish, that  the  Claimant  has
    been here for over twenty years and there was no challenge  effectively
    to evidence given by the witnesses relating to that  calculation:  This
    may have been because the issue was not directly  the  subject  of  the
    appeal albeit relevant  to  Article  8  considerations.   Nevertheless,
    ultimately the basis on which the case was  put  was  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances to justify looking at Article 8 ECHR  on  the
    basis that the Claimant had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  over  20
    years, with or without fault makes no difference in  principle  to  the
    point.  In calculating the twenty years it  would  of  course  make  no
    difference whether his presence was lawful  or  unlawful  and  to  that
    extent, were I to have determined  the  matter  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, the likelihood is that the Claimant had established that he  was
    in and remained in the United Kingdom, certainly by the late 1980s.

12.  It therefore seems to me that that period  of  time  the  Claimant  has
    been in the United Kingdom, which is beyond the issue of  private  life
    rights, constitutes an exceptional and compelling  reason  to  consider
    Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

13.  I do not seek to go behind the Judge's adverse decision on  the  twenty
    year period under the Immigration Rules. I do  take  into  account  the
    evidence now provided to me of the period  of  time  the  Claimant  has
    claimed to be in the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  to  which  third
    parties, admittedly not completely disinterested, have  supported  that
    claim.  The Claimant has lived with Eileen Buckman for many a year  and
    he plainly forms part of her private life as much as she does  of  his.
    In addition, the Claimant has been here for many years, on the  view  I
    have taken something like 30 years.  There is no suggestion   he  might
    have left the UK and returned, however unlikely,   during  that  period
    but nevertheless the fact is  he  has  sought  to  adduce  evidence  to
    discharge the burden of establishing upon a  balance  of  probabilities
    that he  has been in the UK for not less than 30 years.

14.  I consider that the Claimant  has  by  reason  of  longevity  exercised
    private life rights in the UK.  It is extremely difficult to  tell  how
    he has embedded into society in the  UK  because  there  is  so  little
    evidence of it.  He is not a churchgoer  or  participant  in  community
    activities and there is  no  general  evidence  to  indicate  what  his
    private life really consists  of.   When  asked  by  Mr  Whitwell,  the
    Claimant was really unable to  articulate  it,  save  to  rely  on  his
    presence in the United Kingdom for a substantial period  of  time,  his
    private life and that he has grown up in the UK. He said  he  has  many
    friends in the UK, he  has  undergone  some  college  education  in  IT
    studies back in 2000 and has been living privately  and  'lawfully'  in
    the United Kingdom with his cousin, Eileen Buckman. These matters  were
    really the full extent of the evidence, other than  the  fact  that  he
    likes it in the United  Kingdom,  has  no  connections  with  Ghana  or
    Liberia and no one to provide him with any support or family network on
    a return to Ghana or Liberia.

15.   I accept Mr Ash's evidence of knowing the Claimant,  since  about  the
    time they met in 1992. I have nothing to suggest the Claimant  departed
    the United Kingdom. I accept the Claimant and Miss  Buckman's  evidence
    as reasonably reliable.

16.  The issue is raised with the periods of  time  the  Claimant  has  been
    seeking to rectify his status in the United Kingdom which are  said  to
    be delays for which he was not responsible. It seems  to  me  that  the
    only material delay out of the whole period that I have  considered  is
    during the consideration of his application for leave to remain,  which
    got treated as part of the legacy cases, between  2008  and  2015.  The
    fact was that there were many tens of thousands of cases that  came  to
    be dealt with under the legacy provisions.  In  the  circumstances  the
    Claimant has to this extent benefited from the lengthy  period  in  the
    United Kingdom to resolve his claim, albeit he has been unable to  work
    for many years as a result of restrictions upon doing so.

17.    I bear in mind that the Claimant has not been to Ghana  as  an  adult
    and he left there for Liberia as a child aged 9 or  so.   It  does  not
    seem likely to me he will have any contacts whatsoever in Ghana  likely
    to play any part in support of a return there.  I accept the Claimant's
    evidence that he has no meaningful familial connections with  Ghana  to
    whom he can return.  I also  accept  that  those  who  have  given  him
    intermittent financial help,  particularly  Miss  Buckman,  by  way  of
    effectively pocket money and Mr Ash for odd jobs done by  the  Claimant
    or Miss Grainne Forson for babysitting  or  support,  are  unlikely  to
    translate into sufficient funds in future to enable him to  accommodate
    and maintain himself on a return to Ghana.  The circumstances are  such
    that, at the age he is, with no real recent history of working,  he  is
    going to find it difficult to  obtain  reasonably  paid  employment  in
    Ghana even  by that country's standards: The reality  is  that  he  has
    nothing to return to.

18.    In the circumstances, I bear in mind  his  'suitability'  is  not  in
    issue, he has the ability to work, the English Language skills to  find
    employment and reasonable physical health. I can not  find  any  reason
    why he should be a burden on the UK taxpayers. I do not give weight  to
    the exercise of private life whilst his status has been precarious  and
    or unlawful. I find the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    controls is an important issue to which I give  substantial  weight.  I
    find, weighing all these matters up, perhaps also  the  length  of  the
    time the Claimant has, as a fact, been in  the  United  Kingdom  albeit
    without status, shows that  in  this  case  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was disproportionate.

19.  I have applied Section 117A-B of the NIAA 2002 in reaching the  view  I
    have above on proportionality. As  above  in  so  doing  I  have  fully
    considered the issues of the Claimant's unlawful presence in the United
    Kingdom, his English language abilities, his  skills,  his  ability  to
    work and support himself which he could do in the past.  I have nothing
    to indicate that he is not in  good  health  and  would  not  be  in  a
    position to support himself again.

DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision does not stand.  The following decision  is
substituted: the Claimant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity direction was sought.


FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal on the basis  of  information  not  before  the
Respondent a fee award is not appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 10 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

