
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 December 2017                        |On 24 January 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  EJATU [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Akohene, instructed by Afrifa and Partners
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Omotosho  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 10 November 2014 allowed the appellant's appeal  against
    a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  her  a  derivative
    residence card.  Although the  Secretary  of  State  is  the  appellant
    before me I will for ease of reference refer to her as  the  respondent
    as she was the respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I  will  refer
    to Ejatu [J] as the appellant as she was the appellant  in  the  First-
    tier.

2.   The appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge Omotosho  after  a  hearing
    on 5 December 2014.  The Secretary of State appealed that decision  but
    that decision was upheld by Deputy Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  Harris
    who in a determination promulgated on 3 September 2015 found that there
    was no error of  law  in  the  decision  of  Judge  Omotosho.   Further
    representations were then made by the Secretary  of  State  by  letter,
    effectively making an application for permission to appeal to the Court
    of Appeal.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede considered the application made
    and decided that the appropriate course of action was to set aside  the
    decision of Judge Harris.  She  directed  that  unless  there  was  any
    objection to that course of action within 14 days she would  set  aside
    Judge Harris's decision.  There being no objection she  set  aside  his
    determination.  In these circumstances the appeal comes before me as an
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of Judge Omotosho.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone  born  on  [  ]  1978.   She
    applied for a derivative residence card on  31  December  2013  on  the
    basis that she was the primary carer of her sons, [RJK] and [RAK]  whom
    she had had with her partner, [JK]. Her sons  are,  like  her  partner,
    British citizens.  The application for leave to remain was on the basis
    that she was a primary carer under Regulation 15A(7) of the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The Regulation read as follows:-

         "15A.  Derivative right of residence


         (1)  A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies
             the criterion at paragraphs (2), (3),  (4a)  or  (5)  of  this
             Regulation is entitled to a derivative right of  residence  in
             the United Kingdom for as long as  P  satisfied  the  relevant
             criteria.


         (2)  P satisfies the criterion in this paragraph if -


             (a)  P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the  relevant
                  EEA national"); and


             (b)  the relevant EEA national -


                  (i)  is under the age of 18;


                  (ii)  is  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                      sufficient person; and


                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                      if P were required to leave.


         (3)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -


             (a)  P is the child of an  EEA  national  ("the  EEA  national
                  parent");
             ...


         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -


             (a)  P is  the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen  ("the
                  relevant British citizen");


             (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; and


             (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
                  the UK or in another EEA  state  if  P  were  required  to
                  leave.
             ...


         (7)  P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if


             (a)  P is a direct  relative  or  a  legal  guardian  of  that
                  person; and


             (b)  P -


                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                      person's care; or


                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                      care with one other  person  who  is  not  an  exempt
                      person."


4.   The following facts  are  accepted.   The  appellant's  partner  is  an
    exempt person as he is a British citizen.  The children are  under  the
    age of 18, the appellant does not work but looks after the children  at
    home and they are supported by her partner who works.

5.   The Secretary of State  in  the  letter  of  refusal  stated  that  the
    appellant had not provided evidence as to why the children's father was
    not in a position to care for them if she  were  forced  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and that there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that
    the British citizen children "... would be  unable  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom/EEA if you were forced to leave".  It  was  pointed  out
    that any unwillingness to assume care  or  responsibility  was  not  by
    itself sufficient for the claimed primary carer to assert that  another
    direct relative  or  guardian  was  unable  to  care  for  the  British
    children.  The letter went on to say:-

         "Furthermore to be considered the primary carer we would expect you
         to provide evidence to show that the  children  live  with  you  or
         spend the majority of their time with you, that you make the day to
         day decisions in regard to the children's health, education etc and
         that you are financially responsible for the children."


6.   It was noted that the appellant had provided a letter from her  partner
    where it was stated that she was the main carer for the children as she
    only worked part-time and he worked full-time -  sometimes  between  48
    and 60 hours a week - and sometimes worked nights.  He also claimed  to
    be a student.  The letter stated that:-

         "Notwithstanding the information regarding  [JK]'s  employment  and
         studying, it  is  his  choice  to  undertake  such  employment  and
         studying, it  is  his  choice  to  undertake  such  employment  and
         studying and it  does  not  negate  his  responsibilities  for  the
         children or the fact that you share  the  responsibility  for  your
         children's care with an exempt person."


7.   It was pointed out in the letter of refusal that  the  appellant  might
    wish to make an Article 8 application but in any event her  application
    was refused under the provisions  of  Regulation  15A(4A)(a)  and  (c),
    15A(7)(b) and 18A of the Regulations.

8.   Judge Omotosho, in determining the appeal referred to the  decision  in
    Zambrano (European citizen) [2011] EUECJ-C-34/09  and  noted  that  the
    right of residence was not a free movement right but was  a  derivative
    right.  She heard evidence from the appellant who referred  briefly  to
    her family life and those  of  her  children  and  who  said  that  she
    disagreed with the fact that the children could remain in Britain to be
    cared for by their father.  In paragraphs 23 onwards Judge Omotosho set
    out her findings.  She placed weight on the fact that  the  appellant's
    partner was in full-time employment and went on to say:-

         "I have no reason to doubt  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  is
         essentially the primary  carer  for  both  [RJK]  and  [RAK].   The
         children are very young, ages 2 and 3 years and  clearly  dependent
         on their  mother  for  care  and  support.   At  the  time  of  the
         application, the youngest child was still breastfeeding."


9.   She said that an appellant must satisfy the  provisions  of  Regulation
    15A(7).  In paragraph 29 she stated:

          "29.    Whilst I have concluded above that because [JK]  is  named
             as the  children's  father  he  can  be  regarded  as  sharing
             parental responsibility, however,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has primary responsibility for the care of their two
             children.  The parties are not married and although they  live
             in the same household, I am satisfied  that  [JK]  works  full
             time and study part-time;  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the
             evidence that he is not available nor has he  been  personally
             responsible for the care of the children.  When [JK]  goes  to
             work or attend his studies, it is the appellant who cares  for
             the children on a day to day basis.


         30.  I note that there is no family court order in favour  of  [JK]
             in respect of the children and there is nothing preventing him
             from simply walking away from the relationship  and  from  the
             children.  I find that the appellant as the  mother  of  these
             British citizen children is their primary carer  and  as  such
             she has primary responsibility for the care of her children as
             required under Regulation 15A(7)(b)(i).


         31.  In light of my  findings,  I  do  not  need  to  consider  the
             alternative proposition under Regulation  15A(7)(b)(ii),  i.e.
             where responsibility is shared or the fact  that  [JK]  is  an
             exempt person under the Regulations."


10.  In the following paragraphs Judge Omotosho said she took  into  account
    the family circumstances noting that she had found that  the  appellant
    was primarily responsible for the care  of  her  children  while  their
    father went to work and studied.  She said that the appellant's partner
    "has not taken care of the children and would find it difficult  to  do
    so if the appellant is asked to leave".  She added:-

         "32. ... Whilst I acknowledge that  their  father  could  stop  his
             studies or work to concentrate on the care of his children  or
             seek services to help him with their care, however in my  view
             this would not necessarily be  desirable  and  could  be  very
             expensive bearing in mind [JK]'s limited income.  In addition,
             I note the concern of the appellant and [JK] about  the  Ebola
             crisis in Sierra Leone and the concern  for  the  children  if
             they were to go with their  mother.   The  respondent  in  the
             decision letter had not properly considered the best  interest
             of the  children  and  had  simply  inferred  shared  parental
             responsibility and equated this  with  primary  responsibility
             without considering the impact of removal of a mother from the
             care of very young children.


         33.  I find that although the children are not  required  to  leave
             the UK with their mother, I however conclude in light  of  all
             the evidence and  in  this  particular  circumstance  that  in
             reality these British Citizen  children  would  be  unable  to
             reside or remain in the United Kingdom with  their  father  if
             their mother was required to leave.  I am  satisfied  that  it
             would not be in the children's best interest for there to be a
             family split involving either the mother or the father."


    She therefore allowed the appeal.


11.  The Secretary of State appealed, arguing  that  the  judge  had  placed
    weight on there being no family court order in favour of [JK] and there
    was  nothing  preventing  him  from  simply  walking  away   from   the
    relationship and from the children.  It was stated that the  fact  that
    there was no family court order and there was nothing to  prevent  [JK]
    walking away from the relationship was not a sound reason to  find  the
    appellant to be the primary carer as any unwillingness to  assume  care
    and responsibility was not by itself sufficient for the claimed primary
    carer to assert that another direct relative, in this case the  father,
    was unable to care for the children.  It was pointed out  that  one  of
    the conditions associated being regarded as primary carer is  financial
    responsibility and in this case the father had responsibility  for  the
    children.  Moreover, the father was  an  exempt  person.   It  was  not
    relevant that the father might find it  difficult  to  look  after  the
    children as it was acknowledged that the father could stop his  studies
    or work to concentrate on the care of his children or seek services  to
    help him with care.  It was stated that it was a matter of  choice  and
    agreement between parents when it came to the care  of,  and  provision
    for their children, in this case the father  might  initially  find  it
    difficult to adapt to the  change,  but  both  physical  and  financial
    support would be available to him.  It was stated that the  latter  was
    in the form of tax credits if he were to apply and qualify and  it  was
    submitted that whilst it would not  necessarily  be  desirable  as  the
    judge states in paragraph 32 of the determination, the  children  would
    still be able to reside in the United Kingdom  if  the  appellant  were
    required to leave.  It was on that basis that permission  was  granted.
    Judge  Harris  however,  when  considering  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, found that Judge Omotosho had  made  no  error  of  law.   He
    appeared to consider that the appellant had primary responsibility  for
    the children's care and that therefore the requirements of Regulation 7
    were met.

12.   His  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    challenged by the respondent in the  letter  dated  15  September  2015
    which stood as an application to the Court of Appeal.   It  was  argued
    that Judge Harris had misdirected himself in law in his application  of
    the principles of Zambrano and  reference  was  made  to  the  Tribunal
    decision in MA & SM (Zambrano: EU children outside the EU) Iran  [2013]
    UKUT 380 in which the Upper Tribunal had written  in  paragraph  41(ii)
    that:-

         "Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20  and  21
         of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged where the EU
         citizen is not compelled to leave."

     The letter also referred to paragraph 56  of  MA  &  SM  where  it  was
    stated:-

         "The mere fact that the sponsor cannot be as economically active as
         he would wish, because of his care responsibilities to JM  and  FM,
         is not sufficient to support a conclusion that JM and FM  would  be
         denied the genuine enjoyment of their EU  citizenship  rights,  nor
         would this be the case even if the sponsor were  required  to  stop
         working altogether."

13.  It was stated that that finding had  been  affirmed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Sanneh & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 49 where it  was  found  that
    the Zambrano principle did not preclude  the  removal  of  the  primary
    carer even if that would "necessarily diminish  the  quality  of  their
    lives".

14.  It was submitted that if the children were left in the  care  of  their
    father they would not be left without the resources necessary for  them
    to live within the European Union.

15.  As I have said Judge Kebede set aside the  decision  of  Judge  Harris.
    At the hearing before me Mr Bramble referred to the terms of Regulation
    15A and stated that it was  clear  from  relevant  case  law  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements  of  Regulation  15A.   It  was
    clear that Judge Omotosho ignored the fact  that  [JK]  was  an  exempt
    person and therefore could care for  the  children  -  it  was  not  in
    dispute that he was their father.  He took  me  through  the  terms  of
    paragraph 15A arguing that clearly  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements therein.  In reply Mr Akohene argued that it was  accepted
    that the  appellant  was  the  primary  carer  as  opposed  to  sharing
    responsibility and that the judge had been  correct  to  focus  on  the
    facts as they actually were.  The application of the Regulations should
    not be so rigid as to mean that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    remain.  He emphasised that the reality was that the children had  been
    brought up by their mother and had an emotional attachment to  her  and
    that to sever that would lead to emotional damage.  He stated that  the
    cases in MA and  SM  and  Sanneh  were  fact-specific  and  that  Judge
    Omotosho had been correct to state that there was no alternative  other
    than that the appellant should look after the  children  and  therefore
    she should not be required to leave.

Discussion

16.  Regulation 15A is clear.  At (4) it  states  that  "P  is  the  primary
    carer of a person meeting the criteria" that is that the  child  is  an
    EEA national and under the age of 18 and at 4(a) it stated that P would
    satisfy the criteria if she  was  the  primary  carer  of  the  British
    citizen, was residing in the United Kingdom and  the  relevant  citizen
    would be unable to reside in another EEA state.  The reality is that at
    (7) the term primary carer is defined as a  direct  relative  or  legal
    guardian of the person for whom care  is  being  provided  and  is  the
    person's primary  responsibility  for  that  person's  care  or  shares
    equally the responsibility for that person's care with one other person
    who is not an exempt person.  At (7)(a) it states:-

         "7(a)    Where P is to be regarded as a primary  carer  of  another
             person by virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in
             paragraphs (2)(b)(ii), (4)(b) and  (4)(a)  and  (c)  shall  be
             considered on the basis that both P and the person  with  whom
             care responsibility is shared be required to leave the  United
             Kingdom."

17.  That is clearly not the case here.  Indeed  the  reality  is  there  is
    simply nothing to show that the appellant is the primary carer in terms
    of the law.  While it may be that daily care while [JK] is  working  is
    the responsibility of the  appellant  the  reality  is  that  there  is
    nothing to indicate that [JK] does not  play  a  full  role  in  making
    decisions for the children or indeed spends time with them when  he  is
    not working and  of  course  the  reality  is  that  he  has  financial
    responsibility for children.  It is hypothetical  to  suggest  that  he
    could merely walk away.  That is not the fact as it stands.  This is  a
    couple  who  live  together  and  bring  up  their  children  together.
    Moreover, although clearly  there  is  shared  responsibility  for  the
    children, [JK] is an exempt person under the provisions  of  Regulation
    7(b)(ii).  The fact that  they  share  responsibility  means  that  the
    appellant cannot be considered as the primary carer of the children.

18.  I take note of the case law set out in MA & SM and in Salleh &  Others.
     The conclusions of Judge Omotosho are clearly wrong and are  not  made
    in consideration of the exact  terms  of  the  Regulations.   For  that
    reason I set aside her decision.

19.  Having set aside the decision of Judge Omotosho for the  reasons  which
    I have given above I find that the appellant  has  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon her and that she does not qualify for a derivative
    right of residence under Regulation 15(a) and I therefore  dismiss  his
    appeal.

20.  I would point out that  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  the  letter  of
    refusal made it clear to the appellant that she would be able to make a
    human rights application.  Such  an  application  would  of  course  be
    strengthened by the terms of Section 117(b)(6)  of  the  2002  Act.   I
    consider that that would be the appropriate course of  action  -  there
    has not been a decision to remove the application but she  should  take
    steps to regularise her position before such a decision is made.

Notice of Decision

21.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.

22.  I remake the decision and dismiss  her  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.  No rights under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  were
    raised in the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


