
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/20748/2015
                                                               IA/20753/2015
                                                               IA/20757/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2016                |On 10 October 2016                |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMED AHMEDUZZAMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                               BUHAIRA KHANOM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                    [A H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                             Third Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Salim, of Thamina Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances and evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge E B Grant promulgated on 21 March 2016, which  dismissed  the
Appellants' appeals.

Background


3. The Second Appellant is the First Appellant's wife. The  Third  appellant
is their son. The  First  Appellant  was  born  on  31/12/1977.  The  Second
Appellant  was  born  on  16/12/1990.  The  Third  appellant  was  born   on
17/03/2010. All three appellants are nationals of Bangladesh.


4. The second and third appellants' appeals are entirely  dependent  on  the
first appellant's appeal. The first appellant entered the UK  as  a  Tier  4
(general) Student with leave valid from 6 September 2009  until  31  January
2012. In June 2012 the first appellant was granted  leave  to  remain  as  a
Tier 4 (General) Student until 31 May 2014.


5. On 21 February 2015 the First Appellant applied for leave to remain as  a
Tier 2 migrant, as a Minister of Religion.


6.  On  20  May  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellants'
applications.


The Judge's Decision

7. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge E B Grant ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision.

8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 15 August  2016  Judge  Heynes  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3.   Though the application has not raised this point, it is arguable
      that the finding of the Judge that the appellant's  grasp  of  English
      was too poor to have enabled him to have studied for an  MBA  suggests
      that the qualification was not legitimately obtained but this does not
      appear to have been put  to  the  appellant.  Moreover,  there  is  no
      finding as to whether a supplementary course is capable of  supporting
      a Tier 2 application.


      4.    An arguable error of law is disclosed by the application."


The Hearing

9. (a) For the appellant, Mr Salim moved the grounds of appeal. He  produced
a copy of the version of paragraph 245HD  of  the  immigration  rules  which
applied at the date of decision together with a  copy  of  the  respondent's
guidance upon which he placed reliance. He told me that  the  Judge's  brief
decision does not contain a record of the evidence led nor analysis of  that
evidence, which, he told me, is an error of law. He told  me  that  the  two
issues which are influential in  the  Judge's  decision  are  a  refusal  to
accept that the MBA certificate produced  by  the  first  appellant  can  be
relied on, coupled with the  Judge's  finding  that  the  first  appellant's
command of the English language is poor. Those two factors (I am told)  were
not put to the appellant, so that the appellant had  been  deprived  of  the
opportunity to address the determinative issues.

(b)  Mr  Salim  took  me  through  the  terms  of  paragraph  245HD  of  the
immigration rules and told me that, on the  evidence  presented,  the  Judge
should have found that the requirements of the rules are fulfilled. He  told
me that in any event it is not  clear  from  reading  the  Judge's  decision
which immigration rules the Judge was considering. He told me that the  Tier
2 rules and guidance do not prohibit the pursuit of a  supplementary  course
of study, so that the Judge's analysis of the evidence  is  flawed  and  her
exclusion of consideration  of  the  MBA  awarded  to  the  appellant  is  a
material error of law.

(c) Mr Salim urged me to set the Judge's decision aside  and  substitute  my
own decision allowing the appellant's appeal.

10. (a) For the respondent, Mr Melvin told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise. He relied on  the  terms  of  the
respondent's rule 24 note, and told me that the Judge's  decision  sets  out
clear and sustainable findings which were well within the range of  findings
available to the Judge on the evidence produced.

(b) Mr Melvin  told  me  that  it  is  obvious  that  the  Judge  considered
paragraph 245HD(d) of the rules but found that subparagraph's (ii)  (iii)  &
(iv) cannot be met. He told me that the decision makes  it  clear  that  the
Judge has addressed the reasons for refusal and, with  the  benefit  of  the
oral evidence, has reached a decision well within  the  range  of  decisions
available to the Judge. He told me that the MBA relied on by  the  appellant
is not acceptable as evidence in a tier 4 application. By analogy it  cannot
be accepted in a tier 2 application. He urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and
allow the decision to stand.

ANALYSIS

11. The respondent's decision dated 20 May 2015 is that the first  appellant
cannot meet the requirements of  paragraph  245  HD(d)  of  the  immigration
rules.  At  [7]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  correctly   summarises   the
respondent's position, which is  that  the  MBA  qualification  from  Anglia
Ruskin University produced by the first appellant is not acceptable  because
the appellant's grant of leave  to  remain  as  a  tier  4  student  migrant
prohibited study at any institution other than Churchill College,  where  he
was studying full-time for a diploma.

12. At [8] of the decision  the  judge  correctly  records  the  appellants'
argument that the MBA qualification should  be  considered  because  tier  4
guidance  indicates  that  no  extra  permission  is  needed  to   undertake
supplementary courses of study. At [7] &  [8]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
concisely sets out the area of dispute and the arguments for both parties.

13. Paragraph 245HD(d)(iv) says

      'To qualify for leave to remain as a tier 2 (general) migrant, Tier  2
      (minister of religion) migrant or Tier 2 (sportsperson) migrant  under
      this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements listed  below.  The
      applicant meets these requirements, leave to remain will  be  granted.
      If the applicant does not meet  these  requirements,  the  application
      will be refused.


           (d)   an applicant under the provisions in  (b)(ii)  above  must
           meet the following requirements...


              (vi)     the applicant's periods of UK study and/or  research
              towards the course in (i) must have been undertaken whilst he
              had entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain in the
              UK and that was not subject  to  restriction  preventing  him
              from undertaking that course of study and/or research.'

14. It is beyond dispute that the appellant was granted leave to  remain  in
the  UK  to  study  at  London  Churchill  College,  not  an  Anglia  Ruskin
University. The MBA course  pursued  at  Anglia  Ruskin  University  was  an
online course  which  did  not  require  attendance  at  classes.  Mr  Salim
referred to the Home Office  tier  4  points-based  system  policy  guidance
version 7/11. The policy guidance which is relevant to this case was  issued
on November 2014 (not in July 2011) and contains the following.

      'Can I do extra studies whilst in the UK?


      338.


      You are allowed to do a supplementary course, for example, an  evening
      class, as well as your main course of study. This supplementary course
      can be in any subject, and does


      not have to relate to your main course  of  study.  You  do  not  need
      permission from us to undertake a supplementary course and you are not
      required to tell your Tier 4 sponsor.


      However, you must make sure that your supplementary course does not in
      any way hinder your progress on your main course of studies.'

15. The Judge correctly identifies that  the  determinative  issue  in  this
case is whether or not the MBA qualification  obtained  from  Anglia  Ruskin
University  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  245  HD  (d)   of   the
immigration rules. For the reasons given in [9] of the decision,  the  Judge
finds that the MBA is not a supplementary course of study, and so  does  not
fall within the tier 4 guidance given by the respondent.

16. That is a finding  which  was  reasonably  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
evidence presented. It would have been helpful if the Judge had  then  added
another sentenced to [9] or [10] of the  decision  to  spell  out  that  her
finding is that the appellant did  not  have  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
allowing him to undertake the MBA course of study.

17. It is not disputed that the grant of leave to remain  in  the  UK  is  a
grant of leave to allow the appellant to pursue a separate course  of  study
at diploma level at London Churchill College, and that the  grant  of  leave
to remain carried conditions preventing study at any institution other  than
London Churchill. The grant of leave to  remain  was  therefore  subject  to
restriction envisaged by paragraph 245 HD(d) (iv) of the immigration rules.

18. The  Judge's  conclusion  was  therefore  correct.  As  I  have  already
indicated it would  have  been  helpful  if  the  Judge  had  made  explicit
reference to paragraph  245  HD(d)(iv)  of  the  immigration  rules,  but  a
failure to do so is not a material error of law because it does  not  affect
the decision, and, as I have indicated,  the  decision  is  correct  on  the
evidence presented to the first-tier.

19. The grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  make  reference  to  an
article 8 ECHR argument,  and  section  55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  &
Immigration Act 2009. Permission to appeal was not granted to advance  those
arguments and, in any event, no challenge is taken to [11]  of  the  Judge's
decision where the Judge records

      "Article 8 has not been raised in the grounds of appeal  and  was  not
      argued before the Tribunal."

20. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

21. I therefore find that although brief the decision  is  adequate  because
it focuses on the central area of dispute, there is no misdirection of  law,
and the Judge's fact-finding exercise is sufficient. The decision  does  not
contain a material error of law.

22. As the decision does not contain a material error of law stands  in  the
appeal is dismissed.

CONCLUSION

23.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

24.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 6
October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

