
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                           Appeal  Number:
IA/20826/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 1st April 2016                           On 20th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                MISS P. F. A.
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Singer (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge S. P. J. Buchanan, promulgated on the 17th August 2015,
      in which he dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  and  her  three
      dependent children on human rights grounds, both within and outside of
      the Immigration Rules.

   2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge erred in not giving the necessary  weight  to  the  evidence  of
      family life produced  by  the  Appellant.   It  was  argued  that  the
      Appellant had been able to show that the children's  father  continued
      to play an important role in their lives and that  he  had  written  a
      letter of support and provided a witness statement.  It is argued that
      the totality of the evidence in respect of the children's father being
      involved in their lives was not considered by the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge.  Within the second ground of  appeal  it  is  argued  that  the
      Appellant's private  life  in  the  UK  ought  to  be  recognised  and
      protected and that the Tribunal was in error to use  against  her  the
      fact that she received support from third  parties,  because  she  was
      unable to work in the UK.  Within the third ground  of  appeal  it  is
      argued that the Tribunal failed to have regard and  did  not  properly
      consider the best interests of her children when considering the  case
      under the Immigration Rules.

   3. In granting permission to appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
      found that "the grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit
      at paragraph (c) that the Judge erred in law  in  that  he  failed  to
      consider  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's   children   when
      considering the Article 8 case  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules".
      Judge Brunnen found that this was  arguable.   He  did  not,  however,
      consider that there was any merit in the remainder of the  Grounds  of
      Appeal and did not grant permission in respect of the other grounds of
      appeal.

   4. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 reply dated the 22nd February 2016, it
      was  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself
      appropriately and did discharge the burden regarding Section 55 of the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to  fully  consider  the
      best interests of the  children  and  it  is  argued  that  the  Judge
      referred to the best interests of the children consistently throughout
      the determination.

   5. In his oral submissions, Mr Singer relied upon the  Skeleton  Argument
      that he had submitted, and on the Grounds of Appeal.  He  argued  that
      there was a material error in that the Judge had  not  discharged  his
      duties under Section 55 and had not directed  himself  in  respect  of
      Section 55 nor considered it.   He  argued  that  the  Judge  had  not
      mentioned the best interests of the children or how this was a primary
      consideration, nor had he made any findings in respect of  their  best
      interests nor balance these against the legitimate aim  sought  to  be
      achieved.

   6. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Ms Everett relied upon
      the Rule 24 reply.  However, she conceded that she was unable to point
      to anywhere within the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buchanan
      where he had referred to Section 55  or  the  best  interests  of  the
      children.   Nor  was  she  able  to  point  to  anywhere  within   the
      determination where the  best  interests  of  the  children  had  been
      specifically dealt with.  She agreed that this was something that  the
      Judge had to specifically consider and further agreed that it would be
      a material error on the part of  the  Judge  not  to  have  considered
      Section 55 and the best interests of the children in  determining  the
      Article 8 claim.  She further agreed that  if  there  was  a  material
      error in this regard, the matter should be remitted back to the First-
      tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge other than Judge Buchanan.

   7. The Appellant, Miss P. F.  A.,  indicated  that  if  the  matter  were
      remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  rehearing,  she  would
      now wish for there to be an oral hearing at which she wanted  to  give
      evidence rather than the matter being listed again for a paper hearing
      and agreed that she was willing to pay the additional fee required  in
      respect thereof.  She asked that the  matter  be  listed  for  a  Case
      Management Review hearing in order that directions be given.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
      provides that in relation, among other things, to immigration,  asylum
      and nationality, the Secretary of State  must  make  arrangements  for
      ensuring that those functions "are discharged  having  regard  to  the
      need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are  in  the
      United Kingdom".

   9. As was stated  by  Lady  Hale  in  the  case  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)
      (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Respondent)
      [2011] UKSC 4 "any decision which is taken without  having  regard  to
      the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved
      will not be 'in accordance with the law' for the purposes  of  Article
      8(2)".  Lady Hale also specifically found that  the  consideration  of
      the best interests  of  the  children  was  a  primary  consideration,
      although not either "the  primary  consideration"  or  "the  paramount
      consideration".  It is well-established within the case law that First-
      tier Tribunal Judges do have to consider the  best  interests  of  the
      children for the purposes of Section 55, and that this does have to be
      a primary consideration, when taking decisions that have an effect  on
      children who are in the UK.  As was properly conceded by Ms Everett on
      behalf of the Respondent, First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan was under
      a duty to consider the best interests of the children for the purposes
      of Section 55, in determining the Appellant's appeal.

  10. Although it was suggested within the Rule 24 reply that the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had referred to the  best  interests  of  the  children
      consistently and throughout the determination between [6.1] and [7.3],
      in fact when one reads the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S. P.
      J. Buchanan, nowhere within that decision does he refer to Section  55
      of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   Nor  does  he
      make any reference to Article 3(1) of the UNCRC in respect of the best
      interests of the children being a primary consideration.  Nor does the
      Judge make any findings regarding the best interests of the  children,
      and nor does he specifically state that those  best  interests  are  a
      primary consideration when considering the human rights aspect of  the
      appeal.

  11. I therefore do find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  S.
      P. J. Buchanan does contain a material error of law,  in  that  it  is
      clear that he has failed to take account of the best interests of  the
      children as being a primary consideration for the purposes of  Section
      55 when considering the human rights claim.  The  decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge S. P. J. Buchanan is therefore set  aside  in  its
      entirety and the matter is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for rehearing de novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan.

  12. As the Appellant indicated that she now wished to give  oral  evidence
      at any rehearing, rather than having  the  case  heard  again  on  the
      papers, I direct that the matter  is  listed  for  a  Case  Management
      Review  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in   order   that
      directions can be  given  including  directions  for  payment  of  the
      appropriate fee and directions regarding further evidence and  listing
      the matter for an oral hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan does contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  de  novo
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Buchanan;

The matter is to be listed for a Case Management Review hearing  before  the
First-tier Tribunal given the Appellant's indication that she now wishes  to
give oral evidence at any rehearing;

Given that the appeal in this case does involve children, unless  and  until
a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the Appellant and  her  children  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This Order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
Order could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty                             Dated
3rd April 2016
