
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20952/2015
                                                               IA/20956/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 November 2016                       |On 11 May 2017                 |
|Prepared 15 November 2016                 |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     MYK
                                     Ank
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For the  Appellants:     Mr  A  Otchie,  Counsel  instructed  by  Malik  Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The First Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of  birth  [  ]  1972
    and the Second Appellant, his wife, a national  of  Pakistan,  date  of
    birth [ ] 1977, appealed against the  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, dated 30 April 2015, to refuse applications made on 11  November
    2014 for leave to remain on the basis of family and private life.

2.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju who, on  25
    January 2016, allowed their appeals with reference to Article  8  ECHR.
    Permission was given  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  challenge  the
    decisions  which  also  at  that  stage  included  that  of  a  further
    Appellant, [AK], the daughter of the First and Second Appellants.   She
    does not feature directly as  an  Appellant  in  this  appeal  but  she
    remains a dependant of the First and Second Appellants,  along  with  a
    further child, [RK], born in the United Kingdom on 20 December 2010 but
    a Pakistan national.

3.   The Respondent considered the position  of  the  Appellants  and  their
    children with reference to the Immigration Rules (the  Rules).   It  is
    accepted  that  the  First  and  Second  Appellants  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) because they do  not
    meet the eligibility requirements either  as  their  husband  and  wife
    status, the period of time they have been in the United Kingdom and the
    claim of very significant obstacles to return.

4.   The skeleton argument and submissions made on behalf of and in  respect
    of [AK] make a simple factual error.  First, her date of birth is  [  ]
    2004 and secondly, she entered the United Kingdom on 18  October  2008.
    Her application to remain was made on 11 November 2014.   Therefore  at
    the date of application she had not been in the  United  Kingdom  seven
    years immediately preceding the date of application.  The  position  is
    that [RK] does not come within the provisions of Paragraph 276ADE(1) of
    the Rules because she had only lived, at the date of application,  some
    four years and four months in the United Kingdom and therefore did  not
    meet the seven years' continuous period required.

5.   In respect of both [AK] and [RK], it was  argued  that  there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to return.

6.   The  position  was  therefore  that  the  only  issues  were  the  best
    interests of the children and whether or not there  were  circumstances
    that warranted the consideration of Article 8  ECHR,  bearing  in  mind
    that this was not a deportation case.

7.   Mr Walker did not specifically argue that Article 8 could not  fall  to
    be considered but rather the merits of the case did not  give  rise  to
    that outcome.

8.   It was also not argued that either the First or the Second  Appellants'
    personal circumstances in being in the UK were precarious circumstances
    where their immigration status was not settled gave rise to any general
    basis to remain on their merits.  It was also argued that both of  them
    had come to the United Kingdom from Pakistan at  ages  when  they  were
    thoroughly embedded in cultural and social ties  in  Pakistan  and,  as
    Urdu speakers, could communicate on return.  Rather the  way  the  case
    was presented was  that,  particularly  by  reference  to  [AK],  their
    mistakes, overstaying in the United Kingdom and lack of status  or  the
    presence of precarious status, should not  be  held  against  the  best
    interests and future and development of [AK] and [RK].

9.   As a generality it was said that the First and Second  Appellants  were
    originally  from  Kashmir,  although  it  appeared  that   the   Second
    Appellant's family is still  based  there  and  the  First  Appellant's
    family is based in Rawalpindi.

10.  The position therefore is that the factual circumstances are  that  the
    two children are in mainstream education in the United  Kingdom  and  I
    first consider them by reference to Section 55 BCIA  2009  where  their
    best interests lie.

11.  The children's best interests, if it is simply a choice  between  which
    education system and where they are presently, as  opposed  to  change,
    lie in remaining in the United Kingdom, certainly so  far  as  [AK]  is
    concerned.  She  has  now  spent  a  significant  number  of  years  in
    education in the United Kingdom and is  inevitably  settled  here  with
    friends and acquaintances. Her written representation  produced  to  me
    shows just how much she enjoys her life in the United Kingdom.

12.  In effect neither she nor [RK]  know  any  different.   In  considering
    this matter a starting point in this case is the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sethi, promulgated on 12 March 2014, who  considered  an
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 25 October 2013  to  refuse
    to grant the First and Second  Appellants  and  [AK]  leave  to  remain
    following the refusals of respective human rights claims.

13.  The judge found that the children [AK]  and  [RK]  were  in  education,
    that the First and Second Appellants'  business  was  being  developed,
    they were self-sufficient and feared  the  disruption  that  return  to
    Pakistan would cause, particularly to the detriment  of  the  children,
    their education and future opportunities.  It was acknowledged that the
    First Appellant had family members in  Pakistan  and  that  the  Second
    Appellant had remaining family members in Pakistan although possibly in
    Kashmir.   It  was  also  indicated  that  the  Second  Appellant   was
    particularly concerned because she had been a teacher and therefore had
    personal knowledge of the education system / opportunities in  Pakistan
    and the extracurricular activities were more  limited.  The  activities
    that [AK] and [RK] could ultimately enjoy were  different,  there  were
    different expectations upon girls and their conduct  in  Pakistan  than
    could be conducted here and that [AK], whilst understanding  Urdu,  did
    not speak it well. Therefore she would  have  difficulties  integrating
    into  Pakistan.   The  Second  Appellant  accepted  that  it  was   the
    children's parents' choice that  had  maintained  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it was because there was a better life for them  here  that
    they wished to remain.

14.  Judge Sethi set  out  the  factual  matters  that  were  found  and  in
    particular concluded that the best interests of the children lay  in  a
    return to Pakistan.  The judge took into account a number of factors in
    that assessment.

15.  First, their best interests were served by  being  brought  up  in  the
    care of their parents, wherever that might be.  Secondly, although [AK]
    was settled, in the ordinary meaning of the word, in the UK and  enjoys
    a normal life here as enjoyed by a child of similar age and, bearing in
    mind her status and length of time she had spent in  the  UK,  did  not
    demonstrate that she would suffer any  real  or  lasting  detriment  if
    required to return to Pakistan with her parents, where she would in any
    event  be  continuing  in  education.   Thirdly,  although  the  Second
    Appellant considered her children would not receive the same quality of
    education or extracurricular activities through the Pakistan  education
    system, there was no evidence that the  children  would  be  denied  an
    education.  Fourthly,  there  would  be  some  distress  for  [AK]  and
    separation from friendships she had developed in the United Kingdom and
    withdrawal  from  extracurricular  activities  which  she  had   become
    accustomed to and enjoyed.  Fifth, the  children  could  converse  with
    their parents in English and the evidence does not  suggest  that  they
    could not develop competence in Urdu.  Sixth, they are  able  to  adapt
    and would be able to adapt to a different system.  Seventh, of [AK] the
    judge took into account the period of time that had then been spent  in
    the United Kingdom bearing in mind when she entered.  Eighth, there was
    an inability of the First and Second Appellants to meet the Immigration
    Rules.  Ninth, the First and Second Appellants had developed a business
    which was successfully running and the effect of them leaving would  be
    that their staff would lose employment and that the  consequences  were
    not disproportionate.  The judge  also  found  that  the  children  had
    developed friendships in their community and took the  view  that  they
    would be able to do so again in Pakistan just as the First  and  Second
    Appellants, who had been successful in making a  business  in  the  UK,
    would be similarly able to do so  in  Pakistan.  Therefore  relocation,
    albeit disruptive, whatever emotional upset there  might  be,  was  not
    disproportionate.

16.  The major change in circumstances since that decision  in  2014  is  of
    course that [AK] has been in school longer.  It follows also that  [RK]
    will have developed a wider range of friendships and perhaps a  greater
    measure of independence, not in the  sense  of  independence  from  the
    family but independence in the sense of her own friends,  contacts  and
    connections.

17.  Before me what was essentially argued was nothing in  relation  to  the
    First and Second Appellants, save the role that they have in caring for
    their children and the benefits that they have brought to  them  partly
    derived through their life in the United Kingdom.

18.  In the circumstances I therefore consider whether or not there are  the
    kind of exceptional circumstances that might show that Article 8 should
    be considered outside of the Immigration Rules.  I do take into account
    the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874  and  I  do  not  hold
    against the children of the First  and  Second  Appellants  that  their
    parents' conduct in the UK is such that they have chosen  to  reap  the
    benefits of remaining in preference to their life in Pakistan.

19.  I also take into account the case of MK [2011] UKUT 00475 and the  case
    of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197, in particular the discussion about the
    implications of interruption in education,  its  consequences  and  the
    extent to which there should not be overemphasis on an interruption  in
    education, so much as  it  is  a  factor  forming  part  of  the  whole
    assessment.  The primary importance of the best interests  of  affected
    children is undeniable and the duties under Section 55 of the BCIA 2009
    stand independently as statutory requirements which must be addressed.

20.  I take into account the case of Jeunesse v the  Netherlands  (2015)  60
    EHRR 17 and the general principle derived from it that if a family life
    is created when  a  person  knew  that  their  immigration  status  was
    precarious it is likely that only in exceptional cases will the removal
    of the non-national family member be exceptional.  There is a  plethora
    of case law around the issue of what may be exceptional  circumstances,
    as used in different contexts, nevertheless the essential  question  is
    whether the effect of the decision render the outcome unduly  harsh  in
    terms of  the  consequences  for  the  individual  or  the  family  and
    therefore, in considering exceptional circumstances, that must  include
    a consideration of the best interests of a child in the  UK  but  there
    will not often be occasions when that is shown to be  disproportionate.
    If it were otherwise, the presence of a child in the  UK  would  simply
    trump any other considerations, see ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4.

21.  I concluded that it is arguable that the circumstances are such  as  to
    show the decision could be disproportionate in terms of the  impact  on
    [AK].  I do not see, in relation to the First and Second Appellants  or
    indeed [RK], anything that  demonstrates  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances.  So far as [AK] is concerned, and that is the real basis
    on  which  the  appeal  has  been  mounted,  essentially  it   is   the
    interruption in her education and a return to life  in  Pakistan  where
    freedoms for women are different to that in  the  United  Kingdom.   It
    does not seem to me that there really is  a  case  that  the  education
    system fails so badly in Pakistan that it would be disproportionate  to
    return her now in terms of her educational  development  and  progress.
    Rather it seems to me that the position is there  would  be  disruption
    for her that would not be in her best interests but to a degree that is
    a consequence of the choice of keeping the family  together,  which  is
    obviously desirable and the fact that the First and Second  Appellants'
    only basis to remain would be as her carers.

22.  I consider with reference to Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002  that  in
    a non-deportation case  the  removal  of  a  qualifying  child  is  not
    required.  Nevertheless I take the view that it is reasonable  for  her
    to  return  to  Pakistan  with  her  parents  and  that   it   is   not
    disproportionate to do so.  I am particularly  persuaded  by  the  fact
    that her parents are very keen, educated  people  who  wish  to  ensure
    their daughter has the best and they will do their best  on  return  to
    Pakistan to foster the development and educational enhancement of  both
    [AK] and [RK].  I do not accept the evidence that there is no family in
    Pakistan  and  therefore  that  there  would  be  no  possible  support
    available.

23.  I have no educational psychologist's or expert's report on  the  impact
    on either  child's  confidence  or  educational  development  by  being
    removed from schooling in the UK.  I take as  my  starting  point  what
    they would have in Pakistan is different and nevertheless they can make
    friends and undergo examinations and qualifications as  they  wish.   I
    take into account that removing the First and  Second  Appellants  will
    create problems for the disposal of their business and ensuring payment
    for the sale price or however their finances are arranged but I do  not
    accept that that constitutes  exceptional  circumstances  or  that  the
    financial hardship of itself justifies the view that  the  decision  is
    disproportionate.  I take into account the public interest which should
    be given significant weight  I  find  in  the  context  of  the  facts,
    particularly because the First and Second Appellants have taken choices
    to remain with its obvious consequences  which  they  would  prefer  to
    ignore. In the  circumstances  I  find  the  Respondent's  decision  is
    proportionate:  The  public  interest  outweigh  the  various   factors
    concerning [AK] and [RK]'s best interests.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeals are dismissed

ANONYMITY ORDER

An anonymity order is made because of the age of the children.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 10 March 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


P.S. I regret this decision has been so delayed in  promulgation  which  has
    been caused by the  case  file  being  mislocated.  I  have  taken  the
    opportunity to consider the cases of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, Agyarko
    [2007] UKSC 11 and MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 in so far  as  they  may
    bear on the issues.

