
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20094/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 August 2016                      |On 22 August 2016                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                 TAHERA [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Capital
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Seelhoff, promulgated on 9 December 2015, whereby he dismissed the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to
    grant her leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her private and
    family life.



Background and Immigration History

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 March 1984 who
    entered the UK as a visitor on 18 January 2007 with her son who was
    born on [ ] 2004.

 3. Since entering the UK the appellant has made several applications for
    leave to remain, all of which have been refused. The most recent
    application was made on 18 December 2013 on the basis of her private
    and family life and refused on 9 April 2014. The respondent's reason
    for refusing the application, as set out in her letter of 9 April 2014,
    was that the appellant was unable to satisfy the requirements of either
    Appendix FM or Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and there were
    no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the
    Rules. The respondent recognised that the appellant has sole parental
    responsibility for a child under 18 who has lived continuously in the
    UK for over 7 years but found that it would be reasonable to expect the
    child to leave the UK as he is a national of Bangladesh and would be
    returning with his mother as a family unit.

 4. The appellant appealed and the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Pears. In a decision promulgated on 6 January 2015, Judge Pears
    allowed the appeal. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge
    Farrelly who found that Judge Pears had made an error of law and
    remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal was then
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff who, in a decision
    promulgated on 9 December 2015, dismissed the appeal.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff

 5. Judge Seelhoff found that the appellant had used deception to obtain
    permission to enter the UK using documents obtained fraudulently and
    had remained in the UK unlawfully. He also found that she had not been
    the victim of domestic violence as she had claimed.  He used strong
    language in characterising the conduct of the appellant. At paragraph
    [42] he stated: "I find that the appellant's actions in terms of UK
    immigration have been wholly cynical and motivated by a desire to
    manipulate and get around the systems of immigration control".

 6. Having made findings in respect of the appellant's conduct, the judge
    turned to consider the position of her son. The decision includes a
    detailed consideration of his circumstances. At paragraph [44] the
    judge noted the length of time he had lived in the UK (9 years) and
    that he had been of school age for seven of these years. At paragraph
    [45] the judge considered how the appellant's son is progressing at
    school, referring to school reports and his stage in the exam cycle. At
    paragraph [46] the judge discussed his family situation, and relations
    with aunts, uncles and cousins. The judge considered the ages of the
    appellant's cousins and his relations with them (the judge found the
    appellant is likely to be very close to his cousins).  At paragraph
    [47] the judge considered the appellant's knowledge of the Bengali
    language and the objective evidence (or lack thereof) before him as to
    schooling in Bangladesh. At paragraphs [48] - [49] the judge considered
    the family's financial circumstances and the extent to which the
    financial support the appellant and her son receive in the UK could
    continue in Bangladesh.

 7. At paragraph [51] the judge found that it is in the best interests of
    the appellant's son to remain in the UK with his mother and extended
    family. He then, having regard to the question posed at paragraph
    276ADE and EX.1 of Appendix FM, considered whether it would nonetheless
    be reasonable to expect him to relocate to Bangladesh. At paragraph
    [53], the judge stated:

         "I find that the extent of the abuse of Immigration Control is such
         that I find that it is reasonable for the appellant's son to be
         expected to leave the UK bearing in mind that he will be leaving
         with his mother and going to a country where he is likely to have
         significant familiarity with the language and where it is likely
         that the family retains significant ties."

 8. The judge then considered Article 8 outwith the Immigration Rules with
    reference to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002" Act). At paragraph [56], he stated that he was
    required to attach "virtually no weight to any private life developed
    in the UK by the appellant" and

         "... that the appellant is not related to a qualifying child for
         the purposes of 117B(6) of the 2002 Act for the reasons I have set
         out above as it is reasonable for her son to be expected to leave
         the UK".

Grounds of appeal and permission to appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to give proper
    consideration to, and treat as a primary consideration, the best
    interests of the appellant's son. They also argue that the judge erred
    in his interpretation of section 117B of the 2002 Act by finding the
    appellant's son was not a qualifying child.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin.
    Permission was granted only in respect of the ground of appeal
    concerning whether the appellant's son was a qualifying child under
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. In respect of the other grounds of
    appeal, which relate to the judge's assessment of the best interests of
    the appellant's son, the judge stated that the arguments "reveal no
    arguable error of law".

11. Before me, Mr Singer argued that the grant of permission does not
    exclude the other grounds of appeal. When I put it to him that the
    grant expressly limited permission to a single ground, Mr Singer argued
    that this is an appeal involving a child who has been in the UK for a
    substantial period of time and it was in the interest of justice that
    all grounds were argued. He also submitted that there was no explicit
    exclusion of the other grounds.  After hearing submissions on this
    point from Mr Walker - who did not make any objection to Mr Singer
    advancing arguments in respect of the other grounds of appeal - I
    advised the parties that notwithstanding the clear and express
    limitation in the grant of permission, I would consider all grounds of
    appeal.

Consideration

12. Section 117D(1) defines a qualifying child as follows:

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
         who -
         (a) is a British citizen, or,
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
         seven years or more

13. The appellant's son has been in the UK continuously since January 2007
    and therefore falls squarely within this definition. The judge was
    therefore in error to state at paragraph [56] that the appellant is not
    related to a "qualifying child".

14. Section 117B(6) states that:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with
         a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

15. Section 117B(6) requires a judge to consider the reasonableness of
    expecting a qualifying child to leave the UK. In his decision, the
    judge identified, and dealt at length with, the question of whether it
    would be reasonable to expect the appellant's son to leave the UK. At
    paragraph [56], where the statement is made that the appellant's son is
    not a qualifying child, the judge gave as his reason for so finding
    that it would be reasonable for him to be expected to leave the UK.

16. When the decision, or indeed paragraph [56], is read as a whole, it
    becomes apparent that the judge has applied the correct test under
    Section 117B(6) and has approached the appeal on the basis that the
    appellant's son is a qualifying child such that the relevant question
    is the reasonableness of his removal from the UK. The reference to the
    appellant's son not being a qualifying child is no more than sloppy use
    of language. This error of law (to the extent it can even be
    characterised as such) is not material.

17. With regard to the other grounds of appeal, Mr Singer argued that the
    judge failed to give proper consideration to the appellant's son's best
    interests and wrongly held against him the adverse conduct of the
    appellant. I do not consider these arguments to have any merit. The
    judge dealt at length with the circumstances of the appellant's son,
    considering his age, length of time in the UK, education, linguistic
    knowledge, family circumstances and the financial position of his
    family, Having assessed, and made findings, in relation to all of the
    material evidence before him about the appellant's son, the judge
    concluded that notwithstanding that his best interests would be to
    remain in the UK it would not be unreasonable for him to return to
    Bangladesh with his mother. Having looked afresh at the evidence before
    the judge concerning the appellant's son, I am satisfied that he
    reached a conclusion that was open to him.

18. One of the factors considered by the judge, in assessing the
    reasonableness of the appellant's son leaving the UK, was the conduct
    and immigration history of the appellant. Mr Singer argued that in so
    doing the judge was improperly holding against the child adverse
    conduct of his parents. However, I do not accept this was the case. As
    the recent Court of Appeal judgment MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705
    makes clear, it is not blaming the child to say that the conduct of a
    parent should weigh in the scales when the general public interest in
    effective immigration control is under consideration.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

20. The appeal is dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 19 August 2016                |

