
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/20040/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 24 April 2018                       |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                         MR RIZWAN MUHAMMAD SHAUKAT
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  19  April  1981.  His
    appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 14 May 2015 to refuse
    to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom was allowed by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Martins  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  21
    November 2017. The Respondent appeals with leave against that  decision
    and for the reasons which I have set out below I  have  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and have re-made  the  decision  in
    this appeal. Although the matter came before me initially as an  appeal
    by the Respondent, for the sake of convenience I will continue to refer
    to the parties as they were known at first instance.


 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 30 January 2014 with  entry
    clearance as a tier 4 (general)  dependent  valid  until  15  September
    2015. The Appellant was the spouse of [SK]  ("Ms  [K]")  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born on 8 April 1982 who had applied for leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom. The couple had a child M who was born 1 January 2013 in
    Pakistan. He was not a British citizen and has not lived in the  United
    Kingdom for at least 7 years. M was born in Pakistan  but  entered  the
    United Kingdom with the Appellant on 30 January 2014. On 19th of  March
    2015 the Appellant made his application for further leave to remain the
    refusal of which has given rise to the present proceedings.


The Explanation for Refusal

 3. On 14 May 2015  the  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  application
    concluding that the  Appellant  did  not  fulfil  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in respect of the parent route. The Appellant's child M was
    not a qualifying child and the Appellant did  not  have  sole  parental
    responsibility for M who lived with his mother Ms [K]. Section EX.1 did
    not apply to  the  Appellant  as  the  Appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    eligibility requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Respondent
    considered the application under paragraph 276ADE (1)  but  noted  that
    the Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for one  year  and  could
    not show that he had lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  at
    least 20 years or half of his life.  There  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his  reintegration  back  into  Pakistan.  There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances such that the application should  be  granted
    outside the rules.


The First Appeal Proceedings

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and the matter came  before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Housego sitting at Hatton Cross on 11 August
    2016. He dismissed the appeal finding that the Appellant, M and Ms  [K]
    were all citizens of Pakistan and could be expected  to  return  there.
    The Appellant appealed against that decision and a  material  error  of
    law was found by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane sitting at Field House on  3
    March 2017.


 5. The Appellant was permanently separated from the mother  of  the  child
    and if all three were to return to  Pakistan  the  Appellant  would  be
    required to obtain an order for contact in a Pakistan court if  he  was
    to enjoy any family life with M. It was difficult to  see  how  such  a
    scenario might amount to the resumption of family life. The  Judge  had
    not determined the extent of family life between the  Appellant  and  M
    and had  not  made  any  finding  that  contact  was  taking  place  in
    accordance with the Family Court order dated 23rd  of  July  2015.  The
    Judge needed to deal in greater detail with  the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and M and the relevance in the Article 8 analysis of  the
    order which gave the Appellant contact with M each Sunday between 2  PM
    and 6 PM. Judge Lane noted in remitting the appeal back  to  the  first
    tier to be reheard that by the time of  the  next  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing it was likely that a decision would have been taken on Ms [K]'s
    asylum application. The Appellant needed to provide  evidence  to  show
    that he was complying with the contact order.


The Proceedings under Appeal

 6. In consequence of that decision the matter came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Martins sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  21  November
    2017. She heard evidence from the Appellant  and  found  him  to  be  a
    credible witness. The Appellant and Ms [K] did not  have  the  best  of
    communication but had some in relation to M.  The  order  of  the  East
    London Family Court provided that M was not  to  be  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom without the consent of either  of  M's  parents  or  the
    consent of the court. The Appellant and M were close and the Judge  was
    satisfied that they did spend at least Sunday  afternoons  together  as
    envisaged by the contact order. When M was ill Ms [K] would contact the
    Appellant, who would go and spend time with M.


 7. When the matter came before Judge Martins Ms  [K]'s  asylum  claim  had
    still not been determined by the Upper Tribunal.  Her  application  for
    asylum had been refused by the Respondent and she had appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. On 25 September 2017 the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    dismissed Ms [K]'s appeal. Ms [K]  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    which was refused by the First-tier on 18th of October 2017. Her onward
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal was refused on 22
    November 2017, the day after the hearing before Judge Martins. She  did
    not promulgate her determination until 31 January  2018,  just  over  2
    months after Ms [K]'s application to the Upper Tribunal was refused.


 8. In argument before Judge Martins it was said that the Appellant was  an
    educated man who spoke English, held a full-time position and had  done
    so for the past four years which had earned him  more  than  the  money
    that would be required for a couple under the Immigration Rules. He had
    not committed any criminal offences. At [26] of the determination Judge
    Martins came to the conclusion that the Appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden upon him of showing that the Respondent's decision to refuse  to
    grant further leave to remain was a disproportionate interference  with
    the Appellant's right to a private and family life under Article 8, the
    Appellant having accepted that he could not meet the Immigration Rules.




 9. The Judge noted at [27], in the light of the  authority  of  MH  [2010]
    UKUT 439  that it was the practice where there were family  proceedings
    for an immigration appeal to be allowed pursuant to  Article  8  rather
    than for the proceedings to remain within the  Tribunal  system  to  be
    adjourned perhaps more than once. The Respondent would normally grant a
    short period of discretionary leave bearing in mind any relevant  facts
    found by an immigration Judge.


The Onward Appeal

10. The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing that  the  First-
    tier had failed to take into account that M was not a qualifying child.
    Ms [K] had been served with form  IS  96  indicating  an  intention  to
    remove her. The First-tier had speculated about whether  the  Appellant
    would be able to maintain contact with M in Pakistan when there was  no
    evidence of the Family Court or other systems in  Pakistan.  M  had  no
    status in this country and may well be liable to removal  with  Ms  [K]
    when her appeal concluded.


11. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge Boyes on 28 February 2018. In granting permission  to  appeal  he
    wrote that it was arguable that the Judge had  erred  in  reaching  the
    decision to allow the appeal in light  of  the  fact  that  M  was  not
    British had no status in the  United  Kingdom  and  was  likely  to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom with Ms [K].


The Hearing Before Me

12. In consequence of the grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter  came
    before me to consider in the first place whether there was  a  material
    error of law such that the determination fell to be set aside. If there
    was then the decision would be  remade.  If  there  was  not  then  the
    decision at first instance would stand.


13. For the Respondent the Presenting Officer argued  that  the  Judge  had
    looked at the case on a mistaken basis and misapplied the authority  of
    MH regarding pending family proceedings. The Respondent would  normally
    grant a short period of discretionary leave where  there  were  current
    court proceedings in the Family Court but it was for the Respondent  to
    decide on the period of leave in each case. If the  application  for  a
    contact order was successful a parent may apply for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. The result of the  failure  of  Ms  [K]'s
    asylum appeal was that the Appellant was only still here because he had
    an appeal in the system. MH did not apply in this case. In MH the child
    was a British citizen and had a British citizen mother.  That  was  not
    the factual matrix in this case.


14. There was no background evidence to show what would happen  if  Ms  [K]
    and M returned to Pakistan. In a deportation  appeal,  Mohammed  [2014]
    UKUT 419, the Upper Tribunal had said there was nothing to support  the
    notion that the merest possibility of an application for contact  being
    made or pursued was a relevant criterion in the case of an  immigration
    appeal when deciding whether to adjourn an appeal or to direct a  grant
    of discretionary leave in order for such proceedings to be pursued. The
    relevant guidance was concerned with  whether  there  was  a  realistic
    prospect of the Family Court  making  a  decision  that  would  have  a
    material impact on the relationship between  a  child  and  the  parent
    facing immigration measures such as deportation. In this case  none  of
    the parties had the right to stay in the United Kingdom. The Judge  had
    not appreciated the facts or the case law.  Section  117B  (6)  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was not  relevant  in  this
    case because M was not a qualifying child  and  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect M to leave the United Kingdom.


15. For the Appellant counsel  noted  that  the  appeal  had  been  allowed
    outside the Immigration Rules. The  contact  order  made  by  the  East
    London Family Court provided that it was a criminal offence to remove M
    from the jurisdiction. The best interests of M needed to be considered.
    The decision under Article 8 made by the Judge was correct.


The Decision on Error of Law

16. There were two main reasons for the remittal by  Judge  Lane  from  the
    Upper Tribunal  to  the  First-tier.  The  first  was  the  uncertainty
    surrounding the asylum appeal of Ms [K]. If she were successful in that
    appeal she would remain in the United Kingdom and M would  remain  here
    as well. If M remained here then the Appellant could only exercise  his
    rights under the contact order by remaining in this country. The second
    reason was that Judge Housego had given an insufficient analysis of the
    circumstances of the family.


17. The difficulty with Judge Martins' decision was that  she  was  unaware
    when her determination was promulgated that Ms [K] had been  ultimately
    unsuccessful in her asylum appeal and therefore had no right to  remain
    in this country just as M had no right to be  here.  She  indicated  at
    [25] that the Appellant met the criteria under section 117B of the 2002
    Act. It is not clear  from  her  determination  whether  she  was  only
    considering the sub-sections which relate to financial independence and
    linguistic ability or  whether  she  was  suggesting  that  the  public
    interest did not require the Appellant's removal because the  Appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with M and it  would
    not be reasonable to expect M to leave the United Kingdom  (sub-section
    (6). On the facts of this case that sub-section could not be  apply  to
    the Appellant.


18. The main reason why Judge Martins found that  M  could  not  leave  the
    United Kingdom was because of the existence of the contact  order  made
    by the East London Family Court. That however was an order  made  inter
    partes and its effect on the immigration status of  the  three  persons
    involved was not sufficiently analysed. I find that there were material
    errors of law in the First-tier decisions such that it falls to be  set
    aside and the decision remade. I considered at the hearing whether  the
    matter needed to be remitted back to the First-tier again or whether  I
    could re-decide the appeal. I do not consider that it is  necessary  to
    remit given the relatively narrow issue in this case,  which  turns  on
    the status of the injunction attached to the East London  Family  Court
    order. I therefore proceed on the basis of the facts as  found  by  the
    Judge save where the Judge was unaware of the  factual  position  which
    has now been made clear.



Findings

19. It is accepted  in  this  case  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore the matter must be  determined  outside
    the rules under Article 8. The  best  interests  of  M  are  a  primary
    consideration  of  this  Tribunal  and  must   be   considered   first.
    Undoubtedly M's best interests are to remain in the care of his  mother
    and to enjoy regular contact with his father  who  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with  M.  As  Judge  Martins  pointed  out  the
    Appellant and M have a family life which would be  interfered  with  by
    requiring the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom if M were to remain
    in this country.


20. It is less clear whether the family life enjoyed by the Appellant and M
    would be interfered with if they (and Ms [K]) were removed to Pakistan.
    There was no evidence before Judge Martins at  first  instance  on  the
    possibility of contact being ordered by a court in Pakistan  and  there
    was no evidence on this point before me. As the burden of proof was  on
    the Appellant to establish his case, I cannot see that there  would  be
    difficulties for  the  Appellant  to  have  contact  with  his  son  in
    Pakistan.


21. The Appellant's evidence to Judge Martins is summarised at [18] of  her
    determination. The Appellant said he did not believe that on return  to
    Pakistan he would be able to see M because he and Ms [K]  did  not  see
    each other. That is not a sufficient reason to say that  contact  would
    not therefore take place. There is no evidence in this case that it  is
    harder for a father to see his child in  Pakistan  than  it  is  for  a
    father to see his child in the United Kingdom.  If  the  Appellant  was
    able to obtain an order to see his son in the United Kingdom I  see  no
    reason why the Appellant could not do something  similar  in  Pakistan,
    should it be needed.


22. The position would then be that the three  individuals  in  this  case,
    none of whom have a right to be here, would  all  be  in  Pakistan  and
    would be able to enjoy their family relationships there.  In  this  way
    the best interests of M would be safeguarded.  Even  if  there  is  any
    interference in the family life between M  and  the  Appellant  perhaps
    caused by any potential disruption to the contact  arrangements  whilst
    the parties are being removed to Pakistan, that could be remedied  upon
    return to Pakistan when the Appellant could resume contact with M.


23. The main point made by the Appellant is that it would not  be  possible
    to remove Ms [K] and M because there is a court order  prohibiting  the
    removal of M from the jurisdiction. There are a number of  difficulties
    with this argument. The  first  is  that  the  fact  that  Ms  [K]  was
    unsuccessful in her appeal indicates that both the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal took the view that  Ms  [K]'s  Article  8  claim
    (assuming she made one) based on her care of M could not succeed.  Even
    if she did not make such a claim, the order made  by  the  East  London
    Family Court prohibiting the removal of M is directed to the parties in
    that litigation. It is to prevent one or  other  of  the  parents  from
    removing M  arbitrarily  and  thereby  frustrating  the  residence  and
    contact arrangements made under that order. It cannot in my view be  an
    obstacle to the Respondent in his plans to  remove  the  Appellant.  If
    that were not so it would be a simple method to frustrate the  will  of
    Parliament and the meaning of the Immigration  Rules  for  two  parents
    neither of whom have the right to be in this  country  to  formulate  a
    claim before a Family Court in order to  obtain  an  order  that  their
    child should not be removed. The Child Abduction Act 1984  makes  it  a
    criminal offence to remove a child without the leave of the  court  but
    that does not apply  where  the  person  removing,  in  this  case  the
    Secretary of State, has lawful authority to do so, which he would  have
    under removal direction issued to Ms [K] and M. It would not  in  those
    circumstances be necessary for the Respondent to apply  to  the  Family
    Court for permission to remove M.


24. The Upper Tribunal in the decision  of  RS  stated  that  the  Tribunal
    should be alert to proceedings which are  designed  more  to  frustrate
    immigration procedures than to ensure the best interests  of  a  child.
    Even taking these contact proceedings at face value  and  that  it  was
    necessary for the Appellant to apply for a contact order to ensure that
    he saw M regularly, it cannot be correct that the immigration acts  can
    be frustrated by the actions of two parents neither of  whom  have  the
    right to be here. By engaging in this litigation, they are  running  up
    costs to the public purse. There is no reason why this litigation needs
    to be conducted in the United  Kingdom  since  all  three  parties  are
    citizens of Pakistan and all three should return to  their  country  of
    origin. I have seen nothing to indicate that the best  interests  of  M
    would be prejudiced if litigation was undertaken in Pakistan.


25. Given M's young age his primary focus will be on Ms [K] his mother  and
    there is no reason why he could not adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan  upon
    return (where he spent the first year of his  life)  living  with  her.
    Even if there is an interference with  family  life  by  returning  all
    three parties to Pakistan, that interference would be proportionate  to
    the legitimate aim being pursued. I do not consider that the  order  of
    the East London  Family  Court  makes  the  removal  of  the  Appellant
    disproportionate for the reasons given at [24] above.


26. The Appellant has not advanced a case in respect of  his  private  life
    with any force. That must be right. The Appellant has no status  to  be
    in this country and any private life he may have built  up  here  while
    his status has been at best precarious cannot be given any great weight
    by the Tribunal in the proportionality exercise. His private  life  may
    be interfered with by returning him to Pakistan but  that  interference
    is proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued given that the Appellant
    has overstayed his dependent visa and has only been in this country for
    a very short period. The Appellant's  private  life  claim  has  to  be
    looked at through the prism of the Immigration Rules. Due  weight  must
    be given on the Respondent's side of the scales due to  the  fact  that
    the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the  rules.  The  interference  with  the
    Appellant's private life is therefore proportionate.


27. The Appellant cannot show any reason which  engages  Article  8  and  I
    remake the decision in this case by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it  aside.  I  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 2 May 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I set aside  the
fee award. As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed this 2 May 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

