
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20065/2014
                                                               IA/20066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                  GRACE [O]
                                    [C O]
                        (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel, instructed by Tuckers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This comes before us today as a result of a decision that  was  reached
    when I was sitting with Deputy Judge Juss back in  February  this  year
    when we considered  the  appeal  by  the  two  appellants,  mother  and
    daughter, from a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  their
    applications for leave to remain in this country.

2.   What we said was that we had come close to allowing the appeal  because
    we felt that merits were clearly on the side of the appellants  and  it
    would not do any harm to the immigration law of  this  country  if  the
    applications were to be allowed.  But we took the view that we did  not
    have available to us then all the  information  that  might  have  been
    material because there were bundles which were available to the  First-
    tier Judge but which for some  reason  were  not  put  before  us.   We
    therefore decided that we should defer giving a final decision  for  21
    days.

3.   We asked the Secretary of State to reconsider  the  matter  and  decide
    whether she was going to maintain the decision and if  so  to  indicate
    the basis for so doing.  If, as we hoped, she would decide in favour of
    the appellants then obviously there would be no need for the matter  to
    come back.  But if she decided otherwise then it was implicit  in  that
    order that the matter would have to come back to us.

4.   The Secretary of State did make a  further  decision  on  23  February.
    For  reasons  which  are  most  unfortunate  there  was  a   delay   in
    transcribing the judgment and formally promulgating  it  until  August.
    However Mr Melvin who appeared before us  then  and  who  has  appeared
    before us today had made a  full  note  of  what  we  decided  and  had
    notified the relevant  department  in  the  Home  Office  of  what  was
    required of them.

5.   Regrettably the decision made on 23 February seems  basically  to  have
    ignored the information given because all it does is  to  repeat,  with
    two exceptions, what was in the original decision, the subject  of  the
    appeals. The original decision was one given in 2014.

6.   The two exceptions were that it had been said in relation to the  first
    appellant that is the mother, that she did not  speak  or  it  was  not
    established that she spoke sufficient English.   That  was  a  nonsense
    since quite apart from anything else she clearly was fluent in  English
    when the evidence was being  given.   It  was  said  that  that  was  a
    decision which had to be made because she had not gone through the test
    and therefore the official was entitled to form that view.  All we  say
    is that we would hope that a little bit of commonsense can  be  applied
    even though the Rules may require in certain respects a  sort  of  tick
    box approach.  However that is not now relied on and it seems  to  that
    maybe there has been some holding back on the assertion that there  was
    financial independence in going through  the  requirements  of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.

7.   It is not necessary to go into detail into the background since  it  is
    set out in our previous decision.  Suffice it to say that the  wife  of
    the first appellant and of course the  father  of  the  second,  was  a
    diplomat in this country and when, obviously  whilst  a  diplomat,  was
    entitled to be here with his family.  When he ceased being  a  diplomat
    he was given leave to remain on the basis of being able to work here as
    a journalist and in 2009 he had leave  to  remain  until  2012  and  an
    indication was given in the letter  in  2009  that  he  might  then  be
    eligible for the grant of indefinite leave to remain.

8.   Before his leave came to an end in 2012  he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain and of course these two appellants  were  here  as  his
    dependants. Unfortunately, his mother died shortly after  he  had  made
    that application and it was necessary for him as the son to attend  her
    obsequies in Nigeria. However, it was appreciated that the law is  that
    if having made an application for leave to remain the applicant  leaves
    the United Kingdom by section 3C(3) of the 1971 Act the leave will come
    to an end.

9.   Accordingly he contacted his MP and in July 2012 the MP  contacted  the
    relevant body in the Home Office and explained the need for the  father
    to go back to Nigeria to deal with her  mother's  funeral  arrangements
    and was told, we are informed, that the caseworker gave the target date
    in September of that year.  Regrettably, that was not kept.   Far  from
    it.  There were two aspects. There was a need for an attendance to deal
    with biometrics.

10.  Interestingly and surprisingly in February 2013 a letter  was  sent  to
    the first appellant inviting her to enrol her biometrics and eight days
    after that a similar letter to the  second  appellant.   They  both  as
    quickly as possible dealt with that aspect.  It was not for five months
    that a similar letter was sent to the husband. But by then he  had  had
    to leave to go to Nigeria to deal with his mother  because  regrettably
    it seems there had been in the breakdown in the morgue and  the  result
    was that the mother's body was getting to a state where it was  frankly
    going to be thoroughly unpleasant to deal with her.  He had  tried  for
    as long as he could to avoid having to return.

11.  The Home Office was well aware of the problem  and  it  is  significant
    that in the formal letters that they wrote they indicated that if there
    is a real problem including death or serious illness which may  require
    an individual to leave, that should be brought to the attention of  the
    Home Office and can result in expedition. It was in this  case  brought
    to the attention of the Home Office  but  it  did  not  result  in  any
    expedition and it is to be noted that on the information that  we  have
    the father had maintained his position in a good job and there  was  no
    reason on the face of it to believe other than that he would receive  a
    further leave to remain which could  well have been an indefinite leave
    to remain, but of course we are not in a position to know whether  that
    would in reality have resulted.

12.  There is no question in our judgment but that the Home Office has  been
    in the circumstances guilty of serious  maladministration  in  the  way
    that they dealt with the father's application.  It is not  mere  delay,
    because as has been submitted to us, a period of  something  just  over
    twelve months in reaching a decision is regrettably not something which
    is unusual in the way that the Home Office deal with these applications
    and we do appreciate and understand the pressures that there  are  upon
    the Home Office in having to deal with these matters, and it  may  well
    be that there are not enough caseworkers  who are  available.

13.  Delay in itself if there is no reason to suspect it may be delay  which
    ought not to have occurred  for  any  reason,  is  not  such  as  would
    normally give rise to an added feature to show that Article 8, which is
    what this case relies on, would though outside the Rules be  permitted.
    But it does have  relevance  clearly  in  reducing  the  weight  to  be
    accorded to the requirements of firm and fair  immigration  control  if
    the delay is shown to be the result of  a  dysfunctional  system  which
    yields  unpredictable  inconsistent  and  unfair  results.  That  is  a
    quotation from paragraph 16 of Lord Bingham's judgment in EB  (Kosovo).



14.  As we set out in our previous decision, the appellants have  been  here
    now for a significant number of years.  In fact they only  just  missed
    the  ten  years  residence  so  far  as  the  daughter  was  concerned.
    Regrettably there was a muddle over the application  because  when  the
    father left of course their leave also expired at the same time because
    their application was dependent upon his as his dependants.

15.  We are told that they were rightfully advised by  the  solicitors  that
    they then had appearing for them, although  that  will  not  in  itself
    avail them because they are  caught  by  any  failures  of  those  then
    representing them. However it is a factor that clearly one is  entitled
    to take into account when assessing the overall position in relation to
    Article 8.

16.  In any event, it took something in the order of six months for a  valid
    claim to be lodged and the result was that there was a  gap  in  lawful
    residence of that period, namely a period of six months.  All  this  is
    material when considering the requirements both of  the  Rules  and  of
    Section 117B of the Act.

17.  So far as the Rules are concerned, it was never suggested nor could  it
    be suggested that they qualified under the  provisions  of  the  Rules.
    But the Rules are no more than an indication given to the courts and of
    course to the officials who have to deal with immigration matters as to
    what the Rules regard as the requirements to meet  Article  8  in  this
    context.  But it is plain that the courts are not to be dictated to nor
    indeed are those responsible for immigration control because they  have
    a responsibility under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act  not  to  make
    decisions which breach a person's human rights and  the  decision  that
    has to be reached is whether in a  particular  case  removal  would  be
    proportionate, and in that exercise the burden lies upon the  Secretary
    of State to establish that it would be proportionate.  The burden is of
    course  on  the  applicant  to  establish  that  there  has   been   an
    interference with private law rights under Article 8. But there  is  no
    question but that that has been established.

18.  What is said is that in the circumstances since the Rules set  out  and
    must be respected as to the approach to be adopted, there must be  some
    exceptional circumstances  to  justify  a  decision  in  favour  of  an
    applicant under Article 8 when the Rules cannot be met.

19.   The  question  then  is  how  does  one  decide  what  is  or  is  not
    exceptional.  Exceptional as a word can mean  no  more  than  something
    outside the general provision but it has  appeared  to  be  considered,
    certainly up to and including the Court of Appeal, that what is  needed
    is a qualitative approach to  exceptionality  and  it  has  got  to  be
    something that is clearly special in a particular case.  But we have no
    doubt whatever that looking at the background and circumstances of this
    case a delay which resulted in the problems that face these two because
    the father had to leave which was as we  have  indicated  beyond  doubt
    caused by maladministration. That is something which  can  properly  be
    regarded as contributing  to  the  exceptionality  of  the  appellants'
    position in this case.  As Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Juss  and  I
    stated in February,  we  came  close  to  deciding  in  favour  of  the
    appellants.

20.  The further information detailing the manner in which  they  have  been
    dealt with in the delay persuades us that it is indeed proper to  allow
    this appeal.

21.  We can only add this, that as we say the history of the  way  that  the
    appellants have behaved, we put  it  that  way,  in  this  country,  is
    nothing but good.  They  have  worked  and  have  contributed  to  this
    country.

22.  Since we are allowing the  appeal  obviously  the  decision  to  refuse
    permission must be quashed or will no longer  exist  and  consideration
    must be given to the appropriate leave that should now be granted.  But
    we would urge the Secretary of State immediately to indicate that  they
    have permission to work so that they  can  get  back  into  becoming  a
    benefit to this country.

Notice of Decision

23.  For those reasons we are satisfied that this appeal must be allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Mr Justice Collins


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was requested.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Mr Justice Collins


