
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20217/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 August 2016                    |On 31 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                               MR Faheem Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain instructed by Syed Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, Mr Faheem Ahmed, date of birth 7th February 1987  is
         a citizen of Pakistan.  Having considered all the circumstances  it
         is not necessary to make an anonymity direction.

      2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  Shergill  promulgated  on  19  February  2016,
         whereby the judge dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         decision of the Respondent to refuse him  a  residence  card  as  a
         family or an extended family member of an  EU  national  exercising
         treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

      3. By a decision taken on 27 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy
         granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Thus  the
         matter appeared before  me  to  determine  in  the  first  instance
         whether  or  not  there  was  an  error  in  law  in  the  original
         determination.

      4. The Grounds of Appeal assert:

          a) That the judge determined the  case  on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant had not shown that he  had  been  dependent  on  the
             sponsor whilst the appellant had been living in  Pakistan.  It
             is submitted in  line  with  the  case  of  Reyes  (EEA  Regs:
             dependency)[2013] UKUT 00314 the test was not  one  of  passed
             dependency but dependency at the date of decision.

          b) That the judge failed to make any  findings  on  the  material
             issue, which was dependency at the date of decision.

          c) That the judge concentrated upon the past as is  evident  from
             the fact that he considered the support that the appellant got
             from his father and other sources prior to coming  to  the  UK
             and based the decision on such and that  such  was  a  legally
             flawed approach.

          d)  That  the  judge  further  found  that  money  transfers  and
             documents to support such produced by the appellant  were  not
             bona fide and he attached no weight  to  such.  In  accordance
             with the case of RP (Proof of forgery)  Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
             00086 it is submitted that a  document  given  in  good  faith
             should be considered as genuine unless there  is  evidence  to
             the contrary.

          e)   If  the  late  submission  documents  had   prejudiced   the
             respondent  the  respondent  should  have   applied   for   an
             adjournment. If there were any issues with regard to the  bona
             fides of the document such should have been raised during  the
             course of the hearing.

         Factual Background

      5. The appellant was seeking a residence card  on  the  basis  of  his
         relationship  and  dependency  upon  his  uncle  an  EEA   national
         exercising treaty rights in the UK.

      6. The appellant first came to the United Kingdom on a  student  visa.
         The judge notes that that student visa had been the subject  of  an
         appeal before the Tribunal in 2007. On the basis  of  the  evidence
         presented, including evidence from that previous appeal, the  judge
         found that that application had been supported by evidence to  show
         that the appellant would be supported by a benevolent  cousin,  who
         was willing to pay for his  course  fees,  flights  to  the  United
         Kingdom and other costs. At that stage there was no mention of  any
         monies being provided by  any  other  family  member,  specifically
         there was no mention of support from the EU sponsor.

      7. The appellant's visa to study as a student  came  to  an  end.  The
         appellant made various applications either for further leave or for
         a residence card, all of which were refused. Eventually by November
         2013 the appellant was served with documentation as an over  stayer
         as a precursor to his removal. Amongst the applications, which  had
         been made, were at least two seeking entitlement to remain  in  the
         United Kingdom as a family member of an EU citizen, his  uncle  and
         present sponsor.

      8. Indeed the last refusal of such an application appears to have been
         appealed. The appeal proceeded to a hearing but after  the  hearing
         had started, the appellant withdrew the appeal. Before the judge in
         the present proceedings the appellant claimed that he withdrew  his
         application because the previous judge was being extremely rude and
         aggressive. Judge Shergill did not find that to be the case in  the
         present proceedings.

      9. The latest application by the appellant was to remain in the UK  as
         a family member of his uncle, his EU sponsor. That application  was
         refused and the appellant appealed  against  that  refusal  on  the
         basis that the appellant was not a family or extended family member
         of an EEA citizen. It appears to be accepted that  the  appellant's
         uncle was an EEA citizen and that he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
         working and as such was a qualified person. The central  issue  was
         whether or not the appellant satisfied the requirements  under  the
         Directives and Regulations to be a family  member  or  an  extended
         family member.

     10. The terms family member and extended family member are  defined  in
         regulations 7 and 8 of the 2006  Regulations..  There  is  a  clear
         distinction between regulation 7 and  regulation  8.  The  relevant
         parts of regulations 7 and 8 provide:-

             Family member

             7 (1)     Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of  these
             regulations the following  person  shall  be  treated  as  the
             family member of another person-

                   a) his spouse or his civil partner;

                   b) direct descendants of his, his spouse  or  his  civil
                      partner who are-

                        i) under 21; or

                       ii) dependents  of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
                           partner,

                   c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending  line  or
                      that of his spouse or his civil partner;

                   d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of
                      that other person under paragraph (3)

                  ...

             (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a  person  who  is  an  extended
             family member and has been issued with an EEA family permit, a
             registration certificate or a residence card shall be  treated
             as the family member of the relevant  EEA  national  force  as
             long as he continues to satisfy the conditions  in  regulation
             8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that EEA national and the
             permit, certificate or card has not  ceased  to  be  valid  or
             revoked.

             ...

             Regulation 8

             Extended family member

             8 (1)     In these regulations 'extended family member'  means
             a person who is not a family member of an EEA  national  under
             regulation  7  (1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
             conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-

                  (a)  the person is residing in a country  other  than  the
                      United Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national
                      or is a member of his household;

                  (b)  the person satisfied the  condition  in  (a)  and  is
                      accompanying the EEA national to the  United  Kingdom
                      or wishes to join him there; or

                  (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) ,
                      has joined EEA national in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                      continues to be dependent upon him or to be a  member
                      of his household.

11. The provision of the regulations  mirrors  the  provisions  of  Council
    Directive 2004 /38 /EC (Citizens' Free Movement) Articles 2 and  3  and
    Recital 6.

12.  The case of Bigia [2009] EWCA Civ 79 at paragraphs 4, 8  and  9  makes
    the point that family members  under  regulation  7  derive  EU  rights
    provided they are within specific categories  of  relationship  and  in
    certain circumstances are presently dependent on the EU  national.  The
    appellant does not fall within the strict relationship requirements  of
    regulation 7(1). Further the appellant has never  been  issued  with  a
    residence card and therefore he does not fall for  consideration  under
    Regulation 7(3). The term in the Regulation "has been issued with" is a
    necessary element for that provision.

13. Other Family Members/extended family members consistent with Article  2
    and 3 of Directive 2004/83/EC and Regulation 8  have  to  prove  either
    financial dependency upon  the  EU  member  or  membership  of  the  EU
    sponsor's household in a country outside and prior  to  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom and also either financial dependency upon the EU  member
    or membership of the EU sponsor's household in the  United  Kingdom  at
    present.

14.  The  appellant  has  sought  to  rely  upon  the  case  of  Reyes  and
    specifically paragraph 31. Counsel on behalf of the appellant  appeared
    to  be  arguing  that  the  appellant  fell  for  consideration   under
    Regulation 7(3) or Regulation 8(2)c). As the appellant has never had  a
    residence card he does not qualify under Regulation 7(3).

15. In respect of Regulation 8 reading  the  regulations  each  element  of
    Regulation 8 (2) requires the provisions of 8(2)(a)  to  be  satisfied.
    Such is consistent with the Directive and the case  law.  It  is  clear
    that either financial dependency in the past in Pakistan or  membership
    of the households previously in Pakistan are required elements in order
    to be considered as an Extended/Other Family Member. Whilst  regulation
    8(2)(a) is framed in  the  present  tense,  in  considering  regulation
    8(2)(b) or (c) the clear intent and purpose is that (a)  was  satisfied
    in the past and the person has come to join the individual in the UK or
    is accompanying the person to the UK..

16. Therefore  a  finding  that  an  applicant  had  not  been  financially
    dependent upon the EEA national or a member of the household  prior  to
    the applicant coming to  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  fatal  to  an
    application and an appeal.

17. That point  is  not  only  made  in  Bigia  but  also  in  Dauhoo  (EEA
    -regulation -reg. 8.2.) [2012] UKUT 79, which the judge in the  present
    appeal has considered and applied.

18. Accordingly there is no basis  for  challenging  the  decision  on  the
    ground that passed dependency  was  not  a  material  consideration  in
    establishing whether the appellant was  an  extended  or  other  family
    member.

19. The second issue raised by the appellant's  representative  relates  to
    the documents produced by the appellant at the hearing. In  submissions
    counsel on  behalf  of  the  appellant  was  asserting  that  once  the
    documents had been produced they should be accepted on  their  face  as
    proof of the details contained therein unless the  respondent  produced
    evidence to bring their  reliability  into  question.  In  making  that
    submission reliance was placed upon the case of SM &  Qadir  2016  UKUT
    229,which sets out-

         "60.     This contention was  raised  for  the  first  time  in  Mr
             Dunlop's final written submission. This implies  no  criticism
             of him. However, as a result, we have  not  received  detailed
             argument on the issue. We are mindful that as this is  neither
             an asylum nor a human rights case there are strong indications
             that the Tanveer Ahmed principles have no application. Second,
             we  consider  it  highly  unlikely  that  the  Tanveer   Ahmed
             principles  displace  or  alter  the  legal  rules  enunciated
             unambiguously in  Shen,  Muhandirange  and  their  precursors,
             which include MZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ 919, at [25]. The contention that a
             claimant,  or   appellant,   bears   the   legal   burden   of
             demonstrating that a document upon which he relies is reliable
             in a litigation context where the legal burden rests upon  the
             Secretary of State gives rise to an evident incongruity. There
             is a persuasive argument that  the  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles
             are, as the decision itself states unequivocally, confined  to
             asylum and human rights claims.  Indeed,  there  may  also  be
             scope for the argument  that  these  principles  may  have  no
             enduring application in such cases. However, this  issue  does
             not fall to be determined in these appeals and we note that it
             did not arise in the recent Court of  Appeal  decision  in  MA
             (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 175."

20. Reliance upon the paragraph indicated does not give the context to  the
    issue under consideration. It is evident from the rest of the judgement
    that what was being considered was the positive proof of dishonesty  on
    the part of an appellant,  that  is  the  positive  production  of  the
    document knowing that it was false  and  producing  it  with  dishonest
    intent. They can be little doubt that  where  the  Secretary  of  State
    makes positive assertions of dishonesty or forgery the burden is on the
    Secretary of State to prove such. Whilst the paragraphs cited seems  to
    question the approach advocated in the  case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed,  that
    approach was given support by the Court of Appeal in the cases of Mungu
    2003 EWCA Civ 360 and Pants v SSHD 2003 EWCA Civ 1964.

21. The issues in producing a document are whether the document  should  be
    accepted on its face, whether the person producing such  has  to  prove
    that it is reliable or whether the judge in looking at all the evidence
    can find that the document is not reliable.   The  case  of  Zarandy  v
    SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 153 considers the point raised by counsel for  the
    appellant.

         "14.     [Counsel] who appeared on behalf of  the  appellant,  made
         submissions which at one point seemed to suggest that  it  was  his
         contention that if any piece of paper was produced by a claimant it
         must be taken as evidencing what was  asserted  in  that  piece  of
         paper unless either there was  evidence  from  elsewhere  that  the
         paper was not what it appeared to  be  or  alternatively  had  been
         improperly procured or there was evidence appearing from  the  face
         of the document that  it  was  unreliable  I  do  not  accept  that
         proposition. The adjudicator must look at all of  the  material  in
         the round and see whether he is persuaded of the claim.'

         ...

         18.      That directs the tribunal's attention to the proper issue.
         The question is whether the document can be relied on in support of
         the appellant's claim in the light of all the evidence."

22. In the present proceedings the judge was  considering  whether  or  not
    documents produced, albeit produced for the hearing, were  reliable  in
    light of all the circumstances and the evidence. The  judge  considered
    the appellant's documents and came to the conclusion that the documents
    were not reliable. In the circumstances that was a finding of fact that
    the judge was entitled to make on the evidence presented.

23. The judge has very carefully examined all of the circumstances  of  the
    appellant's immigration history. The judge has considered the fact that
    in the past  the  appellant  had  never  referred  to  any  support  or
    assistance from his EU national uncle, that  the  appellant  had  never
    been able to produce supporting documents in the previous  applications
    including a hearing before the Tribunal and that the appellant's father
    was working and generally supporting the family in Pakistan. The  judge
    had carefully looked at all the evidence and having  assessed  all  the
    evidence came to the conclusions that no weight could be given  to  the
    documents in the circumstances. In the light  of  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to the conclusion reached.

24. Further and in any event in dealing with what the money allegedly  sent
    was used for the judge has pointed out that the monies  were  used  for
    luxuries rather than essentials. In considering that  issue  the  judge
    has pointed out the case of Lim (EEA -dependency)  [2013]  UKUT  00437,
    which makes the point. The judge was entitled to conclude that for  the
    purposes of the regulations the appellant had not been  dependent  upon
    his uncle in Pakistan and even if monies had been sent, which the judge
    was not satisfied was the case, the monies were used for  luxury  items
    and as such did not make the appellant dependent upon the uncle.

25. The judge has given valid reasons for coming to the conclusion that the
    appellant does not qualify under Regulation 7 as a family member  or  8
    as an extended family or other family member.

Notice of Decision

26. I dismiss the appeal by the Appellant and uphold the  decision  on  all
    grounds.

27. No anonymity direction is made.

28. As the appeal has been dismissed I make no fee award.


Signed      Date 31 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
