
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20064/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14 April 2014                              |on 15 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             ROSS PATRICK McGILL
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

  Appellant:                 Mrs M O'Brien, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer
  Respondent:  Mr McGuinness of John Fahy and Company Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  By a decision dated 20th May 2013 made on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State"), the Appellant
    herein, the Respondent's application for a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 was refused. His  application  under
    paragraph 276  ADE/Article  8  ECHR  was  simultaneously  refused.  The
    ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the  "FtT")  succeeded.   In
    [9] and [10] of the determination, the Judge stated:

         "[The  Secretary  of  State's  representative]  accepted  that  the
         Appellant meets the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
         Rules and that the decision made breaches Article 8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention.  Upon that concession being  made,  [Appellant's
         Counsel] indicated that he did not  intend  to  pursue  the  appeal
         under the EEA Regulations .....


         I allow the appeal under paragraph  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         .....


         I allow the human rights appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention."

 2. In the Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, it was suggested that the passage quoted above betrayed
    an error of law, since the presenting officer -

         ".....  has indicated that the financial requirements of FM are not
         satisfied.  The Judge has made no findings on this material  aspect
         of Appendix FM and has, therefore, erred in law by stating that the
         Appellant has satisfied the Rules."

    I have noted the terms in which permission to appeal  was  granted.   I
    consider that the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was  inappropriate,
    since the grounds of appeal did  not  challenge,  even  obliquely,  the
    concession unequivocally recorded by the Judge  in  [9].   The  grounds
    demonstrably lacked merit and the  application  for  permission  should
    have been refused.

 3.  In  the  event,  permission  having  been  granted,  the  Respondent's
    solicitors, properly in the circumstances, requested that the FtT Judge
    provide his notes of the hearing.  This request was channelled  through
    the Principal Resident  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  elicited,
    commendably, a swift and co-operative response from the FtT Judge.   As
    the typed transcript demonstrates, the Judge's  notes  put  the  matter
    beyond dispute.  This was followed by a letter dated 15th January  2014
    from  the  Respondent's  solicitor  to   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representatives, enclosing a copy of  the  Judge's  letter  and  notes.
    This letter suggested, in terms, that the appeal be withdrawn and  that
    the Respondent be granted leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 4. The sequence of events thereafter is regrettable.   Some  three  months
    later [today], this appeal was listed for hearing, in circumstances  in
    which  neither  party's  representative  had  engaged  in  any  further
    communication with each other.  This surprising failure was  compounded
    by a further,  associated  failure  on  the  part  of  the  Appellant's
    solicitors to serve a notice under Rule 24 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   No  explanation  for  this  unacceptable
    failure was provided.  In the event, the listing  of  this  appeal  for
    hearing entailed a pre-eminently avoidable waste of  time,  effort  and
    cost.

 5. The Appellant's presenting officer received  the  materials  identified
    above for the first time in the course of the hearing.  Copies were not
    provided to either the presenting officer or the Tribunal  in  advance.
    This failure is  intolerable.  Having  considered  the  materials,  the
    presenting officer, properly in my  view,  indicated  that  the  appeal
    would  not  be  pursued.   At  the  invitation  of  the  Tribunal,   an
    application was made under Rule  17  for  permission  to  withdraw  the
    appeal.  The Tribunal acceded to this application.

DECISION

 6. The Appellant's application under Rule 17 for  permission  to  withdraw
    the appeal is granted.  The decision of the FtT is hereby affirmed.







                                    Signed:   [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date:   14 April 2014
