
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20945/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 July 2016                            |On 17 August 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 yewande [g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Holt, instructed by Perera & Co solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I shall refer herein to Ms [G] as the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1994.  She  first  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 13 January 2006 on  a  six-month  visit  visa,
    aged 11.  She has not left the United Kingdom since,  and  has  had  no
    lawful leave subsequent to the expiry of her leave to  enter  in  2006.
    She has three siblings in the United Kingdom, one of whom is a  British
    citizen and two of whom have discretionary leave to remain here in line
    with the appellant's mother.

 3. The claimant has a  criminal  conviction  for  possession  of  a  false
    identity document. Having pleaded guilty to such  an  offence  she  was
    sentenced, on 14 August 2013, to four  months'  imprisonment  -  wholly
    suspended - and 150 hours' community service.

 4. On 25 February 2015 the claimant applied for  leave  to  remain.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of  21
    May 2015 and it is this decision which was the subject of an appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 6 January
    2016  and  allowed  "under  the  Immigration  Rules"  in   a   decision
    promulgated five days later. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Chambers  with  the
    permission of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison.  Thus  the
    matter came before me.

Secretary of State's decision

 6. In her decision letter of 21 May 2015 the Secretary of State  concluded
    that the appellant failed to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules in the following two respects:

         "It is noted that you were  convicted  of  possession  of  a  false
         identity document and was given a 4 month  suspended  sentence  and
         150 hours community service on 14 August 2013.  For  these  reasons
         the Secretary of State considers that your presence in  the  UK  is
         undesirable and you therefore fail to fulfil S-LTR.1.6 of  Appendix
         FM of the  Immigration  Rules.  Therefore  you  fail  to  meet  the
         requirements of Rule 276ADE(i) of the Immigration Rules.  ...

         In order to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  an
         applicant must show that they are aged 18 or above and  that  there
         will be very significant obstacles to their  integration  into  the
         country to which they would have to go if required to leave the UK.
          It is not accepted that there would be very significant  obstacles
         to your integration into Nigeria, if you were required to leave the
         UK because you spent 11 years of your life in Nigeria before coming
         to the UK. You speak both English and Yoruba and you will  be  able
         to reintegrate back into the culture there.  Consequently, you fail
         to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
         Immigration Rules."

S-LTR.1.6 - Discussion and Conclusion

 7. Paragraph S-LTR.1.6 to Appendix FM of the Rules reads as follows:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct 'including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within  paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3   to   1.5',   character,
         associations, and other reasons, make it undesirable to allow  them
         to remain in the UK."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with  this  provision  in  the  following
    terms [9]:

         "The fact of the conviction alone is not in itself sufficient.  The
         appellant's presence now is not now a threat in any way.  There  is
         no evidence before me to demonstrate the appellant has a propensity
         to reoffend. The sentence she received  was  light  and  below  the
         conventional tariff.  It  strongly  suggests  that  the  sentencing
         court was influenced by the mitigation the  appellant  put  forward
         and persuaded to take an unusually lenient  course.  The  appellant
         has served the sentence. There must  be  something  more  than  the
         offence  itself,  something  based  upon  propensities  within  the
         appellant to give rise to an inference the appellant's presence  in
         the UK is undesirable.   Seemingly  no  action  was  taken  by  the
         respondent at the time of the offence."

 9. The Secretary of State's ground of challenge in relation to this aspect
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision (ground 2) reads:

         "It is not disputed that the appellant has a conviction which falls
         within S-LTR.1.6 above and therefore the appellant cannot meet  the
         suitability requirements."

10. At the hearing Mr Harrison accepted that the fact  of  this  conviction
    alone is not determinative of the issues requiring consideration  under
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6.  He made no further submissions in relation to the
    lawfulness of the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions on this issue.

11. Looking at the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  as  a  whole,  in  my
    conclusion it properly directed itself as to the relevant  requirements
    in S-LTR.1.6, took into account all  material  factors  relevant  to  a
    lawful consideration of that Rule and came to  a  conclusion  which  is
    perfectly rational on the available evidence.  In other  words,  in  my
    conclusion the First-tier Tribunal did not err in its consideration  of
    this requirement of the Rules.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) - Discussion and Conclusion

12. By paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules the claimant  was  required  to
    establish:

         "Subject to subparagraph (ii) [not relevant in this case], is  aged
         18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than
         20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would
         be very significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into
         the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave  the
         UK."

13.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions  on  this  issue  are   found
    ostensibly in paragraph 10 of its decision, which states:

         "In  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  it  is  established   the
         appellant is over 18. There are very significant obstacles  to  her
         integration to Nigeria.  She is heavily pregnant.  She  cannot  fly
         to Nigeria. She left Nigeria when she was aged 11.  She  has  never
         returned to Nigeria.  She has no reasonable expectation of  support
         from family and friends in Nigeria. Given her condition  she  would
         have problems supporting  herself  and,  when  the  time  came,  of
         supporting her child. Her  partner  a  British  citizen  cannot  be
         forced to go to Nigeria with the appellant. He has a  good  job  in
         the United Kingdom. He will be able to support is family if he goes
         there. If he gave up his job and went abroad with the appellant the
         family would not enjoy the same income or prospects. There are also
         considerations to do with the appellant's private and  family  life
         arrangements with her family here."

14.  The Secretary of State's grounds of challenge read:

         "In allowing the appeal under 276ADE(1)(vi) Judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal Chambers finds that there are very  significant  obstacles
         to her integration into Nigeria.

         The reasons he gives for that are:

          1) The appellant is heavily pregnant

          2) The appellant left Nigeria aged 11 and has not returned

          3) The appellant cannot reasonably expect  her  family  there  to
             support her.

          4) She would not be able to support herself and her child

          5) The appellant's British partner would have to give up his job

         In addition to not giving adequate reasons for  any  of  the  above
         findings, it is submitted that reasons (1) and (5)  are  irrelevant
         to the question of significant obstacles and that (2) to (4) whilst
         relevant factors would not necessarily be determinative."

15. Once  again  I  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  ground  is
    unfounded.  Whilst the ground seeks to identify five  separate  reasons
    given by the First-tier Tribunal for its conclusion that there are very
    significant obstacles to the claimant's integration  into  Nigeria,  on
    close analysis - as accepted by Mr Harrison - there are numerous  other
    reasons also given by the Tribunal but not referred to in the  grounds.



16. Looking at the decision of the FtT as a whole in  the  context  of  the
    information it had before it, it is clear  that  each  of  the  reasons
    identified  in  paragraph  10  therein,  for  the  finding   that   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) had been met, has a  foundation
    in the evidence. It is significant to observe that upon  being  invited
    by the Tribunal to identify which, if any, of  the  findings  were  not
    open to the Tribunal on the available evidence Mr Harrison  was  unable
    to direct attention to any such findings.

17. Furthermore, the assertion in  the  grounds  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant is pregnant and that the appellant's  British  partner  would
    have to give up his job if  he  were  to  also  move  to  Pakistan  are
    irrelevant to the question of whether there very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration to Nigeria,  is  entirely  misconceived.
    Plainly, both are matters which should not  properly  be  left  out  of
    account in a consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi); the  weight  to  be
    attached to each being entirely a matter for the FtT.

18. The same can be said of the age the claimant  left  Nigeria,  the  fact
    that she could not reasonably be expected to receive the support of her
    family there and that she would not be able to support herself and  her
    child in Nigeria. Whilst I agree with the grounds that  none  of  these
    matters should be treated as being determinative of the  issue  in  the
    appeal, this is not how the FtT treated them.

19.  In  short,  I  find  that  the  FtT  gave  adequate  reasons  for  its
    conclusions. It was not required to give reasons for reasons.  The  FtT
    was entitled to take into account each of the matters  referred  to  in
    paragraph 10 of its decision, and attach such  weight  to  each  as  it
    thought  appropriate.  The  conclusion  reached  by  the  FtT  is   not
    irrational on the available evidence.

20. As such, and for the reasons given above, I  do  not  accept  that  the
    FtT's decision contains an error of law.

Decision

The SSHD's appeal is dismissed. The  FtT's  decision  does  not  contain  an
error of law.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor






















