
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20759/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 10 September 2015                   |                On 24 November 2015  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                DEEPAK JOSHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:      Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Mayfair Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For convenience we refer to the respondent as the Claimant.


 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds with reference to Appendix FM.






 3. In a Refusal Letter dated 2 May 2014, the Secretary  of  State  refused
    the Claimant's human rights application, made with reference to Article
    8 of the ECHR on private and family life grounds,  and  issued  removal
    directions dated 2 May 2014 (IS151B) set for the Claimant's country  of
    origin,  India.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its   decision
    allowing the Claimant's appeal against that  decision  on  20  February
    2015.





 4. The Appellant appealed against that decision. The ground of appeal  may
    be summarised as follows:


      i) The judge erred  in  giving  inadequate  reasoning  and  failed  to
         explain  why  return  to  India  would  entail   such   significant
         difficulties that family life could not continue,  given  that  the
         sponsor and Claimant could communicate with each other  in  English
         and can continue to do so in India. The judge  failed  to  consider
         whether the  sponsor  could  learn  Punjabi  and  this  was  not  a
         significant difficulty  given  that  the  sponsor  learned  English
         despite coming from the Philippines. The  Appellant  accepted  that
         the  inability  to  speak  Punjabi  would  hinder   the   sponsor's
         employment opportunities; however this was not something that could
         not be overcome.






 5. We were not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Claimant but were
    addressed in oral submissions  by  her  counsel  and  provided  with  a
    Skeleton Argument.





    No Error of Law


 6. At the close of submissions, we indicated that we would reserve our
    decision, which we shall now give. We do not find that there is an
    error of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. Our
    reasons for so finding are as follows.






 7. We find that the Secretary of State's appeal must fail in relation to
    the judge having allegedly failed to give reasons as to why there would
    be significant difficulties in the couple relocating to India. At
    paragraph 15 of the determination, the judge sets out the terms of EX.2
    which provide that insurmountable obstacles means the "very significant
    difficulties" which would be faced by either the applicant or their
    partner in relocating abroad and which could not be overcome or would
    entail "very serious hardship" for the applicant "or their partner".




 8. Thereafter, at paragraphs 18, 22 and 23 of the determination, the judge
    records that the sponsor is a British citizen and that she would not
    relocate to India.



 9. Ms Pettersen submitted that the judge did not explain what significant
    difficulties or hardship would ensue in the context of language
    difficulties or employment, however that is incorrect. At paragraph 22,
    the judge applies the correct test of significant difficulties or
    hardship and at paragraph 23 the sponsor's difficulties are properly
    considered. The judge also records that the sponsor has never been to
    India and does not speak any of the fourteen official languages spoken
    there and found that even if English is spoken in India in some
    circles, this has to be viewed in light of the population overall and
    that the use of English is not likely to be widespread in the circles
    in which the Claimant is likely to live and function.



10. The judge further records that the sponsor could not secure employment
    equivalent to what she does now as she does not speak any of the
    mainstream languages of India which would be a significant handicap in
    the market for someone of her age. Such a significant handicap could be
    a significant difficulty or hardship and it is clear that the judge so
    found. The judge concludes the analysis of EX.1 and EX.2 by stating
    that the sponsor would face "very significant difficulties" in
    continuing her family life in India and those very significant
    difficulties would entail "very serious hardship" for her.




11. We find that the Judge reached findings upon the  evidence  before  him
    that were open to him and which he was entitled to reach. It  might  be
    that another judge would not have reached the same conclusion on  those
    facts; however those findings are neither perverse nor irrational in  a
    Wednesbury sense for that reason. In that respect, we remind  ourselves
    of the dicta of Baroness Hale  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007] UKHL 49, wherein the following was
    stated inter alia [at 30]:


         "...This is an expert tribunal charged with administering a complex
         area of law in challenging circumstances... and they alone are  the
         judges of the facts. It is not enough that their decision on  those
         facts may seem harsh to people who have  not  heard  and  read  the
         evidence and arguments  which  they  have  heard  and  read.  Their
         decisions should be respected unless it is quite  clear  that  they
         have misdirected themselves in law.  Appellate  courts  should  not
         rush to find such misdirections  simply  because  they  might  have
         reached a different conclusion on the facts or expressed themselves
         differently".



12. Given the above, it is clear that the judge applied  the  correct  test
    from the Immigration Rules, and made findings based upon  the  evidence
    before him. It was for the judge to assess  the  sponsor's  ability  to
    relocate and whether that would entail very serious hardship, and  that
    is what he did. Against that backdrop, it appears that the  Appellant's
    appeal is one of disagreement with the outcome and does not  reveal  an
    error on a point of law such that the decision should be set aside.






13. We consequently find that  the  decision  does  not  reveal  inadequate
    reasoning and we find that the judge  explained  the  reasons  for  the
    findings that  he  made.  The  reasons  are  proper,  intelligible  and
    adequate to sustain the conclusions drawn.




14. The grounds do not reveal an error of law such that the decision should
    be set aside.







Decision





15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini                                  19/11/15

































