
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2015                               |On 29 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS RUSHNA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:  Mr S Kareem, Counsel instructed by Hamlet
Solicitors LPP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid sitting at Taylor House  on  30
    January 2015) allowing the  claimant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules against the decision by the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  her
    leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled  here  on
    the ground that she failed to satisfy the English language  requirement
    in paragraph 284.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimant  requires  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Background

 2.  As  from  29  November  2010,  paragraph  284,  which  sets  out   the
    requirements for an extension of stay as a spouse or civil partner of a
    person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom,  has  contained  an
    English language requirement as follows:

    ix(a)    the applicant  provides  an  original  English  language  test
           certificate in speaking and listening from an  English  language
           test provider approved by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  these
           purposes, which clearly  shows  the  applicant's  name  and  the
           qualification obtained (which must meet or exceed  level  A1  of
           the Common European Framework of Reference) unless:

           (i)    the applicant is aged 65 or over at the time he makes his
                application; or

           (ii)   the applicant has a physical  or  mental  condition  that
                would prevent him from meeting the requirement; or

           (iii)  there are exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  that
                would prevent the applicant from meeting the requirement ...

 3. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date  of  birth  was  7
    June 1970.  She applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a
    spouse in November 2010, just before the introduction  of  the  English
    language requirement into Rule 281 and Rule 284.  Her  application  for
    entry clearance was refused  in  February  2011,  but  was  allowed  on
    appeal.  So she was granted entry clearance in the spring of 2012,  and
    on 4 March 2014 Ethnic Community Service  applied  on  her  behalf  for
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the  partner  of  a  person
    present and settled here.

 4. On 24 April 2014 the application was refused on the  sole  ground  that
    she had failed to provide an English language certificate which was  on
    the approved list of providers, and she had not demonstrated  that  she
    was exempt from the English language requirement.  So she did not  meet
    E-LTRP4.1 and 4.2 of Appendix FM.  Her case was considered under  EX.1,
    but  she  had  not  demonstrated  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing her from returning to  Bangladesh.   She  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for just over two years, having spent  the  majority  of
    her life in Bangladesh.  She had parents and  siblings  in  Bangladesh.
    He and her spouse had no children within their relationship, and it was
    not unreasonable to expect them to return to Bangladesh and to continue
    their private and family life there.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before Judge Majid, the  claimant  gave  oral  evidence.
    She adopted as her  evidence-in-chief  a  witness  statement  dated  21
    January 2015, most of which Judge Majid reproduced verbatim when giving
    his reasons for allowing her appeal.

 6. She believed the Secretary of State had refused  her  application  very
    unfairly because when she came to  the  United  Kingdom  there  was  no
    requirement for the English language test. When she applied for further
    leave to remain as a spouse on completion  of  two  years  probationary
    period the new Rule was applied in her case.  She had sought to  comply
    with the requirements of the new Rule.  She had registered with Sanjari
    International College for ESOL course  entry  level  3  (B1),  and  had
    successfully passed the test on 6 February 2014, receiving certificates
    for speaking and listening.   She  asked  the  course  provider  before
    registering with them  whether  this  was  the  right  course  for  the
    requirements of the Home Office for the purposes of her application  of
    further leave to remain in the UK.  They said  that  it  was.   Anyhow,
    since the refusal decision, she had registered  with  Hamlets  Training
    Centre and she was now "ready for exam".

 7. The decision was a direct interference with their  private  and  family
    life.  Her father died on 9 November 2013 at the age of 80.  Her mother
    was 70 years old with multiple health problems.  Her mother  was  fully
    dependent on her younger brother, who was a full-time student  and  did
    not have his own income.  They scarcely managed on  the  little  income
    generated  from  cultivating  land.   So  if  she  had  to  return   to
    Bangladesh, she would face  tremendous  difficulties  to  maintain  and
    accommodate herself there.  On the other hand, her husband here  was  a
    56 year old man with multiple health problems.   He  had  had  a  heart
    attack on two occasions.  He always needed her  support.   Her  absence
    would not only affect their conjugal life, it would cause "our life  to
    be threatened".

 8. In his subsequent decision, the judge held at paragraph  [7]  that  the
    claimant had given evidence consistent with her assertions  in  various
    documents.  Further, she emphasised she had a  genuine  marriage.   The
    judge continued:

         "However, the Home Office has made a mistake and  has  insisted  on
         the language requirement which was imposed after  her  application.
         Thus, I find the decision totally without reason."

 9. Under the heading of "Dispositive Reasons and Deliberations", the judge
    said at paragraph [10]  that  he  had  carefully  perused  the  witness
    statement of the claimant (which he went on to set  out  extensively  -
    see above), and his decision was dictated by the following facts:-

      a) The respondent has made a mistake in rejecting the appellant's case
         and, as it is properly set out in a statement, her case fell before
         the language requirement was imposed.  Mr Ahmed read  some  of  the
         documents and made it clear that the application of  the  appellant
         was definitely much before the language requirement was imposed  by
         the respondent.

      b) The appellant has undertaken a language course from a college which
         told her that it will be suitable for the Home Office requirements.

      c) As the current Rules (strictly  speaking  not  applicable  to  this
         case) provide, the  respondent  has  discretion  in  assessing  the
         language  requirements.   This  discretion  is   clear   from   the
         Immigration Rules, paragraph (ixa) (iii) which says  "(iiii)  there
         are exceptional compassionate circumstances that would prevent  the
         applicant  from  meeting  the  requirement."    Accordingly,   this
         appellant  should  have  been  given  the  benefit  of   discretion
         particularly when the respondent has not adhered to the  timing  of
         the change in the Rules.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, arguing the judge had erred
    in law in holding that the refusal decision was totally without  reason
    and in holding that the Secretary  of  State  had  made  a  mistake  in
    rejecting the claimant's application as she  had  made  it  before  the
    language requirement was imposed by the Secretary of State.

11. Rule 284(ix)(a) was introduced by paragraph 11 of CM 7944 and came into
    force on 29 November 2010 subject to the following provisions:

         'The changes in paragraphs 6 to 20 shall take effect on 29 November
         2010.  However, if an applicant has made an application  for  entry
         clearance or leave to enter or remain as a spouse,  civil  partner,
         unmarried partner, same  sex  partner,  fianc�  or  proposed  civil
         partner of a British citizen or a  person  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom and the application has not been decided before 29 November
         2010, it will be decided in accordance with the Rules in  force  on
         28 November 2010.'

12. The claimant's application for leave to remain was received by the Home
    Office on 4 March 2014.  As  the  date  of  application  post-dated  29
    November 2010, the claimant was  required  to  satisfy  the  Rule,  and
    failed to do so.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On  30  March  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  granted
    permission to appeal as the judge was in error in his view  in  finding
    that the claimant did not need to satisfy the  rules  relating  to  the
    English language requirement.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me, Mr Kareem submitted that the  judge  had  not
    made a material error of law for two reasons.  Firstly,  on  the  facts
    the claimant came within the  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances
    exception; alternatively, the judge had also found  in  the  claimant's
    favour under Article 8 ECHR, and there  was  no  cross  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State against the favourable finding under Article 8 ECHR.

15. Having reviewed the judge's reasons and also the evidence relied on  by
    Mr  Kareem  as  showing  that  there  were  exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances, I ruled an error of law  was  made  out  such  that  the
    decision had to be set aside in its entirety and remade.  After further
    discussion, it was agreed that there did not need  to  be  any  further
    fact-finding, and that I could remake the decision on the basis of  (a)
    the evidence that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  (b)  the
    judge's  primary  findings  of  fact  which   are   undisputed   and/or
    uncontroversial  (such  as  his  positive  finding  on  the  claimant's
    credibility).

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

16. The judge plainly misdirected himself on  the  question  of  compliance
    with Rule 284.  He was under  the  misapprehension  that,  because  the
    claimant had been able to obtain entry clearance to the United  Kingdom
    without demonstrating a required level of  competency  in  the  English
    language, the Rule invoked by the respondent in the refusal decision of
    2014 did not apply to the claimant.

17. Although in paragraph [10] of his decision he  made  reference  to  the
    "exceptional compassionate circumstances" exception, he did not  go  on
    to explain how the claimant could bring herself within this  exception.
    Merely asserting that the claimant ought to have been given the benefit
    of the exception was not good enough.  Nor was it sufficient to  go  on
    to set out a substantial part  of  the  claimant's  witness  statement.
    While  the  contents  of  the  statement,  which  the  judge  accepted,
    disclosed compassionate circumstances, the statement was  not  directed
    at  the  crucial  question  as  to  whether  there   were   exceptional
    compassionate circumstances that prevented the  claimant  from  meeting
    the English language requirement.

18. In argument before me, Mr Kareem relied on the fact that  the  claimant
    had been unable to secure the return of  her  passport  from  the  Home
    Office in order to take an exam with an approved  provider  before  the
    appeal hearing.  No reference to this particular obstacle was  made  in
    the judge's decision, and therefore this obstacle  cannot  be  said  to
    have formed part of his discernable reasoning.

19. I accept that family life and proportionality  considerations  to  some
    extent underpinned the judge's decision to allow the  appeal.   But  he
    did not in terms allow the appeal on the  alternative  basis  that  the
    claimant qualified for Article 8 relief, either under Appendix FM or on
    a conventional proportionality assessment outside the  Rules,  applying
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended by the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    So there was no obligation on the Secretary of State to appeal  against
    a finding under Article 8 ECHR when, on the face of it, the appeal  had
    been solely allowed  on  the  ground  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

The Remaking of the Decision

20. For the purposes of remaking the decision,  I  take  into  account  the
    following documentary evidence to which Mr Kareem drew my attention.

21. On 6 January 2015 Hamlets Training Centre confirmed that  the  claimant
    had been enrolled on an entry 1 course  (which  was  equivalent  to  A1
    under  the  CEFR)  since  23  September  2014.   Her   attendance   was
    satisfactory.  Hamlets Training Centre was approved by Trinity College,
    London and was accredited by the BAC for independent further and higher
    education as a short course provider.  At the end of  the  course,  the
    student would be eligible to sit the Trinity College London  ESOL  GESE
    (grade 2-A1) examination if she could provide a valid identity document
    (passport).  The centre attached the Trinity College  London  candidate
    identification and security policy.

22. As is apparent from the attached policy, all candidates taking  a  SELT
    for visa and immigration purposes must provide a valid passport  for  a
    SELT taken in the UK.  A  valid  biometric  residence  permit  is  only
    acceptable for a test taken in the UK by candidates who do not  have  a
    valid passport, for example,  asylum  seekers  who  have  been  awarded
    refugee status.

23. The policy further advises that in the event that candidates are unable
    to present the appropriate identification outlined in the above  table,
    the SELT centre should advise the candidate to contact the UK Visas and
    Immigration Secure English Language Team for advice.

24. On 17 December 2014 the claimant's  previous  representatives  sent  by
    recorded delivery a letter to UK Visas and  Immigration  in  Sheffield.
    They explained that the claimant urgently needed her original  passport
    back for a short time as she had to produce  the  document  to  Hamlets
    Training Centre for the purpose of the English language  test  booking.
    The test was due to take place on 5  January  2014.   Mrs  Begum  would
    return her original passport to them again as soon as this purpose  was
    served.

25. On 22 December 2014 Mr Taylor of the Temporary Migration Team responded
    to the request, saying that they were unable to return  the  claimant's
    passport as the passport was currently  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Appeals) Team.  They could be contacted on telephone number  0300  123
    1711.  He hoped that this would be of assistance.

26. On 6 January 2015 the claimant's representatives wrote to the  Tribunal
    at Taylor House enclosing a copy of the letter that had  been  received
    from the Home Office.  They said the content of the  letter  was  self-
    explanatory.   According  to  Home  Office  information,  Mrs   Begum's
    passport was currently with the First-tier Tribunal.  They asked if her
    passport could be sent to her at her home address, and  they  confirmed
    that she would return her original passport  before  the  date  of  the
    hearing on 30 January 2015.

27. On 15 February 2015 the First-tier  Tribunal  informed  the  claimant's
    representatives that the Tribunal could not return the passport, as  it
    remained with the  Home  Office,  in  particular  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Appeals) Team.

28. There is a skeleton argument on file  from  Mr  Ahmed  of  Counsel  who
    appeared at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  claimant's
    behalf.  Hamlets Training Centre had informed the claimant  in  writing
    that, if she wanted to sit for an examination in January,  she  had  to
    provide her passport.  She had  approached  the  Home  Office  for  her
    passport without success.  As a consequence she could  not  fulfil  the
    requirement of the Immigration Rule, and this was not  her  own  fault,
    but was caused by an administrative failure on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State.

29. As I canvassed with the parties at the hearing, I do not consider there
    was an administrative failure on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The
    inability of the claimant to secure her passport in time to take a test
    from  the  approved  provider  before  the   hearing   arose   from   a
    misunderstanding.  Her previous representatives assumed that the First-
    tier Tribunal (Appeals) Team was part of the First-tier Tribunal,  when
    in fact, as I infer from the communication of 15 January 2015, it is  a
    separate department of the  Home  Office.   So,  with  the  benefit  of
    hindsight, the claimant's previous  representatives  misdirected  their
    enquiry for the production of the claimant's passport.

30. Reassessing the claim as at the date of the hearing before me, I am not
    persuaded that the claimant can invoke the  "exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances" exception to the English  language  requirement.   There
    were not exceptional compassionate  circumstances  that  prevented  her
    from meeting the  requirement  to  provide  an  English  language  test
    certificate from an approved  provider.   Regrettably,  she  was  badly
    advised in the run up to her application for leave to remain, with  the
    consequence that she did not take a test with an approved provider.  As
    this is not a points-based system appeal, it was open to  the  claimant
    to try and rectify the situation by the date  of  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In the end, it  was  a  practical  obstacle  that
    prevented her from taking a test with her chosen alternative  provider,
    namely the lack of a passport.  It was not an exceptional compassionate
    circumstance that prevented her from taking a  test  with  an  approved
    provider.  So her appeal falls to be dismissed under the Rules.

31. Insufficient evidence has been provided to enable me to make a  finding
    that there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  in
    Bangladesh, and therefore I am unable to find  that  the  claimant  can
    succeed on the alternative basis that she comes  within  the  exemption
    criteria contained in EX.1 of Appendix FM.

32. However, I find that there are compelling circumstances which give rise
    to an arguably good claim for Article 8 relief outside  the  Rules.   I
    accept questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should be answered  in  the
    claimant's favour.  The practical effect of the refusal decision is  to
    require her to return to Bangladesh in order to sit an English language
    test there, and  then  to  apply  for  entry  clearance  when  she  can
    demonstrate that she meets the English  language  requirement.  In  the
    interim, there will be disruption to the claimant's private and  family
    life.

33. I accept that questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test should  be  answered
    in the Secretary of State's favour, and  I  also  accept  that  in  the
    normal  course  of  events   the   proposed   interference   would   be
    proportionate, having regard to the public interest considerations  set
    out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended by the  Immigration  Act
    2014.

34. She has yet to satisfy the Secretary of State that she can  communicate
    in English to the required level of competence.  It is  in  her  favour
    that the other requirements of paragraph 284  are  met,  including  the
    requirement that the parties  are  able  to  maintain  and  accommodate
    themselves and any dependants adequately  without  recourse  to  public
    funds.  But this is not enough to tip  the  scales  in  the  claimant's
    favour.  What tips the scales in the claimant's favour is the  accepted
    evidence of the claimant that there are significant  obstacles  to  her
    going back to Bangladesh even for a  short  period,  and  that  even  a
    temporary separation from her husband will be unduly harsh,  given  his
    state of health and his need for the claimant's constant presence.

35. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that this is  one  of  those  rare
    cases where it is appropriate that  the  claimant  should  be  accorded
    limited Article 8 relief so as to be able to sit  an  English  language
    exam in the UK with an approved provider, with a view to making a fresh
    in-country application for leave to remain which is  supported  by  the
    required English language test certificate.  It is  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State as to how  much  leave  to  grant  the  claimant  in
    accordance with this ruling, but I do not consider that the  period  of
    leave needs to be any longer than two months from  the  date  when  her
    passport is returned to her.

Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
under the Rules contained an error of law, and accordingly the  decision  is
set aside and the following decision is substituted: the  claimant's  appeal
against the refusal of leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  person  present
and settled here is allowed  to  a  limited  extent  under  Article  8  ECHR
outside the Rules to enable the claimant to take an  English  language  test
with an approved provider, and thereby to demonstrate  to  the  Home  Office
that she meets the English language requirement.  The Secretary of State  is
directed to give the claimant at least two months  leave  for  this  purpose
from the date when her passport is returned to her.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

