
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21676/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2013                               |On 2nd August 2013         |
|Prepared 17th July 2013                         |                           |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A L McGEACHY
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                              mr JUNAID ZAHEER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R McGinley, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  On 30th May 2012  he  made  a
    combined application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the points-based system (PBS) and for  a
    biometric residence permit.  The application was refused  by  a  letter
    dated 26th September 2012.  The Appellant's subsequent appeal to First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Balloch was dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 ECHR in a determination promulgated on 6th December 2012.



 2. Grounds of application were lodged asserting  that  the  Appellant  did
    meet Rules 276ADE and was also entitled to remain under Article 8 ECHR.



 3. The application was initially refused  but  on  renewal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Dawson  who
    noted that it was arguable that the Tribunal had  erred  in  concluding
    that the claimant must have been awarded the qualification at the  date
    of the application.

 4. Thus the matter came before us on the above date.

 5. Having regard to SSHD v Raju & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754  Ms  McGinley
    for  the  Appellant  accepted  that  she  could  not  argue  that   the
    Appellant's application was a continuing one as had initially been held
    by the Upper Tribunal.

 6. She also accepted that because the Appellant had not lived continuously
    in the UK for at  least  twenty  years  he  did  not  fall  within  the
    Immigration Rules under paragraph 276ADE(iii) and (v).

 7. She submitted that the error in law in the judge's determination was to
    fail to consider the Appellant's rights under  Article  8  ECHR  in  an
    adequate way.  In particular, in paragraph 45, she  had  not  mentioned
    that the Appellant had been in the UK for nine years.  In paragraph  38
    the judge had not mentioned that the Appellant had been in the UK for a
    long time.  Having been here for that  length  of  time  he  wanted  to
    continue to be allowed leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant.  We were asked to allow the appeal.

 8. For the Home Office Mr Mathews said that there had been no need for the
    judge to go on and comment on Article 8 ECHR given that  the  Appellant
    manifestly failed to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Reference was made
    to MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52 - it could not be said that  the  Appellant
    would suffer unjustifiably harsh consequences if  his  application  was
    refused.  There was no near miss argument available to  the  Appellant.
    Furthermore the judge had carried out a careful analysis of his private
    life.  She had  reviewed  the  law  in  detail.   Paragraph  45  was  a
    conclusion of the reasoning given in the earlier paragraphs.  There was
    no absence of reasons and no error of law and accordingly the  decision
    should stand.

 9. We reserved our decision.

Conclusions

10. The judge commenced her analysis of the Appellant's Article 8 rights at
    paragraph 33 of her determination.  At paragraph 34 she noted that  the
    Appellant did have family members in the UK and did have an established
    private life here given that he had been living in the UK  since  2003.
    Accordingly the point taken by Ms McGinley that the judge had not given
    weight to the Appellant's time in the UK is  not  correct.   The  judge
    then went on to consider the five stage test set out in  R  v  SSHD  ex
    parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 going on to mention  further  jurisprudence
    including SSHD v Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and CDS (PBS "available": Article
    8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305.

11. She considered the Appellant's personal circumstances and  her  comment
    at paragraph 45 was a summary of her views that the interference in the
    Appellant's family and private life  caused  by  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent would not be a disproportionate one.

12. Far from being an error of law in the judge's approach she analysed the
    position of the Appellant with great care.  The submission that she did
    not take into account the length of time the Appellant has spent in the
    United Kingdom is unsound.  No other criticism was made of her findings
    which were entirely open to her  on  the  evidence  presented.   As  Ms
    McGinley acknowledged before us the judge was correct to say that while
    the Appellant hoped to be able to build on his degree by  gaining  some
    work experience in the UK the object of his  coming  to  the  UK  as  a
    student has been fulfilled.

13. It can safely be said that the judge was entirely correct  to  find  as
    she did namely that it would be proportionate for the Appellant  to  be
    returned to Pakistan under Article 8 ECHR.  There is no error  in  law.
    The decision must stand.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. We do not set aside the decision and the appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


