
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21949/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 10 June 2015                       |                   On 25 September    |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MRS RAISSA BEVENOVA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Clough dismissing the appeal  under  the  Immigration
   Rules and on human rights grounds.

2) The appellant is a Russian citizen.  It appears that she entered  the  UK
   illegally in 2003.  In 2011 the appellant married a British  citizen,  Mr
   Mohammad Zaraf Doulati.  Subsequently the  appellant  made  a  number  of
   applications for leave to remain as a spouse.  Following the  refusal  of
   the third application in September 2012 she made a  human  rights  claim.
   It is the respondent's decision refusing this which has given rise to the
   present appeal.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made findings  on  the  relationship
   between the appellant and her husband.  The  appellant's  husband  is  in
   receipt of Disability Living Allowance.  The appellant cooks for him  and
   shops and  cleans.   She  helps  him  with  his  medication  and  medical
   appointments.  The appellant's  husband  was  aware  of  her  immigration
   status from 2005.  The appellant has passed an English language test.

4) The judge accepted that the  appellant  has  established  a  private  and
   family life with her husband and that Article 8 was engaged.   The  judge
   proceeded to consider the issue of proportionality.  She noted  that  the
   appellant had been in the UK without leave since December 2004.  She  and
   her husband married  in  the  knowledge  of  her  lack  of  status.   The
   appellant is a Russian citizen and formerly worked as  an  accountant  in
   Russia.  The judge saw no reason  why  the  appellant  would  not  obtain
   employment in Russia if she returned there, where her two adult  children
   reside.

5) The judge noted that the appellant's husband has health problems  and  is
   in receipt of Disability Living Allowance.  The appellant's husband would
   be able to receive medical treatment in Russia.  The appellant's  husband
   had a Russian passport of his own, although he denied that he had a right
   of residence in Russia.  He had travelled to Russia for lengthy visits in
   2003, 2004 and 2006 in order  to  visit  his  elderly  father  and  close
   friends.  The judge, although accepting that the appellant helped to care
   for her husband, considered that care services would  be  available  from
   social services in the UK were the appellant's husband to remain  in  the
   UK after the appellant returned to Russia.  In any event  the  judge  was
   satisfied that the appellant and  her  husband  would  be  able  to  live
   together in Russia.

6) Permission to appeal was granted on two grounds.  The first of these  was
   that the judge  had  found  that  adequate  medical  treatment  would  be
   available in Russia for the appellant's husband but  arguably  the  judge
   erred by not identifying the evidence upon which this finding  was  made.
   The second ground on which permission was  granted  was  that  the  judge
   arguable erred in applying a test of whether it would  be  "unjustifiably
   harsh" for the appellant's husband to relocate to Russia.

Submissions

7) At the hearing before  me  Mr  McGlashan  submitted  that  there  was  no
   evidence showing that the appellant's husband would  have  the  right  to
   reside in Russia.  The medical evidence showed the  extent  of  his  ill-
   health.  The judge found that health care was  available  in  Russia  but
   this was a speculative finding with no evidence to support it.  There was
   a letter from the GP saying that the appellant's  husband  needed  to  be
   reminded to take his medication and that he may black out when he has  an
   asthma attack.

8) Mr McGlashan further submitted that the judge applied a test  of  whether
   it would be unjustifiably harsh to expect the appellant and  her  husband
   to relocate to Russia but the test should have been  whether  there  were
   exceptional circumstances.  A full assessment was required in relation to
   proportionality.  The judge did not mention that the appellant's  husband
   was a British citizen.  The relevance of this arose in the case of  Mirza
   [2015] CSIH.  In assessing proportionality the  individual  circumstances
   of the parties should have been taken into account and the judge did  not
   do this.

9) For the  respondent,  Mrs  O'Brien  said  that  the  starting  point  for
   consideration had been paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The appellant  did
   not meet the Rules.  The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
   paragraph EX.1  was  not  satisfied  and  there  were  no  insurmountable
   obstacles to the couple carrying on their married life in Russia.

10) On  the  medical  evidence,  Mrs  O'Brien  continued,  it  was  for  the
   appellant to show that  his  medical  circumstances  were  a  barrier  to
   leaving the UK.  The burden of proof in  relation  to  this  was  on  the
   appellant.

11) Mrs O'Brien  continued  that  it  had  not  been  established  that  the
   appellant's husband would not be able to gain entry to Russia.  The judge
   made rational findings on the evidence, which was  that  the  appellant's
   husband has visited Russia.

12) Although the appellant's spouse needed assistance with his care  it  was
   not only his spouse who would be able to provide this.  There were  other
   options for support if the appellant left the UK.  The judge referred  to
   the possibility of assistance  from  social  services.   The  appellant's
   husband was in receipt  of  Disability  Living  Allowance.   It  was  not
   unreasonable for  the  judge  to  rely  on  her  own  knowledge  of  what
   assistance might be available in this country.   In  conclusion,  it  was
   not possible to envisage what other decision could  have  been  made  and
   accordingly the judge had not erred.

13) In response Mr McGlashan pointed out that the  appellant's  husband  had
   formerly been a citizen of Afghanistan.  His father  had  served  in  the
   Afghan Army during the Russian occupation and had travelled to Russia for
   medical treatment.  The appellant's husband used to visit his  father  in
   Russia and he was allowed to enter Russia for this purpose.

14) Mr McGlashan continued that although paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM  was
   mentioned in the refusal letter, there had been no real discussion  about
   this at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The emphasis was  on
   proportionality outwith the Immigration Rules of the appellant's  removal
   from the UK.

15) Mr McGlashan further submitted that there was no evidence on  which  the
   judge could have found  that  health  care  would  be  available  if  the
   appellant's husband was left alone in the UK.  He required the assistance
   of the appellant.  There was  no  evidence  as  to  the  availability  or
   frequency of support from social services.

16)  Mr  McGlashan  further  submitted  that  it  was  relevant   that   the
   appellant's husband  was  in  receipt  of  Disability  Living  Allowance.
   Essentially the respondent's position was that the appellant should leave
   the UK and apply for entry clearance.  The respondent had not  said  that
   the appellant would not receive entry clearance.  The appellant's husband
   has Disability Living Allowance and meets all the requirements.   It  was
   not proportionate to require the appellant to return to Russia  to  apply
   for entry clearance, having regard to  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40.   The
   appellant had brought herself to the attention of the authorities and had
   permission to marry.

17) Mr McGlashan said that he would ask for the appeal  to  be  remitted  to
   the First-tier Tribunal and heard afresh.  The findings made by the judge
   were not based on evidence before  the  Tribunal.   Health  functions  in
   Russia were mentioned in the respondent's  refusal  letter  but  did  not
   relate to the circumstances of the appellant's husband and the assistance
   he required.  There was also the issue of  whether  he  had  a  right  to
   reside in Russia.  When the appellant's husband came to  the  UK  he  was
   given first refugee status, then ILR, and then  citizenship.   The  judge
   had failed to take the entire case into consideration in considering  the
   proportionality of the refusal of leave.  If the appellant was  to  apply
   for entry clearance from abroad this could only be granted.

Discussion

18) The issues in this appeal developed in the course of the hearing  before
   me.   I refer in particular to Mr McGlashan's reference to  the  case  of
   Chikwamba,   which  although  not  specifically  referred   to   in   the
   application for permission to appeal, would seem to be  relevant  to  the
   issue of proportionality, in accordance with R  (on  the  application  of
   Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation   -
   proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189.  It is  difficult  to  fault  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal for failing to  consider  the  Chikwamba
   issue if it was not argued before her but there is an error of law in her
   consideration of the issue of  proportionality.   This  arises  from  the
   judge's use of a test of whether consequences of the appellant's  removal
   would be "unjustifiably harsh".  This test may have some application to a
   person whose immigration status is precarious  but,  as  pointed  out  in
   Mirza [2015] CSIH 28 at 22, there  is  still  a  "need  for  a  specific,
   individual assessment of the whole facts including the degree to which it
   may be said that the status of the relevant party was truly  precarious."
   Since the judge made her decision the understanding of how  the  test  of
   proportionality outwith the Rules is  to  be  applied  has  been  further
   considered as, for example,  in  the  more  nuanced  approach  of  asking
   whether there are "compelling circumstances", discussed  in  the  leading
   authority of SS (Congo)  [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at 33.  The way in which the
   judge applied a test of whether removal would be "unjustifiably harsh" in
   this appeal was not compatible with the approach to proportionality in SS
   (Congo).  In particular the judge applied  this  test  not  only  to  the
   removal of the appellant but also, at paragraph 23, to the impact on  the
   appellant's husband of remaining here alone.  Overall the judge's use  of
   this test meant that the issue of proportionality was not given full  and
   proper consideration and accordingly  the  judge  erred  in  law.   I  am
   satisfied that owing to this error the decision of the Judge of the First-
   tier Tribunal should be set aside.

19) The other point on which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  is  less
   substantial.  As Mr McGlashan acknowledged, in the  respondent's  reasons
   for refusal letter reference was made to medical  facilities  in  Russia,
   although Mr  McGlashan  submitted  that  these  did  not  relate  to  the
   appellant's husband's specific conditions.  Nevertheless, I consider that
   the material in the refusal  letter  was  sufficient  to  show  that  the
   respondent had considered  the  availability  of  medical  facilities  in
   Russia and, as Mrs O'Brien rightly submitted, it would then  be  for  the
   appellant to show that treatment of the  sort  required  by  her  husband
   would not be available.

20) I gave little weight to Mr McGlashan's further point, namely that  there
   was no evidence on the availability of care and support in the  UK.    As
   Mrs O'Brien rightly submitted, the availability of such support  in  this
   country is a matter which the judge  was  entitled  to  regard  as  being
   within judicial knowledge.  If for some reason the  appellant  sought  to
   show that the type or degree of care he required would not  be  available
   in the UK then the burden would be upon the appellant to adduce  evidence
   in relation to this.

21) I have considered  whether  to  substitute  a  fresh  decision  for  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mrs O'Brien submitted that no other
   decision could have been reached than the decision made by the  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal.  This comment was made,  however,  prior  to  Mr
   McGlashan's submission upon  the  relevance  of  Chikwamba.   As  I  have
   already indicated, the Chikwamba issue  does  not  appear  to  have  been
   argued before the First-tier Tribunal and no notice of it appears to have
   been given to the respondent.  Given that the  Chikwamba  issue  was  not
   considered before the First-tier Tribunal and  given  that  there  are  a
   number of points on which either  party  might  wish  to  adduce  further
   evidence, I consider that the appropriate course is for the appeal to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to a judge other  than  Judge  Clough
   for  a  fresh  decision  to  be  made  on  Article  8   with   particular
   consideration of the question of whether it would be disproportionate  to
   expect the appellant to return to  Russia  to  make  an  entry  clearance
   application to rejoin her husband in the UK.

22) I note in this regard that the suitability requirements  under  Appendix
   FM were considered by the  respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  and  the
   appellant was considered to satisfy these requirements.  No consideration
   was given to the  eligibility  requirement  for  entry  clearance  in  E-
   ECP.3.3, to which Mrs O'Brien helpfully referred me at  the  hearing,  in
   relation to  the  appellant's  husband's  receipt  of  Disability  Living
   Allowance.  Of course, at the time of the refusal letter this was not  an
   issue under consideration.  It would, however,  be  appropriate  for  the
   appellant to adduce evidence to show that the requirements  of  E-ECP.3.3
   would be satisfied were an  application  to  be  made.   Evidence  to  be
   adduced in relation to maintenance should  include  evidence  as  to  the
   adequacy of accommodation.  A schedule of income and  outgoings  for  the
   appellant's husband should be provided.

23) The findings made by the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation
   to the existence of private and family life between the appellant and her
   husband are preserved.  It appears from the evidence  before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal that the appellant has successfully  completed  an  English
   language test and confirmation of this should be produced.   Where  there
   is further medical evidence or  evidence  as  to  the  care  and  support
   requirements of the appellant's husband, then evidence may be adduced  in
   relation to this.

Conclusions

24) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

25)  I set aside the decision.

26) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  to
   be remade by a judge other than  Judge  Clough  in  accordance  with  the
   observations set out above.

Anonymity

27) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   No  such
   order has been sought and I see no reason of substance for making one.





Signed                                             Date


Judge of the Upper Tribunal


