
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 6th June 2017                    |On 3rd July 2017                        |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                          mr godfrey jonathan phiri

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Olawanle, of counsel, instructed by Del &Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home office Presenting officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of South  Africa  who  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2002.  From March 2007 he has  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

2.   He sought leave to remain on the basis  of  family  and  private  life,
    which leave was refused by a decision dated 28th May 2015.

3.   Although the appellant is married he is currently  separated  from  his
    wife.  He has three children from that relationship namely [J] born  on
    7th November 1994, [Z] born on 1st August 1998 and [Ja]  born  on  [  ]
    2007.  In addition there is a further child of his wife namely [N] born
    on [ ] 2011.

4.   The appellant's wife  and  children  have  been  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 8th July 2018.

5.   The appellant sought to  appeal  against  the  refusal  decision  which
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan on 29th September
    2016.  In a determination promulgated on 26th October 2016  the  appeal
    was dismissed in all respects.

6.   The appellant  sought  to  challenge  the  decision,  contending   that
    inadequate consideration  had  been  given  to  the  interests  of  the
    children and that no proper regard had been had to Section  117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.  Permission to mount that appeal was granted and thus the
    matter comes before me to determine the merits of the challenge.

7.   In fairness to the Judge, the determination shows that  the  Judge  did
    attempt to consider in detail the situation and  circumstances  of  the
    family and of the children in particular.  I note various statements as
    submitted in the appellant's bundle, but they are somewhat vague as  to
    the reality of relationship with  which  the  children  have  with  the
    appellant and indeed the nature of their particular circumstances.

8.   That having been said, the Judge at paragraph 8  of  the  determination
    recognised that Sections 117A, B and D of the 2002 Act had relevance in
    the analysis that was to be conducted.   Sadly,  although  noting  that
    fact, the Judge did not act upon it.  In one sense those provisions  do
    not assist the  appellant,  particularly   Section  117B(4)  (5)  which
    provides that little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life  or
    relationship formed at a time when the person is in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully or that person's  immigration  status  is  precarious.   The
    comments clearly apply to the appellant.

9.   However what is also of significance is that Section  117B(6)  provides
    that the public interest does not require the  person's  removal  where
    that person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

10.  At the time of the hearing [Ja] was a qualifying child for the  purpose
    of that section, he having lived in the United  Kingdom  in  excess  of
    seven years.

11.  Had that been appreciated it may have been that the  Judge  would  have
    focused the examination of the  factual  circumstances  by  asking  the
    questions as to whether or not there existed  a  parental  relationship
    between the appellant and [Ja], if so  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom.   Neither  question  was
    asked in those terms.

12.  It has been submitted to me that overwhelmingly it can be said that  it
    was not reasonable for [Ja] to leave the jurisdiction.  That was not  a
    question  which  was  asked  or  considered  in  the  course   of   the
    determination.  Indeed I find that even if asked, the answer would  not
    be so definite, as I have been invited to find that it would.

13.  The appellant's wife and all the children have  no  settled  status  in
    the United Kingdom other than the leave to remain until 8th July  2018.
    In those  circumstances  it  could  be  argued  that  it  was  entirely
    reasonable to expect the family to be with the appellant or  indeed  to
    join him at the expiry of that leave if not before.  Clearly whether it
    was or was not reasonable would depend upon a proper  analysis  of  the
    family situation.  This was not done.

14.  Although there was some  consideration  as  to  the  link  between  the
    children  and  particularly  [Ja]  and  the  appellant,   the   precise
    consideration of parental relationship did not arise  in  those  terms.
    There is some suggestion that financial support was given from time  to
    time although its nature was not entirely  clear.   There  was  also  a
    suggestion of visits  made  although  they  would  seem  to  be  fairly
    infrequent.

15.  Linked with such matters arises the situation of [N].  The Judge  found
    that [N] was not the child of the  appellant  and  therefore  that  the
    appellant had no parental relationship with him.  It seems to  me  that
    that flies in the face of the reality of the situation that [N] is part
    of the family, lives in the household with  the  appellant's  wife  and
    children.

16.  Curiously there is very little evidence that  has  been  adduced  about
    him as to the circumstances in  which  he  came  to  be  born  and  the
    relationship that the appellant's wife had  or  has  with  the  natural
    father of [N].  I was told at the hearing that he has no  contact  with
    his natural father. If so it raises again the question of what parental
    responsibilities if any have been accepted  by  the  appellant  towards
    [N].  Again I have been told at the hearing that  the  appellant  takes
    [N] and [Ja] out, seemingly treating him as his child.  It seems to  me
    in those circumstances that it is simplistic simply to  ignore  [N]  as
    part of that family group as the same questions  need  to  be  properly
    asked as to whether there is any parental  relationship  with  him  and
    indeed even if there is not what are his best interests  under  Section
    55 of the Act of  2009.   It  is  clearly  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    reasonableness of removal of [Ja] to be looked at in the whole  context
    of the reasonableness of removal of the family as a whole.    In  those
    circumstances I find material errors of law such as to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that the  decision  should  be
    remade.

17.  I was invited to retain  it  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  remake  the
    decision myself on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  as  presented.   For
    reasons, which I hope I have made clear, it seems to me that much  more
    thorough examination as to the family situation and circumstances needs
    to be conducted.  It will  be  a  matter  for  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives to provide such evidence as would assist in the  proper
    and fair resolution of the issues to which I have made reference.

18.  In those circumstances and in accordance with  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Direction, I remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.

19.  The issue of costs will be determined by the First-tier  Tribunal  upon
    completion of that appeal.





[pic]
Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD















