
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21356/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th November 2014                           |On 29th May 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                             Tina Romania Brown
                        (no aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ms Tina Romania Brown date of birth 16th April 1980,  is
    a citizen of Jamaica. I have considered whether it is necessary to make
    an anonymity direction. Having considered all the circumstances  I  not
    make such a direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C  M  Phillips  promulgated  on  3  December  2013,
    whereby  the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
    decisions of the respondent  dated  the  16  May  2013  to  refuse  the
    appellant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and  thereupon
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.

 3. Judge Phillips had promulgated his decision on  3  December  2013.  The
    appellant applied for leave to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  That
    application  was  refused  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  by
    decision made on the 20th December  2013.  The  appellant  renewed  her
    application to the Upper Tribunal but that application was  refused  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on the 29th January 2014.

 4. The appellant sought judicial review of that decision. By order made on
    20 May 2014 Master Gidden made the following Order:-

         "Permission having been granted to apply for  judicial  review  and
         there being no request under CPR Part 54.7A (9) for  a  substantive
         hearing, the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to
         appeal is quashed."

 5. The appeal  was  referred  back  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  further
    consideration of the application for permission to appeal. In light  of
    the Order of the High Court, Mr  C M G Ockelton Vice President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal made the following order on 14 August 2014:-

         "Permission is granted in light of the decision of the  High  Court
         in this case. The parties are reminded that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         task is that set out in section 12 of the 2007 Act: this is a  case
         in which the court has given no reasons for its decision."

 6. By reference to section 12 I take that that is a reference  to  Section
    12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. Section 12 of the
    Act provides-

         '12. Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

         (1)  Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in  deciding  an
         appeal under section 11, finds that  the  making  of  the  decision
         concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law.

         (2)  The Upper Tribunal-

             (a)  may (but need not) set aside the decision of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, and

             (b)  if it does, must either-

                  (i)  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
                  directions for its reconsideration, or

                  (ii) re-make the decision.

         (3)  In acting under subsection (2) (b) (i) ,  the  Upper  Tribunal
         may also

             (a)  direct that the members of the First-Tier who are  chosen
             to reconsider the case are not the same as those who made  the
             decision that has been set aside;

             (b)   give  procedural  directions  in  connection  with   the
             reconsideration of the case by the First-Tier Tribunal

         (4)  In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i) , the Upper Tribunal

             (a)  may make any decision which the First-Tier Tribunal could
             make if the First-Tier Tribunal were re-making  the  decision,
             and

             (b)   may  make  such  findings  of  fact  as   it   considers
             appropriate.'

 7. The High Court has given no reasons for its decision. Thus in the first
    instance the case appears before me to determine whether or  not  there
    is an error of law in the original decision and if there is an error of
    law to determine how the case should further proceed.

Factual Background

 8. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 26  May  2002.
    The appellant had leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor
    until 26 November 2002. The appellant during the currency of her  leave
    made an application to remain as a student  and  that  application  was
    granted. The  appellant  thereafter  made  further  applications  as  a
    student resulting in her leave being extended at various times until 30
    November 2009. The appellant  had  spent  seven  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a student.

 9. On 30 November 2009 the appellant submitted a Tier  4  General  Student
    application. This application was rejected on 23 December 2009.  It  is
    suggested in the appellant's chronology  that  the  form  contained  an
    error and therefore the application was  rejected,  but  was  then  re-
    submitted on 5 January 2010. That application was refused  on  1  March
    2010. The refusal in respect of  that  application  did  not  give  the
    appellant any right of appeal.

10. According to the Decision and the other evidence herein [see  paragraph
    15] the first application of December 2009 was incomplete, as mandatory
    parts of the application had not been filled in by the appellant.  When
    the application was refused, advice was given that the appellant should
    ensure that all  mandatory  parts  were  completed  and  that  all  the
    necessary documentation was included in any future application. Despite
    that the second application/resubmitted  application  did  not  have  a
    valid CAS and did not have  the  required  financial  information  [see
    paragraph  17  and  the  refusal  letter  of  1st  March  Annex  C1  to
    respondent's bundle].

11. On 29 April 2010 the appellant submitted a "further application"  as  a
    Tier 4 General Student. That application was granted  on  the  10  June
    2010 and the appellant was given leave from 10 June 2010 to 9 September
    2010.

12. However the appellant had been without leave from 23 December 2009,  at
    the earliest when the first application was refused, or  from  the  1st
    March at the latest when the second application was refused through  to
    June 2010.

13. On 9 September 2010 the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 General Student. That application was  refused.  The
    appellant appealed against  the  refusal  and  was  successful  in  the
    appeal. Following a successful appeal leave to remain was granted  from
    16 May 2012 until 16 September 2012.

14. The appeal in the First-tier Tribunal was heard  on  the  17th  January
    2011, at which time the appellant had 2 terms left to complete  of  her
    current course of study, that is through to July  2011.  There  was  an
    appeal by the respondent to the Upper Tribunal  in  September  2011  by
    which time the appellant's course had been completed.

15. The appeal was allowed on the basis that it would be a  breach  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights not to allow her to complete  her  course.
    The appellant could not show that she had the required level  of  funds
    to meet the immigration rules but the First-tier Judge decided that  it
    would be disproportionate to remove the  appellant  when  she  had  two
    terms left to complete level 3 of  a  BTEC.  Of  significance  in  that
    decision was the appellant's assertion that her intention was to  leave
    the UK and return to Jamaica on completing the two remaining terms.  As
    is evident  from  the  appellant's  witness  statement  [marked  JPMc1]
    paragraph 3 the appellant's course appears to  have  finished  in  July
    2011.

16. By reason of information received on 25 June 2012 the appellant's leave
    was curtailed. The effective date of  the  expiry  of  the  appellant's
    leave by reason of the curtailment was 24 August 2012.

17. The letter curtailing the appellant's leave dated 25 June 2012 required
    the appellant to regularise her status/leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant on 23 August 2012 submitted an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  10
    years long residence.

18. That application was refused by letter dated 16 May 2013. The letter of
    refusal makes the following points:-

          a) The appellant could  not  succeed  under  the  long  residence
             provision by reason of the fact that there was a  gap  in  her
             lawful leave between the 1st March 2010 and  10th  June  2010,
             when the appellant  was  granted  further  leave.  Whilst  the
             appellant had made an application on the 29th April  2010,  no
             leave had been granted until the  10th  June  2010.  Therefore
             there was  a  break  in  the  lawfulness  of  the  appellant's
             residence of in excess of 100 days.  Accordingly the appellant
             could not succeed under paragraph 276B(i)(a). [see above - the
             point appears not taken that the original application  by  the
             appellant in November 2009 had been refused in  December  2009
             and therefore the appellant's leave had ceased at that  point.
             It appears to be accepted that with the re-submission  of  the
             application in January the  appellant's  leave  continued  for
             that period].

          b) Consideration  was  then  given  as  to  whether  or  not  the
             appellant could succeed under Appendix FM.  As  the  appellant
             had not given any evidence to lead the respondent  to  believe
             that the appellant had any family life the appellant could not
             rely upon Appendix FM.

          c) Consideration was then given  to  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
             Immigration Rules. The appellant had not lived in  the  United
             Kingdom for at least 20 years. The appellant had  resided  the
             majority of the live in Jamaica. It was not accepted that  the
             appellant had severed all ties, including social, cultural and
             family ties with Jamaica and therefore the appellant  did  not
             meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

          d)  Having  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  the
             respondent made the decisions to refuse the appellant  further
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thereupon to  remove
             her from the United Kingdom.

19. As stated the appellant appealed against those decisions and the appeal
    was heard by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Phillips.  In dealing  with  the
    appeal at paragraph 6 the judge notes that the appellant  has  accepted
    that the continuity of residence had  been  broken  and  therefore  the
    appeal could only  be  pursued  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR. The judge has specifically identified  the  fact
    that the appellant submissions related in substance to the private life
    which she had developed over a period of 11 years.

The Grounds of Appeal

20. The grounds of appeal appear in two parts. The initial  grounds  appear
    to have been settled by the counsel that originally appeared on  behalf
    of the appellant. Thereafter further  grounds  were  submitted  relying
    upon the original grounds and  adding  further  grounds.  The  original
    grounds raised the following points;

          a) Firstly it is alleged that in considering the case  the  judge
             applied an exceptionality test to the  appellant's  Article  8
             claim outside the rules. It is pointed out that  at  paragraph
             13 Judge Phillips had referred to the case of Kabia (MF:  para
             398 - "exceptional circumstances") [2013] UKUT  00569.  It  is
             acknowledged that it had not been stated that the  appellant's
             circumstances  were  exceptional  but  this  was  because  the
             appellant was not required to show  exceptional  circumstances
             in order to succeed under Article  8.  It  is  submitted  that
             Judge  Phillips  had  misdirected  himself  and   applied   an
             exceptionality test.

          b) The judge has made factual errors misstating  the  appellant's
             case in evidence. It is argued that in  paragraph  43  of  the
             decision the judge has stated that the appellant has withdrawn
             her appeal against the removal  directions.  It  is  submitted
             that that is inaccurate. What was conceded was that given  the
             case law and given the effect of section 51 of the  Crime  and
             Courts Act  2013  it  could  no  longer  be  argued  that  the
             respondent could not make two decisions at one  and  the  same
             time, namely a refusal to vary leave decision at the same time
             as making a decision to remove under section 47  of  the  2006
             Act.

          c)  Further  the  judge  has  failed  accurately  to  record  the
             appellant's evidence

               i) The timings of applications  and  their  refusal  are  not
                  accurate.

              ii) The judge has referred to the  appellant  indicating  that
                  she  has  accommodation  available  in  Jamaica  with  her
                  grandmother. As the judge has  not  compartmentalised  the
                  evidence of the appellant it  is  difficult  to  ascertain
                  where this evidence came from.

             iii)  The impression created is that the judge  has  failed  to
                  give anxious scrutiny to the appellant's case.

          d) The judge had failed  to  properly  consider  the  appellant's
             case. It had been asserted that the respondent had  failed  to
             apply her own policy in the IDIs in respect of long residence.
             The long residence policy gave  the  respondent  a  discretion
             where there were breaks in the period of residence  and  where
             there were exceptional circumstances such as  to  explain  the
             break in the continuity of residence. The judge was invited to
             consider the reasons that the appellant's application had been
             refused; the failure to return  the  appellant's  passport  in
             time; and the delay in renewing the applications, were such as
             to constitute "exceptional reasons" such that  the  discretion
             should have been exercised  in  the  appellant's  favour.  The
             judge treated the examples in the IDIs as to the circumstances
             in which the discretion  would  be  exercised  as  exhaustive,
             which they were not.

          e) The judge erred in concluding  that  the  appellant  had  been
             deceptive in a previous appeal in allegedly stating  during  a
             student appeal that she intended to return to Jamaica  and  in
             finding that Mr Jeffrey Brown had distanced himself  from  the
             appellant's evidence, when in  fact  Mr  Brown,  a  solicitor,
             stated  that  he  kept  a  fair  distance  from  advising  the
             appellant. The judge failed to provide reasons for conclusions
             set out in paragraph 58 of the decision.

          f) The Tribunal failed to properly consider the  documentary  and
             oral evidence. The general  credibility  was  doubted  but  no
             adequate consideration has been given to the evidence  and  no
             sufficient basis or reasons for rejecting  the  evidence.  The
             judge  took  inadequate  account  of  the  evidence  that  the
             appellant had a distant relationship  with  her  parents.  The
             appellant's parents are still in Jamaica.

          g) The judge erred in  assessing  the  Article  8  claim.  It  is
             submitted that the appellant is an integral part of the family
             of her uncle Mr Keith Brown. There  is  dependency  above  and
             beyond the norm such that family life has been established.

21. The additional grounds concentrate upon

          a) A material mistake as to facts - referring again to  paragraph
             58. It is again reiterated  that  Mr  Jeffrey  Brown  did  not
             distance himself from  the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  her
             intention. What he did distanced himself  from  was  providing
             legal advice to  the  appellant.  It  is  submitted  that  the
             findings by the judge are contrary  to  the  evidence  in  the
             circumstances.

          b) Procedural unfairness - and states:-

                  The  IJ  has  materially   erred   in   law   by   failing
                  particularise why the  appellant  was  sic  -  "unable  to
                  explain convincingly or credible in why she had  told  the
                  previous immigration judge that she intended to return  to
                  Jamaica on completion of the  course  but  had  chosen  to
                  remain in the United Kingdom when she was not a student".

             It  is  submitted  that  the  appellant   had   a   legitimate
             expectation that she would be asked to clarify why she had not
             returned and the judge demonstrably failed to do this.  It  is
             asserted that had she been  asked  the  appellant  could  have
             given a satisfactory  explanation.  For  subsequent  that  the
             appellant's circumstances changed, and she  should  have  been
             given an opportunity of explaining the changes.

          c) The judge has failed to make a finding that  the  respondent's
             failure to consider her own IDIs amounted  to  the  respondent
             making a decision that was not in accordance with the law.  It
             is submitted that the IDIs were a material part of the appeal.
             The judge's failure to consider them demonstrates an error  of
             law.

22. At the hearing before me the representative  made  submissions  on  the
    issues raised. To an extent having conceded that the appeal was on  the
    basis of Article 8,  and  the  grounds  appear  to  be  raising  issues
    relating to other factors including the immigration rules and the IDIs.
    The grounds raised issues beyond merely Article 8.

23. It is on the basis indicated that the appellant seeks to appeal against
    the decision on Judge Phillips.

Consideration

24. It is asserted that the  judge  has  applied  an  exceptionality  test.
    Whilst the judge has within paragraph 13 referred to the case of Kabia,
    it is necessary to look at how the judge treated the issues with regard
    to Article 8. Whilst it is correct to say  that  in  paragraph  72  the
    judge indicates that there is nothing exceptional within the  facts  as
    advanced by the appellant, he does not by reason of that only say  that
    that determines the appeal. He  goes  on  to  consider  all  the  steps
    required by the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 in assessing whether  the
    rights to family and private life would be  breached  and  whether  the
    decisions taken are proportionately justified.

25. The judge has started his consideration of Article 8 at  paragraph  64.
    The judge does within paragraph 66 commence consideration by  following
    the guidance given in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL27.

26. The judge considers whether  family  and  private  life  exist.  Having
    considered all of the circumstances he does  not  find  that  there  is
    sufficient elements of dependency to show that family life exists.  The
    approach of the judge is consistent with the case law, specifically the
    case of Kugathas [2003] INLR 170. The judge has considered the evidence
    and given valid reasons for the conclusions reached.  In  that  respect
    the judge has made material findings sufficient to find that there  was
    no family life.

27. The judge has however gone on in paragraph 67 to find that by reason of
    the period of time that the appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    she has developed a private life.  The  judge  thereafter  goes  on  to
    consider in accordance  with  Razgar  the  remaining  elements  of  the
    guidance given in the case law, whether  the  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant and to refuse further leave would be sufficiently serious  to
    engage Article 8 private life. As is evident from  the  conclusions  of
    paragraph 68 the judge was satisfied that  the  decisions  sufficiently
    seriously interfered with the appellant's private life so as to  engage
    Article 8. It was clear and evident that the decision on the  basis  of
    an analysis of the judge was in accordance with the law and was for the
    purposes of maintaining immigration control.

28. Thereafter the judge has gone on to  assess  whether  the  decision  is
    proportionately justified and in so doing makes it  clear  that  he  is
    undertaking the balancing exercise as required by Razgar. The judge was
    looking at all the factors in relation to the  proportionality  of  the
    decisions.

29. In that context whether there are exceptional  factors  is  a  material
    consideration to put into the proportionality balance. The judge  found
    that there was nothing exceptional within the facts as presented by the
    appellant. The judge has however gone on to consider other factors.  As
    is evident from the conclusions within paragraphs 76 to  78  the  judge
    was assessing all of the evidence before him in determining whether  or
    not the decisions were proportionately justified and was  satisfied  in
    all the circumstances that they were.

30. In the light of such an approach he cannot be said that the  judge  has
    applied an exceptionality test. He was merely  considering  whether  or
    not there were exceptional factors which needed to be placed  into  the
    balancing exercise in favour  of  the  appellant.  The  judge  has  not
    applied an exceptionality test therefore and there is no error  of  law
    in the approach the judge.

31. With regard to the second ground whilst it is correct to say  that  the
    judge appears to be indicating that the  appellant  has  withdrawn  her
    appeal against the removal directions, it is clear  from  what  follows
    thereafter that the  judge  was  merely  indicating  that  the  grounds
    previously advanced in other cases that removal decision could  not  be
    made at the same time as a decision to refuse to vary  leave  could  no
    longer be maintained. The judge has again not stopped the assessment of
    the case at that point but has  gone  on  to  consider  with  care  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8.

32. As is evident again from paragraph 78 the judge  has  assessed  whether
    the decisions to refuse further  leave  and  to  remove  constituted  a
    breach of Article 8 rights, clearly concentrating on whether or not  it
    was unreasonable to remove the appellant  or  whether  or  not  it  was
    proportionately justified. Whilst the complaint is against paragraph 43
    it is clear that the judge was dealing with  the  issue  of  whether  a
    removal decision could be made at the same time as a decision to refuse
    further leave. Whilst the phrasing may be  unfortunate  the  judge  has
    considered ultimately whether removal  was  proportionately  justified.
    The circumstances the judge has not  treated  the  appeal  against  the
    removal as withdrawn but merely  that  an  argument  that  the  removal
    decision was illegal was no longer pursued.

33. Thereafter it is suggested that the judge has not accurately record the
    appellant's and her witnesses' evidence. That there  were  inaccuracies
    within the timings of applications  and  their  refusal.  It  does  not
    appear to be challenged that there was a gap in the lawfulness  of  the
    residence of the appellant from March 2010 until June 2010. During that
    period of time the appellant did not have lawful leave  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom.

34. It is now asserted that the judge  has  failed  to  consider  the  IDIs
    properly. As is evident from paragraph 36 the judge was considering the
    submission that there was a historic wrong  and  whether  a  discretion
    should  be  exercised  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  The  judge  has
    specifically dealt with that matter in paragraph 56  of  the  decision.
    The judge has pointed out that the reasons for  the  rejection  of  the
    applications in the period of November 2009 to March 2010 were failures
    on the part of the appellant to submit properly completed  applications
    with a valid CAS letter and with the required financial details.

35. It is suggested in the grounds of appeal that the judge has  failed  to
    consider the IDIs. Alternatively it is suggested  that  in  considering
    the IDIs has failed to find that there  were  circumstances  justifying
    the exercise of a discretion. As is evident from paragraph 53 the judge
    considered the matter and noted that  the  previous  determination  was
    granted not on the basis of an application under the immigration  rules
    but on the basis of Article 8 under in  part  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was going to return to Jamaica at the end for a  course.  The
    judge was satisfied that no legitimate expectation arose or no argument
    on administrative error was appropriate.

36. The reasons that the applications  failed  was  because  the  appellant
    failed to submit proper and completed applications. The  appellant  had
    been warned after the failure of  the  first  application  in  2009  to
    ensure that she submitted completed applications with all the necessary
    documents.

37. The appellant seeks to  rely  upon  the  IDIs.  The  IDIs  are  in  the
    appellant's bundle at page 45. There is reference therein to breaks  or
    gaps in lawful residence. The IDIs indicate that gaps of the lawfulness
    of the residents may be permitted where the gap  is  no  more  than  28
    days. However the IDIs  go  on  to  say  that  there  is  a  discretion
    exceptionally where in respect of a single application a  gap  of  more
    than 28 days occurs. In one sense it depends very much on how one views
    the period from November through to March  whether  that  is  a  single
    application or three  separate  applications  made  by  the  appellant.
    Further the examples given of where a discretion may be exercised point
    clearly to circumstances where responsibility  lies  with  others,  not
    failures by the appellant and certainly not failures by  the  appellant
    who has been told to submit all the appropriate  documentation.  Whilst
    there may be a discretion none of the examples where a  discretion  was
    exercised involved the failure on the part of the appellant to submit a
    proper complete application or  the  required  documentation  with  the
    application. The judge had  considered  the  issue  of  discretion  and
    decided that it should not be exercised in favour of the  appellant  in
    the circumstances.  Again the judge has fully justified his approach to
    the issues raised.

38. In respect of the remaining grounds a number of issues  relate  to  the
    evidence been raised, for example relating to whether accommodation was
    available with the appellant's grandmother. It is  suggested  that,  as
    the evidence was not been compartmentalised, the  representative  could
    not identify where the suggestion has come from that accommodation  was
    available. No one has requested the noted of  evidence  of  the  judge.
    However at the conclusion of cross-examination the notes of  the  judge
    clearly  indicate  that  the  appellant  was  asked  whether   or   not
    accommodation was available with her grandmother and she indicated that
    it was.  Cross-examination  was  finished  at  that  point.  The  notes
    continue by indicating  that  the  appellant  was  re-examined  by  her
    representative on the point immediately.

39. The issue was whether or not the appellant was  asked  questions  about
    the availability of accommodation in Jamaica. The appellant was and she
    gave  an  answer  that  accommodation  would  be  available  with   her
    grandmother. Whilst subsequently she sought to  resile  from  that  and
    suggest that the  grandmother  could  not  support  her  and  that  the
    grandmother lives on a pension, it is clearly an issue that was  raised
    in evidence and the judge  was  entitled  to  take  the  evidence  into
    account. The appellant also has her  parents  in  Jamaica.  Whilst  the
    appellant now seeks  to  submit  evidence  that  she  has  a  "distant"
    relationship with her parents, the  fact  is  that  she  has  immediate
    family members in Jamaica.

40. The appellant's representative was also raised the issue of  the  judge
    making a finding that  the  appellant  had  been  deceptive  in  giving
    evidence previously stating that  she  intended  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom at the end of her course. That was clearly an  issue  that  was
    there to be considered. The appellant had every opportunity to  explain
    why she remained in the United Kingdom after  the  end  of  her  course
    having stated previously that when her course finished she would  leave
    and return to Jamaica. The judge was entitled to consider the  evidence
    and consider the fact that the appellant had not offered an explanation
    when she could have done so. That was a finding of fact that the  judge
    was entitled to make on the evidence. If the appellant wanted  to  give
    an explanation then she had every opportunity of doing so.

41. The judge in the decision refers to the evidence given by other members
    of the family in the previous appeal with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    stated intention to return to Jamaica. Whilst it is suggested that  the
    judge has misunderstood the evidence by Mr Jeffrey Brown, there  is  no
    challenge to the evidence given by Claudette Brown, as recorded by  the
    judge, that she was not aware that the appellant's intention to  return
    to Jamaica in July 2011. The judge has considered the evidence that was
    before him and given valid reasons for the findings that he  made.  The
    appellant had every opportunity to deal with an issue was clearly there
    on the papers. There is no error in the approach the judge to the issue

42. In the circumstances the judge has properly considered all the evidence
    and made valid findings of fact with regard to the issues in the  case.
    The judge was aware that the appellant had family  members  in  Jamaica
    including her parents and her grandmother.

43. The judge has properly assessed all the issues under Article 8 and  was
    entitled to make the decision that he did on the evidence presented.

44. There is no material error of law in the determination.  I  uphold  the
    decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

