
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/21779/2015
                                                               ia/21786/2015
                                                               ia/21783/2015
                                                               ia/21789/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th November 2016                         |On 2 December 2016            |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                       Victoria [O] (first appellant)
                       Stanley [O] (second appellant)
                           [L O] (third appellant)
                          [S O] (fourth appellant)
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Unigwe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Froom who dismissed  their  appeals  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The appellants are citizens of  Nigeria  and  the  first  and
    second appellants are the parents of the third and  fourth  appellants.
    The first two appellants were  born  on  23rd  February  1979  and  2nd
    February 1972 respectively and their children are 9  years  old  and  6
    years old being born on 6th October 2007 and 21st March 2010.  A  third
    child [D] was born on 5th February  2013  and  was  not  party  to  the
    proceedings.  A key  issue  in  the  proceedings  was  that  the  third
    appellant had lived continuously in the UK for seven years.

 2. The first and second appellants had both come to the United Kingdom  as
    visitors, in 2006 (the Secretary of  State  records  2007),  overstayed
    their leave and had not had leave since their six month visas  expired.
    The appellants made their applications  on  27th  March  2015  and  the
    refusal was made on 26th May 2015.   Consideration  was  given  to  the
    appellants' applications both under Appendix  FM  and  under  paragraph
    276ADE.  The first and second appellants  were  considered  to  be  ex-
    partners but the second appellant had daily contact with the  children.
    (Their relationship was said  to  have  since  resumed).   It  was  not
    accepted that it would be unreasonable for the children to relocate  to
    Nigeria and  it  was  also  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
    significant  obstacles   to   integration   into   Nigeria.    Separate
    consideration was given to the third and  fourth  appellants.   It  was
    noted that the appellant had lived in the UK for seven years but it was
    not considered unreasonable to expect him to leave the  UK  because  he
    would be returning to Nigeria with his parents and siblings as a family
    unit.

 3. The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Froom's  decision,  and
    for which permission was granted, was made on the basis that the  judge
    had failed to consider adequately, or at all, the impact of removal  on
    the appellants' moral and physical integrity and that the removal would
    prejudice their private and family life in contravention of  Article  8
    of the ECHR.  It was asserted the best interests of the children had to
    be considered and given paramount weight as part of the  assessment  of
    proportionality. This was not done by the judge.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Unigwe referred to paragraphs 33 to  37  of
    Judge Froom's decision in which he noted that the eldest  child  (third
    appellant) was making progress at school and that he  was  a  promising
    footballer, a fact recognised by his admission to the Reading  Academy.
    The judge had asserted that there were no unusual features to this case
    but his assessment at paragraph 34 was plainly wrong and the judge  had
    failed to consider the best interests of the child.  The judge had  not
    engaged  outside  the  Rules  which  was  an  error  of  law  and   the
    representative could not understand how the judge could have  concluded
    that  the  Rules  themselves  provided  adequate  protection  for   the
    appellants' human rights.  Under  Section  55  the  judge  clearly  was
    obliged to promote the welfare  of  the  children.   The  judge  merely
    dismissed Section 117B(6) but it was  an  applicable  section  in  this
    case.

 5. Mr Duffy resisted the grounds of appeal asserting they  were  merely  a
    disagreement and there was nothing wrong with the decision.   The  best
    interests of the children had been considered in a correct  and  lawful
    manner.

 6. The grant of permission specified that it was arguable that  the  judge
    had set out an  insufficient  analysis  of  the  criteria  pursuant  to
    Section 117 of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  in
    carrying out the proportionality exercise and that it was arguable that
    the judge had attached insufficient weight to the  provision  that  the
    public  interest  did  not  require  removal  where  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    Further the judge had elided the  application  of  its  conclusions  in
    relation to Section 55 with the provisions set out in  Section  117  in
    relation to a qualifying child.  It was arguable that the judge  should
    have conducted a full proportionality exercise and that there were very
    compelling circumstances which enabled this to be done.

 7. I find no arguable or material error of  law  in  this  decision.   The
    judge carefully considered the application of the Immigration Rules  to
    both the parents and the children and was fully aware  that  the  third
    appellant had lived in the UK for a continuous period  of  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of application.  The  crucial  point  is
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.  This was relevant to consideration under  paragraph  EX.1.(a)
    of Appendix FM and of paragraph 276ADE(4) and also of Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.  As the judge recorded at paragraph 16  the  nub  of  the
    matter was whether either within or without the Rules it was reasonable
    for the children to move to Nigeria and live with their parents  there.
    It was quite clear, as the judge found,  that  the  children  were  not
    British citizens and that all of the appellants were Nigerian nationals
    and could return to Nigeria together (20).  The judge accepted that the
    relationship between the first two appellants was  indeed  ongoing  and
    they confirmed that they would all live together as a family on  return
    to Nigeria.

 8. The judge considered the circumstances of the parents  and  noted  that
    both the first and second appellants had  family  in  Nigeria  and  the
    second appellant had worked as a barber there.  In  essence  the  judge
    established the position of the parents  because  this  is  what  would
    affect the children.  The judge  proceeded  at  paragraph  25  to  make
    findings with respect to the children not least the  third  and  fourth
    appellants who attended primary school,  where  they  were  progressing
    well, and he noted that the third  appellant  has  ambitions  to  be  a
    professional footballer.  The judge made a very detailed  consideration
    of the best interests of the children between paragraphs 33 to 37.   It
    is the substance of the analysis which is critical in relation  to  the
    best interests of the children and the judge was perfectly  aware  that
    the children would be uprooted from school which would be stressful for
    the children and, particularly for the third appellant,  but  he  found
    that was far from unusual and that it was important that he  would  not
    be separated from his parents or the family  as  a  whole.   The  judge
    found that he had grandparents and aunts  and  uncles  in  Nigeria  who
    could assist the parents and no doubt the children  to  resettle.   The
    father was found to be able-bodied and had a transferable  skill  which
    would mean he would be able to find employment to support the family.

 9. The judge also made a finding at 35 that there was an education  system
    in Nigeria and there would be interruption  to  the  progress  but  the
    third appellant  was  obviously  a  bright  and  capable  boy  and  the
    foundation he had gained in school in the UK would stand  him  in  good
    stead in Nigeria.  The judge noted in particular that there may not  be
    the  same  facilities  in  the  Edo  State  to  match  the  footballing
    facilities at Reading Academy but that was not a significant point when
    assessing the reasonableness of expecting the child to leave.  He noted
    that the third child was in good health.

10. Essentially at paragraph 39 the judge found the  family  were  familiar
    with Nigerian life even if they had become accustomed to life in the UK
    and there was absolutely "no reason  they  could  not  integrate  quite
    readily."  As for the children there would be more of a  challenge  but
    not one which there is any reason to believe they would not be able  to
    manage with the help of their parents and wider family.  In essence the
    judge assessed the key point  of  the  reasonableness  of  the  child's
    return under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).   There  was  no
    need for the judge to  pursue  a  further  analysis  under  sub-Section
    117B(6) as he stated this covered the same ground as paragraph  276ADE.
    That must be right.  The judge conducted a  best  interests  assessment
    and it cannot be argued that he elided that Section 55 assessment  with
    the assessment under Section 117.

11. The judge having found the  appellants  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Rules, nonetheless turned his attention to Article 8 outside the  Rules
    making a finding that Article 8 in relation  to  family  life  was  not
    engaged and this was a finding which was open  to  him  indeed,  as  he
    stated, the whole family were Nigerian nationals and their family  life
    was with each other.

12.  In  relation  to  private  life,  as  he  stated  only  if  compelling
    circumstances were shown that it was necessary to look beyond them  and
    as the judge stated  at  paragraph  44  the  question  is  whether  the
    appellants' particular circumstances demanded  separate  assessment  or
    whether the application of  proportionality  balancing  exercise  would
    inevitably lead to the same result as the application of the Rules;  he
    found that it did so and that the Rules  themselves  provided  adequate
    protection for the Human Rights.

13. It is clear as the judge stated that it was  not  possible  to  find  a
    significant gap between the protection offered by the  Rules  and  that
    which was offered by Article 8.

14. As I have identified the judge wove the best interests of the  children
    into his determination as a whole and yet for the  avoidance  of  doubt
    specifically identified  at  paragraph  46  that  the  children's  best
    interests were a primary consideration and indeed although as Mr Unigwe
    stated they were of paramount consideration as the  judge  states  they
    are not a trump card.  The judge specifically identified the fact  that
    seven years is a significant period recognised under the Rules in which
    to live in the UK but also adopted the correct legal approach in taking
    into account the fact that a  child  is  not  British,  when  assessing
    proportionality and the weight to be given to the best interests.

15. The judge's assessment also referred to EV Philippines [2014] EWCA  Civ
    874   and referred to both strands of thought from that decision, which
    culminated in a finding that

         "where the parents had no independent right to remain in the UK  it
         was 'entirely reasonable' to expect the children to go with  them."



16. The desirability of the  children  being  educated  at  the  UK  public
    expense could not outweigh their best interest which was to remain with
    the parents.  As identified at  paragraph  50  Judge  Froom  noted,  in
    effect, that the best interests of the children are not  necessarily  a
    trump card and that the reasonableness of  the  return  should  not  be
    determined by reference to the child alone  without  reference  to  the
    immigration status  or  history  of  the  parents  and  this  point  is
    underlined and reinforced by MA Pakistan v SSSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705  .



17. There is no doubt  that  the  judge  made  a  full  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of the third appellant's removal to  Nigeria,  the  best
    interests of the children and all the relevant factors in  relation  to
    Article 8, whether considered within or without the Rules.

18. I find no error of law in this decision and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 1st December 2016

Helen Rimington

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
