
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21795/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 September 2014                            |On 1st October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                              MR ANDREW BARRETT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. No anonymity direction has been made in these proceedings hitherto  and
    nothing has been put before me today to suggest that one should now  be
    given.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  His application  for  leave  to
    remain was refused by the respondent who went on to give directions for
    the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom to  his  home  country.
    The respondent's decision was made on 14 May 2013 and was  the  subject
    of an appeal.  That  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal E B Grant at Hatton Cross.  In a determination promulgated  on
    29 July 2014 she dismissed it.

 3. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Shimmin on 18 August 2014.  His reasons for so doing  are
    as follows:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of a Panel chaired by First-tier Tribunal Judge  E.B.
             Grant who, in a determination promulgated  on  29  July  2014,
             dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to refuse him leave to remain.

         2.   The respondent's decision was  based  on  the  view  that  the
             appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public
             good.

         3.   The grounds of appeal argue that the panel erred in:

             (1)  Failing to record the gist of  the  appellant's  evidence
                  accurately, not least the nature of his evidence with  his
                  children;

             (2)  Failing to give any/adequate reasons in  support  of  the
                  conclusion that the appellant had  not  given  a  credible
                  explanation as to the personal nature of his cannabis use;

             (3)   Failed  to  consider  a  relevant  matter,   namely   an
                  independent social worker report;

             (4)   Misdirected  itself/speculated  in  finding   that   the
                  residence order of 2009 was not the final order;

             (5)  Misdirected  itself  in  holding  that  the  trigger  for
                  consideration  of  proportionality  under  Article  8  was
                  'exceptional  and  compelling'   circumstances   and   not
                  arguably good grounds (MM and Others [2014] EWCA 985); and
                  the appellant's 12  year  presence,  his  lack  of  recent
                  convictions and 3 British children's best  interests  were
                  sufficient to trigger the proportionality exercise.

         4.   The determination does not consider material evidence,  namely
             the independent social worker's report of 30 September 203.

         5.   The grounds of appeal disclose an arguable error of law.

         6.   All grounds remain open."

 4. Mr Gilbert relied on all the grounds put  forward  in  the  application
    seeking permission to appeal and in particular submitted that not  only
    was there a failure by the judge to consider  expert  evidence  in  the
    form of an independent  social  worker's  report  but  also  all  three
    witness statements of the appellant.

 5. Mr Allen was referred by me to the respondent's response to the grounds
    of appeal under Rule 24, and in particular paragraph 4 which states:

         "The appellant's grounds contend that the Panel failed to  consider
         material evidence, namely the independent social worker's report of
         30 September where  the  determination  makes  no  mention  of  the
         existence of such a report and there is no  evidence  that  such  a
         report was before the Panel at the time  of  the  hearing,  nor  is
         there any record of any witness/oral evidence regarding this report
         ..."

    I referred Mr Allen  to  the  report  which  is  contained  within  the
    appellant's bundle which was put before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. That report is germane to the issues that fell to be considered by  the
    Tribunal as of  course  are  the  balance  of  the  witness  statements
    provided by the appellant himself.

 7. Whilst there is of course no general requirement for the judge  to  set
    out the totality of the oral evidence considered it is a matter of good
    practice to summarise at least the material parts of the evidence which
    the judge has heard so as to enable an informed reader to ascertain the
    nature and content of that evidence and also to enable the appellant to
    be satisfied that the judge has  directed  his  mind  properly  to  the
    material aspects of the evidence.  It is also incumbent upon the  judge
    to make clear findings of fact on  the  material  issues  and  to  give
    proper intelligible  and  adequate  reasoning  for  arriving  at  those
    findings.  (See AK  (Failure  to  assess  witnesses'  evidence)  Turkey
    [2004] UKIAT 00230.

 8. Having failed to engage with this evidence  the  judge  has  materially
    erred having failed to given adequate reasons for findings on  material
    matters.

 9. The determination is therefore set aside in its entirety and the appeal
    will proceed to a de novo hearing.

10. In deciding whether to satisfy the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    under Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007,  I
    can dispose of the appeal in one or two ways, either by  remitting  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal  or  by  remaking  the  decision.   The
    choice is regulated by paragraph 6 of part 3 of the Practice Directions
    of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal which  only
    contemplates remittal in very limited circumstances though this  so  is
    such a case.  The effect of the cumulative errors detailed  above  have
    been to deprive a  party  -  the  appellant  -  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of a fair hearing, or other opportunity for the parties'  case
    to be put to and considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  those
    circumstances I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal  subject  to
    the  attached  directions.   I  do  so  with  the   consent   of   both
    representatives before me today.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


              DIRECTIONS FOR REMITAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 1. The appeal is to be listed at Hatton Cross on 23 March 2015.

 2. The time estimate for the hearing is five hours.

 3. No interpreter is required.

 4. In the event of either party  wishing  to  file  and  serve  additional
    evidence this must be done so no later than 21 days prior to  the  date
    of hearing.





Signed                              Date 1 October 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard




