
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/21658/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 May 2017                            | On 31 May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR DWAYNE ST PATRICK GARVAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Klear of Counsel instructed by Phillip
Priscilla Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on 7 September  1977,  as
    the appellant herein.

2.   He arrived in the UK on 21 April 2002 as a  visitor.   He  applied  for
    further leave to remain on 21 October 2002 but this was refused.  On  4
    November 2011 he applied for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds
    and while his application was refused the appellant  appealed  and  his
    appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 31 July 2012  who  found  that
    the salient factors in the appeal were the family relationships and the
    impact of the removal of the appellant on them.

3.   The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds and  the  appellant  was
    granted leave to remain on 21 September 2012 until 30 March 2015.   The
    appellant's application for leave to remain was made on 18  March  2015
    and gave rise to the decision in this case refusing his application.

4.   The appellant had declared convictions in his application  dating  from
    April 2007, May  2008,  June  2010,  September  2010  and  March  2011.
    However it was and is the Secretary of State's case that the  appellant
    had failed to declare subsequent convictions dating from  August  2012,
    March 2013 and May 2014.

5.   The respondent took the view in the light of this  that  the  appellant
    was a  persistent  offender  who  had  failed  to  disclose  the  later
    convictions and refused the application in particular on the  following
    paragraphs of Appendix FM:


         "S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave  to  remain
         on grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2.  to  1.7.
         apply.


         ...


         S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
         their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a  persistent
         offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.


         S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because  their  conduct  (including  convictions
         which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK.


         S-LTR.2.1.  The applicant will normally be refused  on  grounds  of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2 to 2.5 apply.


         S-LTR.2.2.  Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -


         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or


         (b)  there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."

6.   The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant  who  said
    he had been with his wife ever since their marriage  in  October  2002.
    They had a child aged 10 and three children from the appellant's wife's
    previous relationship.  They were aged 14, 19 and 22.  The 10 year  old
    lived with the appellant's wife's aunt but came to stay with them every
    weekend and at half term and  other  school  holidays.   The  appellant
    explained the circumstances which had led to his  previous  convictions
    and said "that he may have committed further offences as claimed by the
    Home Office but he has no clear recollection and had  no  intention  to
    deceive when completing his application form."  The children had  ended
    up living with relatives because of the problems he and his wife faced.
     Although they did not live with their children  they  still  formed  a
    happy family.

7.   When asked why the appellant had  not  declared  all  of  his  previous
    convictions the appellant said that he had mentioned the ones  that  he
    could remember "that when he was arrested he was usually drunk and that
    he had done his best".

8.   The appellant's wife also gave evidence and said she would not be  able
    to relocate to Jamaica with the appellant.

9.   The judge considered there was no evidence at  all  to  show  that  the
    appellant had additional convictions as claimed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and added:

         "His position in evidence was that  he  had  declared  all  of  the
         convictions he could remember.  He said that it was  possible  that
         there were others which he could not remember, but  the  concession
         of such a possibility does not cure the absence of actual  evidence
         of the further convictions asserted by the respondent,  which  were
         the whole basis for the refusal of his application."

10.  Having referred to SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the judge  identified
    "compelling circumstances in the case for considering  the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules".   He  considered
    that the starting point was the previous determination which had  found
    that family life existed between the  appellant,  his  wife  and  their
    children.  One of the stepchildren was living with them  at  that  time
    but was now living with her grandparents.  However the judge found that
    family life still existed despite "that minor change in circumstances".

11.  Having referred to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the judge addressed the  issue
    of proportionality and stated that in  considering  proportionality  "I
    must balance the public interest against the private  rights  of  those
    concerned."  He continued in paragraph 34  "as  regards  those  private
    rights, a paramount consideration must be the  best  interests  of  the
    children...".  The judge referred to the appellant's son and stepson  -
    the other children were both adults.  As regards the appellant's son in
    particular  the  judge  was  satisfied  "that  the  evidence  shows   a
    meaningful relationship between them, with regular contact every  other
    weekend and during school holidays" which was of importance and benefit
    to the child.  It was in his best interests for that to continue.

12.  The judge set out Section 117B and it is  convenient  to  reproduce  it
    here:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

13.  The judge reminded himself that the state  had  the  right  to  control
    entry to its territory and that Article 8 did not  confer  a  right  to
    choose where family life was to be established.   In  relation  to  the
    other considerations the judge found that the appellant  spoke  English
    but  was  not  financially  independent.   His  private  life  and  his
    relationship with his wife had been formed while he was in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and therefore little weight was to  be  accorded  to
    those matters.  However the judge was satisfied that the appellant  had
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son who  was  a
    "qualifying" child in terms of Section 117D.  The judge continues:

         "I find also that it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave
         the United Kingdom.  He was born in this country,  has  lived  here
         all his life and is now 10 years old.  His mother and step siblings
         are all here as are his  extended  family  members,  including  his
         mother's aunt who is his guardian and primary  carer.   He  has  no
         connection with Jamaica other than his  father's  nationality.   It
         follows, therefore, that the public interest does not  require  the
         appellant's removal."

14.  The judge concluded  that  the  decision  involved  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights and his  family,  in
    particular his son, and allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

15.  There was an application for permission to appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State and it was said that there had been a  material  misdirection  of
    law for the following reasons:

         "Firstly, it is submitted that the  FtTJ  has  erred  at  [25]  for
         finding that the Appellant was not a persistent offender  (for  the
         purposes of S-LTR 1.5) nor his presence in the United  Kingdom  not
         being conducive to the public good (for the purposes of S-LTR  1.6)
         or indeed for failing to disclose material facts in relation to the
         application (for the purposes of S-LTR 2.2).

         The FtTJ noted that the Appellant's oral evidence was  not  to  the
         effect that he had not received a further three convictions between
         2012 to 2014, just that 'He said that he may have committed further
         offences, as claimed by the  Home  Office,  but  he  has  no  clear
         recollection and had no intention to deceive  when  completing  his
         application form' [13].

         Whilst it is accepted that the FtTJ considered  at  [25]  that  the
         possibility of the offences  didn't  cure  the  absence  of  actual
         evidence  it  is  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  has  failed  to  give
         sufficient weight to the Appellant's oral  evidence  and  that  the
         Appellant as a matter of fact was not challenging the existence  of
         such three convictions.

         Whilst perhaps premature at this  stage,  an  application  will  be
         sought to the Upper Tribunal under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 for permission  to  adduce  a
         copy of the Police  National  Computer  check  in  respect  of  the
         Appellant, including the Appellant's  antecedence  for  the  period
         2012-2014, the contents of which are self-explanatory.

         Secondly and in any event,  it  is  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  has
         misdirected himself in law at [34] by  considering  that  the  best
         interests of the child are a 'paramount' consideration rather  than
         simply a primary consideration, which  has  resulted  in  the  FtTJ
         treating the best interests of the child  as  dispositive  in  this
         appeal, see [36(6)].

         Reliance is placed on ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 where at:-

             '25. Further, it is clear from the recent  jurisprudence  that
                  the Strasbourg Court will expect national  authorities  to
                  apply article 3(1) of UNCRC and treat the  best  interests
                  of a child  as  'a  primary  consideration'.   Of  course,
                  despite the looseness with which these terms are sometimes
                  used, 'a primary consideration' is not the  same  as  'the
                  primary  consideration',  still  less  as  'the  paramount
                  consideration.'

         The materiality of this error further illustrated in SS (Nigeria) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,
         where it was said at:-

             '44. These two characteristics are vouchsafed by authority  of
                  the House of Lords and  the  Supreme  Court.   With  great
                  respect they are capable, if not carefully understood,  of
                  investing child cases  with  a  uniform  prevailing  force
                  which yields no or little space to the  context  in  hand.
                  As for the first characteristic,  the  key  phrase  is  of
                  course 'a primary consideration'.  It appears  in  ZH  and
                  subsequently, but is taken from Article 3(1) of the UNCRC,
                  so  the  choice  of  words  may  be  regarded  as   having
                  particular significance.  What sense is to be given to the
                  adjective 'primary'?  We know it does not mean 'paramount'
                  - other considerations may ultimately  prevail.   And  the
                  child's interests are  not  'the'  but  only  'a'  primary
                  consideration  -  indicating  there  may  be  other   such
                  considerations which, presumably, may count for as much."

16.  Permission to appeal was granted by a  First-tier  Judge  on  11  April
    2017 who commented that the  judge's  findings  were  not  particularly
    clear.  In the light of the findings that the Secretary  of  State  had
    not made out her claim under the suitability grounds an  assessment  of
    the situation  under  Appendix  FM  should  have  formed  part  of  the
    assessment within the decision.  However  the  judge  had  gone  on  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules without  considering  Appendix  FM
    "which is directly relevant to  the  assessment  of  where  the  public
    interest lay in the proportionality assessment.   He  appears  to  have
    treated Article 8 as a stand alone provision".

17.  The judge did not find the ground in relation to the  appellant  having
    accepted he had previous convictions  particularly  impressive  as  the
    burden lay on the Secretary of State to prove the  matter.   The  judge
    noted the argument that the  judge  had  erred  in  treating  the  best
    interests of the  children  as  paramount  rather  than  as  a  primary
    consideration and found that the second ground had merit as  the  judge
    appeared not  to  have  considered  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    relation to the Immigration Rules  and  failed  to  assess  the  public
    interest against that background.

18.  At the  hearing  before  me  Ms  Isherwood  applied  to  introduce  the
    evidence  of  the  appellant's  subsequent  convictions  which  Counsel
    resisted on the basis that there had  been  no  application  under  the
    Rules and no  explanation  for  the  delay.   The  burden  lay  on  the
    Secretary of State - reference was made  to  Muhandiramge  (Section  S-
    LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 (IAC).  There was an evidential burden on  the
    Secretary of State.  I was  also  referred  to  Secretary  of  State  v
    Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

19.  The appellant had not denied  having  convictions  and  permission  had
    been granted on all the grounds.  Reference was made to  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 where, at paragraph 52, the principles in Zoumbas v
    Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74 were set out.  The best interests  of
    a child must be "a primary consideration, although not always the  only
    primary consideration;  and  the  child's  best  interests  do  not  of
    themselves have the status of the paramount consideration".

20.  The judge  had  not  gone  through  the  other  aspects  of  the  legal
    principles set out, in particular he had not asked the right  questions
    in an orderly manner, the fourth principle.  Although  the  matter  had
    come before the Tribunal on a previous occasion that  had  been  before
    the change in the Rules.

21.   The  appellant  had  acknowledged  his  criminal   convictions.    The
    appellant could have returned to  Jamaica  and  applied  for  an  entry
    clearance.  If there was  a  material  error  of  law  the  appellant's
    subsequent convictions would be submitted.

22.  Counsel submitted that the  first  appeal  had  been  allowed  and  the
    appellant's family life had strengthened since  then.   The  First-tier
    Judge had heard all evidence from the appellant and his wife.   He  had
    turned to consider proportionality  and  could  not  be  criticised  in
    deciding as he did.  There was an evidential burden on the Secretary of
    State to put in the convictions.  The ground relied on by the Secretary
    of State  had  been  described  as  not  particularly  impressive  when
    permission to appeal was granted.  While it was accepted that the  best
    interests of the children  were  a  primary  rather  than  a  paramount
    consideration the Judge was correct to refer to the best  interests  of
    the children and reference was made to MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705 at paragraph 116.

23.  Ms Isherwood submitted  in  reply  that  there  had  been  no  Rule  24
    response.   The  judge  had  erred  in  referring  to   a   "paramount"
    consideration and it was not a typographical mistake.  It was an  error
    of approach.  The appellant did not meet the Rules and what was said in
    SS (Congo) was of relevance.

24.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself  that
    I can only interfere with the decision if it was materially  flawed  in
    law.

25.  It does appear that the judge neglected  to  consider  the  appellant's
    case under the Rules and I cannot improve on the way in  which  it  was
    put when permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Judge.  The
    case should have been dealt with in an orderly way had the judge  found
    that the Secretary of State had not made good the allegations about the
    appellant failing to comply with  the  suitability  requirements.   The
    judge appears to have misunderstood the learning on what  consideration
    must be given to the best interests of the children - as  Ms  Isherwood
    submitted it is quite clear that the best  interests  of  the  children
    while a primary  consideration  are  not  -  as  the  extract  from  ZH
    (Tanzania) referred to above makes clear - the  primary  consideration,
    still less the paramount consideration.  It is quite clear  that  there
    is a distinction between the words primary and paramount although  they
    may be loosely used.

26.  Furthermore the judge failed to remind himself that matters  had  moved
    on since the previous determination - the Rules had changed.

27.  While of course the Secretary of State should have supplied the  First-
    tier Judge with the  material  to  support  the  allegations  that  the
    appellant had undeclared convictions, in mitigation it may be mentioned
    that issue had not been taken by the appellant in the  grounds  against
    the decision with these convictions.  The  appellant  admitted  he  had
    convictions although the judge did not consider this to be sufficient.

28.  It was not apparently appreciated at the  hearing  by  either  side  or
    indeed by me that the Secretary of State had taken steps  albeit  after
    the hearing to rely on the appellant's previous convictions.

29.  The grounds dated 11 November 2016 were compiled by  Stephen  Whitwell.
    It is described as form IAFT4.  Mr Whitwell  says  in  his  cover  note
    "Please find  attached  completed  IAFT4  appeal  form  and  associated
    determination".  There is a letter from Mr Whitwell on 11 November 2016
    with attachments addressed to "Dear Colleague" and stating:

         "Please find attached the IAFT-4, associated  determination  and  P
         and C check for the appellant."

30.  It appears that when the  grounds  of  appeal  were  sent  out  to  the
    parties the associated documents were not reproduced.  I have  set  out
    ground  8  above  but  it  would  appear  that  the   draughtsman   was
    anticipating that the appellant's antecedents would be attached to  the
    grounds.  They appear as a separate part of  the  court  file  and  are
    dated 11 November 2016 - after the decision of the First-tier Judge.

31.  None of this alters the position that  those  antecedents  should  have
    been placed before the First-tier Judge and was not.  However  it  does
    mitigate somewhat the points taken on delay thereafter.

32.  I found that the determination of the First-tier Judge  was  materially
flawed in law.

33.  I understand that all parties  now  have  a  copy  of  the  appellant's
    antecedents.  The appellant has had or will have an opportunity to  see
    whether these antecedents are disputed.


34.  In the particular circumstances of this case I am satisfied that  there
    is a material error of law in the determination for the reasons I  have
    given earlier.  While Counsel is anxious that there should not be a  de
    novo hearing I am satisfied that that is the right course in this case.
     I am also satisfied that it would be right to grant the application to
    admit the convictions at the resumed hearing  providing  the  appellant
    has had the opportunity to go through them. I do this in the  light  of
    the various points I have made above. It seems also appropriate to note
    that the issue of a person's convictions may not be  without  relevance
    to the consideration given to  the  best  interests  of  that  person's
    child, quite apart from general  public  interest  considerations.  For
    example, a child's best interests might more readily  be  found  to  be
    compromised if that child was cared for by a parent of  good  character
    and it was proposed to remove that parent than  if  the  parent  was  a
    persistent offender. In the latter case the position might -  I  stress
    that word - be more nuanced, but it would always depend  on  a  careful
    examination of the individual circumstances.

35.  The appeal must be heard de novo before a different  First-tier  Judge.



Notice of Decision

36.  Appeal allowed to the extent indicated

Anonymity Order

 37. The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order, no  anonymity  order  was
    applied for, and I make none.

Fee Award

38.  The First-tier Judge made a fee award in the sum of  �140.   The  judge
    relied in part on the  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  adduce  the
    appellant's antecedents in evidence and in the light of  that  admitted
    failure I have decided that the fee award should stand  notwithstanding
    the other defects in the decision and the fact that the respondent  has
    been successful in overturning the judge's decision.





Signed                                  Date 26 May 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

