
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21753/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Promulgated                          |
|On: 25 August 2015                   |On 11 September 2015                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                             Mr MD Tariful Haque
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  17  February  1963.
    His appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 6 May  2014  to
    refuse to vary his leave to remain in the UK and to remove him  by  way
    of directions under 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006 was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart  in  a
    decision promulgated on 22 April 2015.

 2. The appellant had applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant. He was not awarded any  points  for  maintenance.  The
    respondent stated that the loan letter from the  Bangladeshi  bank  was
    not acceptable having regard to  the  requirements  under  Appendix  C.
    Judge Bart-Stewart dismissed his appeal on the basis  that  the  letter
    did not show "that it is part of a national loan scheme nor set out  in
    any detail the terms or conditions that would be expected  in  such  an
    arrangement, including repayment terms." [10]

 3. On 24 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted the appellant
    permission to appeal. He noted that in paragraph 9 of the determination
    the Judge made reference to a statement/letter from South Indian  Bank,
    whereas this appellant had arranged a loan from NCC Bank in Bangladesh.
    This was not  a  bank  regulated  under  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.
    Accordingly he found it to be arguable that the Judge  may  have  taken
    into account erroneous facts. The Judge may have also erred in  law  by
    applying  paragraph   13(iii)   which   only   applies   to   "official
    sponsorship." The NCC Bank was not his official sponsor.

 4. Ms Savage on  behalf  of  the  respondent  produced  printouts  of  the
    relevant rule as well as Appendix C,  applicable  as  at  the  date  of
    application and decision. A copy was given to the  appellant  prior  to
    the  commencement  of  the  appeal.  I  gave  him  the  opportunity  to
    familiarise himself with these printouts. He stated that he  understood
    the contents.

 5. The appellant submitted that he had produced an acceptable loan letter.
    I shall refer to its contents below.

 6. Ms Savage submitted that the 'mistake' was not material.  The appellant
    had not produced the relevant specified documentation as required.

 7. Mr Haque did not make any further submissions. He stated that he wishes
    to go to college.

    Assessment

 8. Paragraph 1B of Appendix C refers to the specified documents which  the
    appellant is required to provide under Appendix  C.  The  appellant  in
    this  case  is  relying  on  a  loan  from  a  financial   institution.
    Accordingly under paragraph 1B(d) where, as in this case, the applicant
    is applying as a Tier 4 Migrant, a loan letter must be provided from  a
    financial institution regulated for the purpose of  student  loans,  in
    the case of overseas accounts, from the official  regulatory  body  for
    the country the institution is in and where the money is held.

 9. It is also provided at (d)(7) that the application  must  clearly  show
    that the loan is  provided  by  a  government  sponsored  student  loan
    company or is part of an academic or educational loans scheme.

10. The loan letter produced by the appellant was from the National  Credit
    and Commerce Bank Ltd, Bangladesh. It is dated 18 Mar h  2014.  Details
    relating to the account holder's  name,  profession,  passport  number,
    nationality and loan account number and loan limit are set out  in  the
    body of  the  letter.  It  is  also  stated  to  be  held  without  any
    conditions. The purpose is stated to be "study purpose and this loan is
    part of an educational loan scheme."

11.  It is evident that the Judge  Bart-Stewart  wrongly  stated  that  the
    appellant had stated in his witness statement that the letter should be
    accepted, 'stating that the South  Indian  Bank  is  regulated  by  the
    Reserve Bank of India' [9(iii)]. However, that was incorrect. The Judge
    did not properly consider the application in accordance with the letter
    produced from the National Credit and Commerce Bank Ltd in Bangladesh.

12. However, there was  no  evidence  produced  from  Bangladesh  that  the
    National Credit and Commerce Bank Ltd, Bangladesh, is regulated by  the
    official regulatory body for Bangladesh.

13. Moreover, no evidence has been produced showing how the Bangladesh bank
    is controlled by any Banking regulations or statutes in Bangladesh. Nor
    has any evidence been produced as to how the  regulatory  bank  derives
    its powers and directions to supervise  educational  loan  schemes.  No
    circulars or any information in that respect has been  produced.  There
    is no evidence of any educational loan scheme having been prepared  for
    adoption by all banks in Bangladesh.

14. Although the Judge clearly erred in referring to  an  irrelevant  Bank,
    namely the South India Bank, which was not the bank relied  on  by  the
    appellant in this case, I find that the  error  is  not  material.  The
    Judge had earlier noted that the appellant had sought to  rely  on  the
    letter from National Credit and Commerce Bank  Ltd,  Bangladesh  before
    him and which the appellant produced as evidence [3].

15. I am thus satisfied for the reasons given that the  appellant's  appeal
    would have been dismissed on the basis  that  he  failed  to  meet  the
    relevant requirements under the rules and Appendix C.

    Notice of decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of any material error of law. It shall accordingly stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Dated: 10 September 2015


    Judge C R Mailer
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
