
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21081/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 13 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         funmilayo bolanle igbinyemi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Moksud, International Immigration Advisory
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal did not direct anonymity  of  this  appeal  and
    there is no reason why it should be anonymised in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant Secretary of State argues that the decision  and  reasons
    statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge J S Law, which  was  promulgated
    on 6 November 2014, is wrong in law.  The two interrelated  grounds  of
    appeal can be summarised: (i) the judge failed to have proper regard to
    the statutory public interest considerations contained in sections 117A-
    D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), and
    (ii) the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the  best
    interests of the children outweighed the public  interest  that  should
    have been considered.

 3. Mr Mills reminded me that when deciding whether Judge Law erred in  law
    I could not take into consideration facts that arose after the date  of
    his decision.

 4. At the date of decision, neither of Mrs Igbinyemi's  two  children  had
    lived in the UK for over seven years and neither was a British citizen.
     As a result, Mrs Igbinyemi could not benefit from  the  provisions  of
    paragraph EX.1(a)(cc) of appendix FM to the immigration  rules  because
    neither of its provisions  were  met  when  Judge  Law  determined  the
    appeal. Despite the clear nature of the applicable  immigration  rules,
    at paragraph 10 of his decision, Judge Law came to the conclusion  that
    it would not be reasonable under  paragraph  EX.1  to  expect  the  two
    children to leave the UK.   Mr  Mills  suggested  such  a  finding  was
    legally perverse.

 5. Mr Mills next submitted that Judge Law had been confined to considering
    whether Mrs Igbinyemi met  the  provisions  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  and
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  her
    partner continuing outside the UK yet the judge made no clear  findings
    on this issue.  Judge Law recorded that between the Home Office refusal
    of her application to vary leave and the date of  hearing  her  partner
    had secured indefinite leave to remain.  Mr Mills submitted that at  no
    point has Judge Law  explained  why  this  of  itself  amounted  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle or what other insurmountable obstacles  existed
    that prevented Mrs Igbinyemi and her partner  continuing  their  family
    life overseas.

 6. Mr Mills relied  on  similar  arguments  in  relation  to  whether  Mrs
    Igbinyemi could have succeeded under the parent route of appendix FM or
    under paragraph 276ADE.   Judge  Law  looked  at  paragraph  276ADE  in
    paragraph 17 of his decision and  reasons  statement  but  came  to  no
    conclusion whatsoever.  Instead Judge Law appeared to move directly  to
    consider article 8 outside the immigration rules but in  so  doing  did
    not have regard to the statutory public interest  considerations.   The
    lack of structure made it difficult  not  only  to  find  any  reasoned
    findings but also left significant doubt as to whether  the  judge  had
    applied the relevant law.

 7. Mr Mills concluded his submissions by arguing that Judge Law's  finding
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to go to Nigeria
    with their mother was not only legally perverse but it was also unsound
    because he had failed to consider the fact that they had  been  brought
    up by parents who are Nigerian and the children would have the help  of
    their parents to integrate into Nigerian society and culture.

 8. Mr Moksud relied on his rule 24 response that was submitted on 27 April
    2015.  The response focused on the fact that the children were now both
    British citizens and that it was in their best interests to  remain  in
    the UK.  I reminded Mr Moksud that when deciding  whether  Judge  Law's
    had erred in law I could not have regard to new  facts.   The  response
    also argued that Judge  Law's  decision  was  rational  and  Mr  Moksud
    developed this submission arguing that there was logic to  Judge  Law's
    finding that it was not reasonable to expect the children to leave  the
    UK given they  were  born  here  and  their  father  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  However, Mr Moksud  acknowledged  that  it
    was not entirely clear what Judge Law meant when he  referred  to  s.71
    and article 8(3) in paragraph 17 of his decision.  With regard  to  the
    latter reference it was acknowledged  that  it  could  be  a  reference
    either to article 8(2) or article 3 since the judge was discussing  the
    medical needs of the children at that juncture.

 9. Having  heard  from  the  representatives  and  having  considered  the
    decision and reasons statement I am in no  doubt  that  it  is  legally
    unsound because it is not possible to identify what law the  judge  was
    applying or what findings he had made in  relation  to  the  applicable
    law.  In other words, I agree with and adopt Mr  Mills'  exposition  of
    the errors.  Because of the nature of the legal errors I can  only  set
    Judge Law's decision aside.

10. In order to remake the decision I discussed with Mr Mills and Mr Moksud
    whether any of Judge Law's factual findings might be preserved.   As  I
    indicated at the end of our discussion, I can find no reason to  depart
    from his finding that it would not be reasonable to expect the children
    to leave the UK, given the additional evidence now available.

11. It was not disputed that by the time  of  the  hearing  the  children's
    father was settled in the UK and that  they  had  both  been  born  and
    brought up in this society.  The settlement of their  father  indicated
    that one of their parent's long term future was in the UK.   Judge  Law
    was also aware of the children's serious medical condition and the fact
    that they were already accessing treatment in the UK to which they were
    entitled through their father's immigration status.  That remains their
    situation.

12. Although I accept that Judge Law's finding was premature  in  that  the
    children did not fall  into  either  category  described  in  paragraph
    EX.1.(a)(cc), and for that reasons was legally perverse, it is accepted
    at the date of remaking the decision that the children are both British
    citizens and the eldest has been in the UK for more than  seven  years.
    These facts add to the findings already made regarding whether it would
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  It would clearly
    not be in their best interests to leave and that makes any  expectation
    for them to do so to be unreasonable.

13. Mr Mills accepted that if I were to preserve  Judge  Law's  finding  or
    make my own finding that in all the circumstances it was not reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK, then the appeal  must  succeed.
    Because I do make such a  finding,  I  allow  the  appeal  against  the
    original Home Office decision.   The  appeal  is  allowed  because  the
    appellant meets the provisions under the ten year partner route because
    the criteria of paragraph EX.1(a) are met.

14. As a result there is no need for me to consider article 8  directly  or
    to consider the statutory public interest considerations because of the
    provision contained in s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge  Law  contains  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside and to this extent the  Secretary  of  State's
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

In remaking the decision,  the  original  appeal  against  the  Home  Office
refusal is allowed.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
