
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21205/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2016                           |On 19 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN



                                   Between

                        MISS ELIZABETH ANN ARMSTRONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Jegede, Solicitor, OJN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 28 April 2014 to refuse to vary her leave to
    remain and to give directions for her removal under Section  47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


2.   The appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, born on 8  September
    1962. She claims to have arrived in the UK in August 2000.  On 21 March
    2011 she was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, under Article 8 ECHR on the basis  of  her  relationship  with
    Miss Malgorzata Edyta Dziwirek until 20 March 2014.  On  7  March  214,
    she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her family and  private
    life.  The respondent refused the application on 28 April 2014  stating
    that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  sufficient  documentary
    evidence from official sources to show that she was  still  enjoying  a
    family life with her partner.   The respondent was not  satisfied  that
    the grounds under which she was previously granted discretionary  leave
    still persist and her application for further discretionary  leave  was
    refused.

3.   The respondent then considered the appellant's claim that  her  removal
    would breach her right to respect for private  and  family  life  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The respondent considered the application under
    Rule 276ADE(1)(vi).  The respondent noted the appellant's claim to have
    entered the UK in  August  2000  and  noted  that  she  has  not  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least twenty years.  The  respondent  was
    not satisfied that the appellant could meet the  requirements  of  Rule
    276ADE(iii).

4.   The respondent noted that at the time of the application the  applicant
    was 51 years old  and  was  not  satisfied  that  she  could  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and (v).  Having spent 38 years
    in her home country  and,  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  the
    contrary, it was not accepted that in the period of time that  she  has
    been in the UK, she has lost ties to her home country.  The  respondent
    was not satisfied in the circumstances that the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of 276ADE(1)(vi).

5.   Mr Jegede had argued before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that  there
    has not been any significant change in circumstances of  the  appellant
    since the initial grant of her  leave.   Nevertheless  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim was not solely based on her relationship  but  included
    her private life which was in respect of her length of residence in the
    UK, her network of friends and interaction with members of the society.



6.   The judge found that after a successful appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  in
    the UK for the period between 21 March 2011 and 20 March  2014  on  the
    basis of her then relationship to a  Polish  national.   That  has  now
    elapsed and this application was made on the basis  of  an  application
    for further leave.  The judge noted that discretionary leave to  remain
    is not permanent and does not bestow a  right  or  expectation  of  the
    grant of such leave.  The fact is that the appellant cannot rely on her
    previous relationship because that has now ended.

7.   He noted that the appellant's claim was therefore  based  upon  private
    life only.  She has lived in the UK for over fourteen  years  and  has,
    clearly established a private life in the UK over that period.  It  was
    argued that she was financially independent and there was therefore  no
    public interest in here removal.

8.    The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules either in terms of paragraph 276ADE or  Appendix  FM.
    She could not fulfil the twenty year residence Rule and  there  was  no
    other basis upon which she could qualify under those Rules.

9.   The judge said that reliance was therefore placed  upon  Article  8  of
    the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.  He  found  that  there  was
    nothing exceptional or notable about the appellant's claim  other  than
    the fact she has resided in the UK for the past fourteen years. She has
    spent her first 38 years in Trinidad and Tobago before she moved to the
    UK.  That is much longer and more significant than simply a "formative"
    or influential part of her life.  The judge accepted that the appellant
    has built up a private life for the past 14 years or more. That was  to
    be expected.  However he did not accept that  her  removal  was  either
    disproportionate or unlawful.  The above findings  made  by  the  judge
    were not challenged.

10.  Mr Jegede challenged the decision  on  the  basis  that  whilst  it  is
    acknowledged that the appellant's relationship no longer  existed,  the
    issue for the Tribunal was whether the cessation of  that  relationship
    amounted to a  significant  change  in  the  appellant's  circumstances
    justifying refusal of extension of leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   He
    argued that the judge failed to give consideration to this part of  his
    argument.

11.  Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M  Hollingworth
    as follows:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen with regard to the  degree  of
         analysis or absence of the same in relation to the  policy  of  the
         respondent governing the grant of discretionary leave before 9 July
         2012 in assessing the nature of the changes which have taken place.
          A consideration of the spectrum of factors ranging  across  family
         and private life in assessing the nature of those changes  has  not
         been undertaken  in  the  light  of  the  respondent's  policy.  No
         analysis has been undertaken as to the relationship of the  changes
         in this spectrum set against the  factors  to  be  weighed  in  the
         proportionality exercise.  This is arguably relevant to the  public
         interest in the maintenance of efficient immigration controls."

12.  Mr. Jegede relied  on  the  respondent's  policy  entitled  "Applicants
    Granted Discretionary Leave before 9  July  2012".   The  first  bullet
    point of that policy states as follows:

         ".   Those who, before 9 July 2012, have been granted  leave  under
             the DL policy in force at the time will normally  continue  to
             be dealt with under that policy through to settlement if  they
             qualify for it (normally after accruing  six  years  continues
             DL).  Further leave applications for those granted up to three
             years DL before 9 July 2012 are subject to an active  review."



13.  The third bullet point states as follows:

         ".    Decision  makers  must  consider  whether  the  circumstances
             prevailing at the time of the original grant of leave continue
             at the date of the decision.  If the circumstances remain  the
             same and the criminality thresholds do not  apply,  a  further
             period of three years DL should normally be granted. Decision-
             makers must consider whether there are any circumstances  that
             may warrant departure from the standard period of leave."

14.  I find that even though the  judge  failed  to  consider  Mr.  Jegede's
    argument, the failure does not amount to material error of  law.    The
    appellant has to qualify for settlement under the  Discretionary  Leave
    Policy.  The decision  maker  was  required  to  consider  whether  the
    circumstances prevailing at the time of the  original  grant  of  leave
    persisted at the date of  decision.   It  was  not  disputed  that  the
    appellant's relationship to her EEA partner had lapsed as found by  the
    judge.  Therefore, as the appellant's circumstances prevailing  at  the
    time of the original grant of leave no longer  existed,  it  cannot  be
    expected that the appellant  would  be  granted  further  discretionary
    leave to remain.

15.  Mr. Jegede's argument was without merit.

Notice of Decision

16.  The judge's decision shall stand.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

