
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21192/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Oral decision given following hearing |                                      |
|On 5 April 2017                       |On 13 June 2017                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ms nilda villarimo berano
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr Armstrong, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Ms Berano): Ms Bustani of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Quinn in which the judge had  allowed  Ms  Berano's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision refusing to grant  her
    leave to remain as the partner of a Mr Rogers, a UK citizen.  For  ease
    of convenience I shall throughout this decision refer to the  Secretary
    of State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of  State"
    and to Ms Berano, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a citizen  of  the  Philippines  who  was  born  on  27
    December 1950.  She entered the UK in July 2007 with entry clearance as
    a student which leave expired in May 2011.  Prior to the expiration  of
    this leave she had applied for leave to remain  as  a  carer  but  this
    application was refused.  She sought various reviews of  this  decision
    but then in September 2013 she applied for leave to remain on the basis
    of her relationship with Mr Rogers.

 3. This application was refused and a  further  application  was  made  in
    February 2014 which was also refused.

 4. Then on 2 April 2015 the claimant applied again for leave to remain  on
    the basis of her relationship with Mr Rogers  and  by  this  time  this
    relationship had been ongoing for at  least  two  years  prior  to  the
    application.  It is not suggested on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    that it is not a genuine relationship and nor is it suggested that  had
    the Rules been satisfied there would have been any other reason why the
    application should be refused.

 5. This application was refused in May 2015 and it was in respect of  this
    decision that the claimant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    appeal was as I have already noted allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Quinn, who following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 1 September 2016 in a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  19  September  2016  allowed  the
    appeal both under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. It is common ground  first  that  if  paragraph  EX.1  set  out  within
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  applied  then  the  appeal  could
    succeed under the  Rules.   It  is  not  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that it would not have been open to the judge on the
    basis of the evidence before him to find that the requirements in  EX.1
    (which will be considered below) were satisfied.   It  is  also  common
    ground that the reasons given by the  judge  for  allowing  the  appeal
    outside the Rules under Article 8 are not  sustainable.   However,  for
    reasons which I will give below, that does not of itself mean that that
    aspect of the decision needs to be overturned.

 7. Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM provides as follows:

         "Section EX exceptions  to  certain  eligibility  requirements  for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent

         EX.1 this paragraph applies if

         (a)  ...

         (b)  The applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK".

 8. As I have already noted, it is not disputed that  the  claimant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr Rogers  who  is  a  British
    citizen, settled in the UK, but  it  is  contended  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the judge failed to make an adequate finding as
    to  whether  there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life"
    continuing with Mr Rogers outside the UK.  As will be discussed  below,
    it is the Secretary of State's case that the judge  applied  the  wrong
    test  because  he  considered  whether  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles" to Mr Rogers returning with the claimant to the  Philippines
    rather than whether there were "insurmountable obstacles" to his  doing
    so.

 9. It is important to have in mind also when considering  paragraph  EX.1,
    the provisions of paragraph EX.2 which provide as follows:

         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1(b)  'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which  would  be  faced  by
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

10. The issue before this Tribunal is a very narrow one and turns upon  the
    wording of paragraph 36 of Judge Quinn's decision, which is as follows:

         "36. Given the age of Mr Rogers and his medical condition  and  the
             uncertainty over treatment, accommodation and finance  in  the
             Philippines and the question of whether he would be allowed to
             live there in any event, along with his current means I was of
             the view that there were very  significant  obstacles  to  him
             going to the Philippines and I did not think that  it  was  an
             option for him [my emphasis] ...".

11. The judge found that the decision was not a proportionate one in  light
    of this difficulty.  He then  considered  whether  or  not  the  appeal
    should also be allowed under Article 8 outside the Rules and it is fair
    to say that although he allowed the appeal under article 8 it  is  hard
    to square this finding with the  reasons  he  gave.   In  the  Rule  24
    notice, which were settled by Ms Bustani, Counsel,  who  also  appeared
    for the claimant at this hearing, it is candidly conceded (at paragraph
    12) that

         "The fttj's finding that the circumstances were not exceptional  or
         compelling so as to succeed under Article 8 [paragraph 39]  do  not
         sit well with the findings  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  or  the
         conclusion at paragraph 42 that  returning  the  appellant  to  the
         Philippines would have a 'devastating effect' upon Mr Rogers".

    However, as I have noted above, this does  not  in  the  light  of  the
    findings which I am about to make, necessarily mean that the conclusion
    that the appeal should be allowed under Article 8 as well as under  the
    Rules should be set aside.

12. The issue is, as Mr Armstrong  accepts  a  very  narrow  one  which  is
    whether or not there is any material  difference  between  there  being
    "insurmountable obstacles" rather than the "very significant" obstacles
    which Judge Quinn found there would be.  In this case it is clear  that
    Judge Quinn considered all  the  factors  very  carefully  indeed.   He
    looked at the  age  of  the  claimant  and  her  partner,  his  medical
    condition (he has prostate cancer), the uncertainty  of  the  treatment
    which would be available to him in the Philippines,  the  accommodation
    which might be available to them (bearing in  mind  that  the  claimant
    herself had not lived in the Philippines  for  some  34  years),  their
    finance, and whether Mr Rogers would be allowed to live  there  in  any
    event.  It is in my judgment significant that he did not just find that
    there would be "very significant obstacles" to Mr Rogers going  to  the
    Philippines  with  the  claimant  but  went  on  to   find   in   these
    circumstances that "I didn't think that it  was  an  option  for  him".
    When considering this conclusion, I have in mind what  is  set  out  in
    paragraph EX.2 that when considering  "insurmountable  obstacles"  that
    means "the very significant difficulties which would be  faced  by  the
    applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the UK" which "could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their  partner  [again   my
    emphasis]".

13. I have in mind also what was said by Sales LJ giving  the  judgment  of
    the court in  Agyarko and  Others  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440,  at
    paragraph 23 (which judgment was subsequently  upheld  by  the  Supreme
    Court) as follows:

         "23.  For  clarity,  two  points   should   be   made   about   the
             'insurmountable  obstacles'  criterion.   First,  although  it
             involves a stringent test, it is obviously  intended  in  both
             the case-law and the Rules to be interrupted in a sensible and
             practical rather than a purely literal way ...".

14.  Sales LJ then set out the relevant jurisprudence, but the  point  that
    is being made, which is entirely consistent with paragraph EX.2 is that
    one has to understand the term "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  meaning
    obstacles  that  are  sufficiently  serious  that  they  would   entail
    significant hardship to the parties returning.  In this case, the judge
    clearly found that the hardship would be  sufficiently  serious  as  to
    render the option of Mr Rogers returning with the claimant  unavailable
    to him; in the judge's words, "I did not think that it  was  an  option
    for him".

15. As I do not consider in the circumstances of this case  that  there  is
    any  meaningful  difference  between  the  expression   "insurmountable
    obstacles" and the "very significant obstacles" such that going to  the
    Philippines was not an option for Mr Rogers, while it would  have  been
    preferable had the judge used the expression "insurmountable obstacles"
    his failure to do so was not a material error,  but  was  a  matter  of
    linguistics rather than substance.  It follows that  the  Secretary  of
    State's challenge to the decision of the  judge  to  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules must be dismissed.

16. Although this is not of significance now, that  does  still  leave  the
    question of whether the appeal could properly be  allowed  outside  the
    Rules under Article 8.  Although as  I  have  indicated  it  is  common
    ground that the reasons given by the  judge  for  allowing  the  appeal
    outside the Rules under Article 8 are not sustainable, in light  of  my
    decision that the judge was entitled to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, in these circumstances it cannot be proportionate to
    return the claimant to the Philippines.  It follows that to do so would
    be to breach her Article 8 rights and accordingly the decision that the
    judge made allowing the appeal under Article 8 also is sustainable.

17. It follows that the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge must be dismissed on all  grounds  and  I
    will so find.

Decision

The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  decision  of   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Quinn, in  which  Judge  Quinn  had  allowed  the  claimant's
appeal is dismissed, and Judge Quinn's decision is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 7 June 2017


