
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 21120 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2013                               |On 14 March 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                              MD IKBAL HOSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain, Counsel, instructed by Hossain Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Miss F Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan  (born  on  1  January  1981)
    against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Agnew  who  in  a
    determination promulgated  on  4  December  2012  dismissed  his  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent refusing him leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

 2. The reason for refusing the application and the  reason  for  dismissing
    the appeal is that the appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of
    the Rules as they were then understood.  He was obliged to show that  he
    had been awarded a degree, in this case from the  University  of  Wales,
    but he could not do that because the degree had not been awarded when he
    presented his application.

 3. However the degree was awarded before the respondent decided  to  refuse
    the application. If this can be taken into account then the  application
    should have been granted and, failing that, the appeal allowed.

 4. Unlike the First-tier Tribunal we have the benefit of  the  decision  of
    this  Tribunal  in  Khatel  and  others  (s85A;  effect  of   continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) which is a decision of  the  President
    of this Tribunal sitting with Upper Tribunal Judge Coker. After  a  very
    careful analysis of all the necessary Rules the  Tribunal  came  to  the
    conclusion that an application is an ongoing process and  provided  that
    the necessary documents are produced before  the  decision  is  actually
    made then they are produced with the application for the purpose of  the
    Rules.

 5. In this case the application was made on 2 April, the degree was awarded
    on 14 August and the decision was made on 28 September 2012.

 6. It follows therefore that, for the reasons given in Khatel  this  is  an
    appeal which should have been allowed.

 7. It is right to say that Miss Saunders asked us to adjourn  the  hearing.
    Mr Justice Blake has given permission to appeal the decision  in  Khatel
    to the Court of Appeal and if the Court of Appeal  express  a  different
    view then this decision will probably be wrong. We are not  prepared  to
    adjourn in case Khatel is overruled. Presently the law is stated clearly
    in a published authoritative decision of the Tribunal. If  the  decision
    is shown to be wrong then it should not be necessary to have  a  further
    hearing to correct it because there could be an application based  on  a
    change in the law.

 8. Miss Saunders also asked us to record her respectful outline  submission
    that the decision in Khatel was wrong in law. We do that.  She  did  not
    develop the point and we did not ask her to develop the point.  She  was
    preserving her position.

 9. It follows therefore that although there is no criticism of Judge  Agnew
    we are confident that the appeal should be allowed.

10. We set aside the decision of Judge Agnew and we allow the appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 March 2013                  |








