
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21769/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2014                        |On 4th December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                           MR ANOMAN MONDAH JULIEN
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Akinfenwa, of Michael Stevens Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on 15th  June  1966.
    He applied for an EEA residence card  as  the  durable  partner  of  Ms
    Yvelise Jacqueline Sainte Luce, a citizen of France.  He  had  a  proxy
    marriage with Ms Sainte Luce in Mali on 20th June 2010. His application
    was refused on 11th April 2011. He appealed, his appeal  was  dismissed
    and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Holmes on 20th July 2011.  He  made  a  further
    application for an EEA residence card on  18th  March  2013.  This  was
    refused on 28th April 2014 on the basis that insufficient evidence  had
    been provided to show a durable relationship with Ms Sainte  Luce.  His
    appeal was dismissed in a determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal N Manuel promulgated on 4th September 2014.

 2. On 16th October 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson  found
    that there was an arguable error of law in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He indicates that the arguable errors  were  based
    on failure to apply a number of reported guidance cases  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and a failure to follow the findings made by Judge  Holmes  in
    his decision of 20th July 2011.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

 4. Mr Akinfenwa relied upon the grounds  of  appeal  and  skeleton.  These
    alleged errors of law both in relation  to  the  determination  of  the
    appeal in relation to the  EEA  residence  card  and  Article  8  ECHR.
    However I found these documents very hard to follow. They seemed mostly
    to be general statements of law not all of which were correct, some  of
    which were confused and most of which were not relevant. The grounds of
    appeal in this case were not in conformity with  the  standards  to  be
    expected as laid down in Nixon (permission to  appeal  grounds)  [2014]
    UKUT 368.

 5. I explained to Mr Akinfenwa that it was not an error of law  to  decide
    to give less weight to a piece of evidence unless this  was  irrational
    or unreasoned. I made it plain that Judge Manuel was correct in finding
    that the only issue before her was whether the appellant and Ms  Sainte
    Luce were in a durable relationship. If they had been found to be in  a
    durable relationship the decision would have been to allow  the  appeal
    as "not in accordance with the law" and the matter would have  returned
    to the Secretary of State to exercise discretion to issue  a  residence
    card, see paragraph 22 of the determination correctly  setting  out  YB
    (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast  [2008]  UKAIT  00062.  I
    also explained that Judge Manuel could not have erred in law by failing
    to take into consideration new evidence not before her, which was  said
    to show the appellant's durable relationship with Ms Sainte Luce, which
    Mr Akinfenwa was anxious to submit to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  This  new
    evidence could only be relevant to re-making the appeal if an error  of
    law was found, or to any new application to the respondent.

 6. I asked Mr Akinfenwa to take me to the  paragraphs  of  Judge  Manuel's
    decision which disclosed errors of law. He argued that Judge Manuel had
    erred at paragraphs 24 and 25 of her determination as it was not  right
    to  say  that  cards  and  photographs  without  dates  should  not  be
    considered proper evidence. Further he argued  that  "family  licensee"
    was a term known in housing law and so what was said at paragraph 16 of
    the determination was also an error of law.

 7. Mr Bramble submitted for the respondent that Judge Manuel had  produced
    a perfectly reasonable and lawful determination based on  the  evidence
    before her, and it was important to note that the appellant had  chosen
    to have this matter determined on the papers and so had chosen  not  to
    adduce oral evidence which might have supplemented  the  documentation.
    Judge  Manuel  had  given  many  reasons  at  paragraph   18   of   her
    determination explaining why she did not attribute much weight  to  the
    "family licensee" letter from Ms Blanche Golli.  It  was  also  obvious
    that letters, photos and cards without dates could not  easily  show  a
    durable relationship as they did not evidence a time line over which  a
    relationship had existed, thus showing  its  durability.  Any  lack  of
    attributing weight to decisions made in 2011 was entirely correct. This
    was a long time ago and Judge Manuel had to determine if the  appellant
    and his partner were currently in a durable relationship.

 8. In reply Mr Akinfenwa argued that insufficient weight had been given to
    the health cards, the photographs with dates, the work documents of  Ms
    Sainte Luce and the letters from the Tribunal to the  appellant  at  Ms
    Sainte Luce's address.

 9. At the end of the hearing I told the parties that I found no  error  of
    law in Judge Manuel's determination. I set out my reasons below.

Conclusions - Error of Law

10. Judge Manuel properly directs herself to the fact  that  under  EU  law
    there is no fixed time  period  proving  a  durable  relationship,  see
    paragraph 15 of the findings section of her determination  setting  out
    Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 00079

11. Judge Manuel properly and carefully considered all of the evidence said
    to show a durable relationship submitted by the appellant and Ms Sainte
    Luce. She considers the letters from the two landlords of the appellant
    and Ms Sainte Luce at paragraphs 16- 18. She notes that living  at  the
    same address does not mean that the appellant and Ms Sainte Luce are in
    a durable relationship. She notes  that  with  respect  of  the  second
    address only one tenant (and not the other tenant or the landlord) were
    apparently aware of the appellant and Ms Sainte  Luce  living  at  that
    address, and that a number of other adult  people  were  said  to  live
    there.

12. At paragraph 19 Judge Manuel considers the health insurance  cards  but
    again can see no way in which these show a durable relationship between
    the appellant and Ms Sainte Luce as they have no issue date or address.
    She also finds that correspondence from the Home  Office  and  Tribunal
    does not show the appellant and Ms Sainte Luce are cohabiting as it  is
    not independent and just shows  that  he  is  using  this  address  for
    correspondence.

13. At paragraph 20 she considers the past application  made  in  2011  but
    finds that this is too long ago to assist the  appellant  in  currently
    showing his durable relationship with Ms Sainte Luce.

14.  At  paragraphs  24  and  25  Judge  Manuel  considers  the  cards  and
    photographs, noting that two had dates on them but that these were from
    2011 and 2012 (and so were not evidence of a durable relationship since
    that time), and also that some of the correspondence suggested that the
    parties were not living together and so did not show cohabitation in  a
    durable relationship.

15. Judge Manuel's decision that, on the evidence before her, did not  lead
    her to find the  appellant  and  Ms  Sainte  Luce  were  in  a  durable
    relationship was careful and well- reasoned, and could not be  said  to
    be irrational in any way. It discloses no error of law.

16. Judge Manuel then properly goes on to find that as she  has  not  found
    that the appellant and Ms Sainte Luce are in a durable relationship  on
    the evidence before her that she is also not satisfied that  they  have
    family life together. The article 8 ECHR claim therefore fails  at  the
    first hurdle. This again is perfectly logical and  shows  no  error  of
    law.

Decision

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.

   2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal  is
      upheld.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 3rd December 2014


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 3rd December 2014


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

