

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21521/2014
                                                               IA/21520/2014
                                                               IA/21519/2014
                                                               IA/21522/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 March 2016                       |On 5 April 2016                  |
|                                       |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                               SAMEER SATWANI
                                 SAMAN KHAN
                                     SNS
                                     HS

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muquit of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the  Appellants'  applications  for
       leave to remain on 23 April 2014. They were  all  required
       to leave the United Kingdom. They sought leave  to  remain
       as  they  are  now  "settled"  here.  Their  appeals  were
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer ("the Judge")
       following a hearing on 3 July 2015.


    2. The 1st  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  India.  The  other
       Appellants are citizens of  Pakistan.  The  1st  Appellant
       came to the United Kingdom on 1 March 2006 to  study.  The
       other  Appellants  arrived  on  5  November  2006  as  his
       dependents. The  2nd  Appellant  is  the  1st  Appellant's
       spouse. The other Appellants are their children born on  [
       ] 2003 and [ ]  2005  respectively.  They  all  had  leave
       extended on various dates until 23 September  2011.  Leave
       was again granted on 26 March 2012 to all the  Appellants.
       In relation to the 1st Appellant that was until  26  March
       2014. In relation to the other Appellants it was until  31
       October 2013 and not 2009 as stated  in  the  Respondent's
       immigration history.

The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission to  appeal
       (10 December 2015) on the ground that:


          "It is arguable that FtTJ  Freer  erred  in  concluding
          [69] that it would be in the children's best  interests
          to continue their education abroad. It may be  arguable
          that this, and the consideration of  the  father  being
          able to go to Dubai [71] and the  apparent  failure  to
          consider the conditions in the country or countries  to
          which the children could return also amounts to  errors
          of law, given that these were  taken  into  account  is
          assessing proportionality.


          Permission is granted on all grounds."


Appellants' position

    4. In addition to the matters upon which permission to appeal
       was granted and which are referred to above [3], too  much
       emphasis  was  placed  on   the   previous   determination
       (IA/35679/2011 etc) as that was only an Article  8  appeal
       whereas now the children have been here for  more  than  7
       years and fall within the Immigration Rules. It was also a
       material error of law not to follow the guidance contained
       in PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri
       Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).


Respondent's position

    5. Mr Avery relied on the Rule 24 notice  (18  January  2016)
       which  in  essence  said  that  the  Judge  made  adequate
       findings and considered the best interest of the  children
       and there was no evidence they could not return  to  India
       or Pakistan. He added orally that the same test applies to
       paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules as  to  Article
       8, namely is it reasonable to expect the children to leave
       the United Kingdom. Even if there was an error of law,  it
       was not material. PD does not apply retrospectively.


Judge's Determination


    6. The Judge stated [1], "This appeal is under Article 8 ECHR
       outside the Immigration Rules."


    7. He asked himself [64], "...is it reasonable to expect  the
       two children or either of them to leave the UK."

    8. He stated [65] "I cannot decide this appeal  by  comparing
       countries."

    9. He found that [68] "...I have to take into account  as  my
       starting point the broad position as found  very  strongly
       by  the  previous  Judge  in  2012,  which  has  not  been
       contradicted by any independent evidence of the  education
       systems in the other countries."

   10. He found that [69] "I conclude  that  while  the  children
       show well above average ability, it would be in their best
       interests (or not in breach) to  continue  overseas.  They
       are both very likely to continue to University. There  are
       Universities in  other  countries.  The  cultural  context
       would be different in each of Dubai,  India  and  Pakistan
       ... As a public interest point,  I  have  to  balance  the
       expenditure that is being made on the children  of  non-UK
       nationals by the taxpayer and will continue for many years
       if they are  allowed  to  remain  and  I  must  inevitably
       consider that the higher fees charged to overseas students
       are also in the public interest."

   11. He stated that [70] the Appellants "private life has often
       been precarious on this basis and therefore I am  required
       to give little weight to  it  and  it  cannot  lead  to  a
       successful outcome on the weighing exercise."

   12. He stated [71] "I do not find  a  defect  of  law  in  the
       respondent's  reasoning.  Section  55  has  already   been
       considered in 2012. I am simply updating that analysis ...
       The very  strong  ties  in  Dubai  indicate  a  very  high
       likelihood that the father can resume work there with  his
       good connections and track record. No reason is shown  why
       he would not be given a work visa in  Dubai.  Any  waiting
       time  will  be  funded  by  his  wife's  brother.  It   is
       reasonable to expect the children to leave, as there is no
       legitimate expectation of staying here any longer."

Discussion


   13. The Judge was correct to state that this appeal  is  under
       Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.  However  it
       was also under the Immigration Rules. It  was  clear  from
       the application that this was the case,  and  the  refusal
       letter which considers  the  rules,  and  the  grounds  of
       appeal which refer to them at [5]. The Judge himself makes
       reference to the Immigration Rules where he summarises the
       refusal letter [6-10, 18]. He does not however  apply  the
       Immigration Rules just by  stating  the  test  he  has  to
       apply. He has to make findings and then apply the test  to
       them. His failure to do so is a material error of law.

   14. The authorities from higher courts merely state  what  the
       law is and has always been since a  particular  enactment.
       PD merely states what the law is and was at  the  time  of
       the hearing before the Judge and  how  to  approach  cases
       such as this. In considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR
       claims of multiple family members  decision-makers  should
       first apply  the  Immigration  Rules  to  each  individual
       applicant and, if appropriate,  then  consider  Article  8
       outside the Rules. This exercise will typically entail the
       consideration and determination of all claims jointly,  so
       as to ensure that all material  facts  and  considerations
       are taken into account in each case. The Judge plainly did
       not follow  the  process  identified  in  PD.  That  is  a
       material  error  of  law  irrespective  of  when  PD   was
       promulgated.


   15. The Judge did not consider how it could be  reasonable  to
       expect children to leave the United  Kingdom  for  another
       country (Dubai, Pakistan  or  India)  without  considering
       what they would be going to. He compounded this  error  by
       speculating as to the 1st  appellant's  ability  to  enter
       into let alone find employment in a country (Dubai) he has
       not lived in for 10 years.

   16. I do not agree with  Mr  Avery  that  these  matters  were
       considered within the proportionality  balancing  exercise
       as the Judge specifically excluded them. That exercise  in
       itself was therefore defective and was a further  material
       error of law.


   17. I do not agree with Mr Muquit that the Judge erred in  his
       consideration  of  the  2012  determination  as  that  was
       nothing more  than  the  starting  point  for  the  Judges
       consideration.

   18. I agreed with Mr Muquit that it would be most  appropriate
       to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
       novo hearing  given  the  defective  factual  matrix  both
       within and outside the Immigration Rules.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the Article 8 decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing by a Judge other than Judge Freer.



Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
24 March 2016
