
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:           Appeal
                                                      Numbers: IA/21782/2014
                                                               IA/21788/2014
                                                               IA/21794/2014
                                                               IA/21795/2014
                                                               IA/27800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2015                                |On 05 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between
                               FATTAH AFOLABI
                          OLUWAKEMI HAFSAT AFOLABI
                            FARID OLAOLU SIMISOLA
                           TARIQ OLUTADE JADESOLA
                           MATINA EYITAYO AFOLABI

                                                                 Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants: Mrs A Sobande instructed by OA Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are husband, wife and their three children. They  are  all
  nationals of Nigeria. They appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
  the decisions of the Secretary of State of 8 May  2014  to  refuse  their
  applications for leave to remain on the basis of their private and family
  life in the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge A R  Williams  dismissed  their
  appeals and the appellants now appeal with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The first, second, third and fourth appellants entered  the  UK  in  2005
  with entry clearance as visitors. The fifth appellant was born in the  UK
  on 4 October 2005.  On 18 March 2013 they applied  for  leave  to  remain
  under the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  their  private  and  family
  life. Those applications were refused on 3 June 2013  with  no  right  of
  appeal in the UK. Following applications for Judicial  Review  a  Consent
  Order was made and the respondent reconsidered the applications and on  8
  May 2014 issued fresh decisions to refuse the applications and remove the
  appellants from the UK.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated in his  determination  that  it  was
  accepted at the outset of the case that  the  appeals  revolved  entirely
  around Article 8 and that it was accepted that the Immigration Rules  did
  not help the appellants [29]. He went on to consider the appeals  outside
  the Immigration Rules and concluded  that  the  decision  to  return  the
  family to Nigeria was a proportionate interference with their private and
  family life.

Error of law

4. The appellants put forward three main grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
  Tribunal. The first is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
  refusing the application to adjourn the hearing of the appeal  which  was
  based on the fact that the second appellant  was  in  hospital  with  her
  newborn baby. I agree with First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan, who  granted
  permission to appeal, that there is no substance in this  ground.  First-
  tier Tribunal  Judge  AR  Williams  set  out  reasons  for  refusing  the
  adjournment request and noted  that  the  essential  facts  were  not  in
  dispute. He heard oral evidence from the first appellant. His decision to
  refuse to adjourn resulted in no prejudice to the appellants.

5. It is contended in the grounds of appeal that the Judge  made  a  mistake
  of fact at paragraph 39 of the decision where  he  says  that  the  fifth
  appellant was 7 years old at the date of his decision whereas in fact she
  was 9 years old at that time. That however is not necessarily a  material
  error in light of the fact that the Judge stated earlier that  the  fifth
  appellant was born in October 2005 [2], he acknowledged that she was born
  in the UK [39] and he correctly stated the ages of the other children who
  are older than the fifth appellant.

6. The other main ground of appeal is that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to
  consider the relevant Immigration Rules.  The Judge said that it had been
  accepted that the Immigration Rules were  not  met  [29]  and  took  into
  account that the Immigration Rules had not been met in his assessment  of
  proportionality under Article 8  [34].  It  is  contended  that  no  such
  concession was made and that in fact it  was  argued  in  the  First-tier
  Tribunal that the  appellants  qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE.  It  is
  contended that the Judge therefore  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
  Immigration Rules.

7. Mr Kandola referred to a  recent  case  which  he  said  meant  that  the
  appellants should have produced evidence to support their contention that
  there was no concession made in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  understand
  that the case he referred  to  is  that  of  BW  (witness  statements  by
  advocates) Afghanistan  [2014]  UKUT  00568  (IAC)  where  the  President
  outlined what he described as the 'rare' circumstances where an  advocate
  may be required to submit a witness statement where the grounds of appeal
  are based, in whole or in part, on how the  first  instance  hearing  was
  conducted and events which unfolded therein. The President said  that  in
  practice this course is most likely to occur 'where it is contended  that
  the litigant was deprived of his right to a fair  hearing  by  reason  of
  events which occurred  at  the  hearing  itself'  where  'the  Tribunal's
  decision does not speak for itself on this discrete issue'.

8. In this appeal the Judge made  no  reference  in  his  recording  of  the
  preliminary issues to a concession 'at the outset of the case' [29]  that
  the appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules. He  did  not  record
  any submission to that effect in his record of Mrs Sobande's  submissions
  at the end of the evidence. In fact at paragraph 25 he records  that  Mrs
  Sobande relied on her skeleton argument. The  skeleton  argument  clearly
  relies on paragraph 276ADE (iv) in relation to the children. Further, the
  Reasons for Refusal letter of 8 May 2014 clearly deals with  Appendix  FM
  and paragraph 276ADE in relation to each of the appellants.

9. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the Tribunal's decision,  read
  with the skeleton argument, does in fact speak for itself on this  issue.
  Further, the record of proceedings  on  file  records  that  the  appeals
  'revolve around the law of  Article  8'  as  set  out  by  the  Judge  at
  paragraph 5, but it does not record any concession.  I am satisfied  that
  the Judge  erred  in  stating  that  there  was  a  concession  that  the
  appellants did not meet the Immigration Rules and accordingly in  failing
  to consider the Immigration Rules before going on to consider  Article  8
  of the ECHR.

10. Mr Kandola submitted that if I accept that the Judge  erred  in  failing
  to consider paragraph 276ADE any error was not material because paragraph
  276ADE (iv) requires it to be shown that it not reasonable to expect  the
  children to leave the UK. He submitted that the Judge did  consider  that
  question in his determination.

11. Mrs Sobande submitted  that  the  Judge  made  a  fundamental  error  in
  failing to consider paragraph 276ADE.  She  submitted  that  this  was  a
  material error as, if the Judge had considered it properly, he might have
  reached a different conclusion.

12. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that  the  Judge  erred  in
  recording  that  the  appellants'  representative   conceded   that   the
  Immigration Rules could not be met. Mrs Sobande did not submit  that  any
  other parts of the Immigration Rules could be met and I am satisfied that
  the Judge erred in failing to consider paragraph 276ADE  in  relation  to
  the children before going on to consider freestanding Article 8.

13. I indicated at the hearing that I was satisfied that the Judge  made  an
  error of law. I heard submissions from Mr  Kandola  and  Mrs  Sobande  in
  relation to remaking the decision. In considering these  submissions  and
  the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge as a whole I find that
  the error made by the Judge was not a material one for  the  reasons  set
  out below.

14. The Judge accepted that the family have a  family  life  and  a  private
  life in the UK. He noted that if they are returned to Nigeria  they  will
  be returned as a family but went on to consider the appeal on  the  basis
  of their private life [30]. Going through the steps set out in R  v  SSHD
  ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the Judge reached the stage of considering
  the proportionality of the decision. At  that  stage  he  considered  the
  family's length of stay in the UK and the fact that their  visas  expired
  in 2006 and 2007; the best interests of the children in  accordance  with
  section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009;  and
  section 117B of the of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

15. In considering section 117B the Judge took account of the fact that  all
  of the family speak English and that little weight should be given  to  a
  private life established when immigration status is precarious.

16. The Judge considered section 117B(6) which provides that where a  person
  not  liable  to  deportation  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
  relationship with a qualifying child (which  includes  a  child  who  has
  lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years or more)  and  'it
  would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK'.  Therefore
  whilst the Judge failed to consider paragraph 276ADE (iv) he did consider
  the same question as posed by section 117B (6). This is  the  reverse  of
  the situation considered by the Upper Tribunal in the case of AM (S 117B)
  Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) where the Tribunal concluded;

      "13.     There is also in our judgement no requirement  that  the  FtT
      should pose and answer the same question more than once, simply  as  a
      matter of  form.  Thus  since  both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
      Immigration Rules, and s117B(6),  both  raise  the  same  question  in
      relation to a  particular  child,  of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is a question that
      need only be answered once. Although the judge did not  make  specific
      reference to s117B(6) or set its provision out in full,  it  is  plain
      from the terms of her determination at paragraphs 30-37, 48-52, and 56-
      58, that she did consider at some  length  the  circumstances  of  the
      children and  their  ability  to  relocate  to  Malawi.  There  is  no
      suggestion before us that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  any
      material circumstance relating to either child. The mere  presence  of
      the children in the UK, and their academic success, was not  a  "trump
      card" which their parents could deploy to  demand  immigration  status
      for the whole family; Butt v Norway App 47017/09 4 December  2012,
      and EV (Philippines) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874."

17. At paragraphs 37-39 the Judge considered whether it would be  reasonable
  to expect the children to leave  the  UK  and  acknowledged  that  strong
  reasons are required to remove children who have been in the  UK  for  at
  least seven years. He identified the kinds of factors he  would  have  to
  take into account. He noted that the children would be removed with their
  parents, that there was no evidence of a significant risk to their health
  if removed to Nigeria, that there was no evidence as to wider family ties
  in the UK and in particular there was no evidence about or from a  cousin
  who had been mentioned; that upon return to Nigeria they would be able to
  enjoy the full rights of being citizens of Nigeria; that the children can
  speak, read and  write  English  which  is  a  language  of  Nigeria;  he
  considered the length of time each child had been in the UK at  the  date
  of the hearing; he considered the evidence as to their education. He took
  account of the relevant case law including the decision of the  Court  of
  Appeal in EV (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 which made
  clear that the desirability of being educated in the UK  cannot  outweigh
  the benefit to children of remaining with their parents.  He  noted  that
  each of the children had always lived with their parents with  whom  they
  would be removed.

18. In terms of the parents the Judge considered the  fact  that  the  first
  appellant would be employable in Nigeria  and  that  he  and  the  second
  appellant had spent the majority of their lives in Nigeria  and  had  not
  lost ties with that country. He took account of the fact that the parents
  will be able to provide stability to the children and help them integrate
  into Nigerian society [44].

19. In her submissions to me Mrs Sobande did not rely on any  factors  other
  than those considered by the Judge and set out above. She relied  on  the
  length of residence of the children.  However  even  if  I  were  to  now
  consider paragraph 276ADE the provisions  of  that  rule  relate  to  the
  requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  at  the  date  of  application
  (paragraph 276ADE (1)), which in this case was 18th March 2013, when  the
  appellants had been in the UK for around 8  years.  Any  additional  time
  spent here since then  cannot  be  considered  in  looking  at  paragraph
  276ADE.

20. Having examined all of the factors taken into account by the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge I am satisfied that these are the same  factors  he  would
  have taken into account had he considered paragraph 276ADE.  Accordingly,
  although the  Judge  erred  in  wrongly  proceeding  on  the  basis  that
  paragraph 276ADE had been conceded and in failing to  expressly  consider
  that paragraph, this error was not material because he did  consider  the
  same question in his consideration of section 117B (6).

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed
                       Date: 3 June 2015



A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


