
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21961/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 11 April 2013                              |on 16 April 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              CHIBUISI IKWUAGWU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr T Maleque, of Bruce Short, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals to the UT against  a  determination  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Wood TD, promulgated on 30 November 2012,  dismissing  his
   appeal against refusal of leave to remain under Tier 1.

2) The respondent refused the application because it was made  on  30  March
   2012, but the relevant qualification was obtained only on  30  May  2012,
   and the date of award had to be within the 12 months prior to the date of
   application.  Judge Wood upheld that approach (and dismissed  the  appeal
   also insofar as argued on human rights).

3) Since the decision of the FtT, Khatel [2013] UKUT  0044  (IAC)  has  been
   reported.  The case holds than an application for further leave to remain
   is to be treated as a continuing application, starting with the date when
   it was first submitted and ending on the date when  it  is  decided.   On
   that interpretation, the appeal should have succeeded.

4) The Presenting Officer sought an adjournment, pending a further  decision
   in Khatel in the Court of Appeal.

5) I declined to adjourn.  A pending appeal in  another  case,  even  if  it
   raises a relevant point at a higher level, is not generally a good reason
   for delay.

6) Mr Mullen alternatively submitted that Khatel was  wrongly  decided,  and
   that Immigration Rule  34G  applies,  defining  the  date  on  which  the
   application was made as the date of posting.

7) I follow Khatel, which although not a  starred  case  was  decided  by  a
   panel including the President of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Chamber.

8) Mr Maleque indicated that if the case had not succeeded on the  basis  of
   Khatel he would have argued it further on the basis of  the  respondent's
   "evidential flexibility" policy, and on  communications  passing  between
   the appellant and respondent.  I did not hear  further  from  parties  on
   that issue, but such a case does not appear to have  been  taken  in  the
   grounds of appeal to the FtT or the UT.

9) The determination of the FtT is set aside.  A  decision  is  substituted,
   allowing this appeal,  as  originally  brought  to  the  FtT,  under  the
   Immigration Rules.





                               [pic]
                                15 April 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal



