
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21081/2015
                                                IA/21893/2015, IA/21887/2015
                                                IA/21882/2015, IA/21878/2015
                                                               IA/21086/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2016                      |On 5 September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 APURBA [D]
                                 ANOWAR [H]
                                 SHIPRA [S]
                                 KAMRUN [N]
                                   [Mi H]
                                   [Mk H]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Layne of Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson.  The six appellants  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal are hereinafter referred to as "the applicants".

 2) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeals by  the  first
    and third named applicants under the Immigration Rules.  In relation to
    the appeals by the second, fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  applicants,  the
    judge decided that the refusal decisions were not  in  accordance  with
    the law.  Their applications remained outstanding before the  Secretary
    of State.

 3) The background to the appeals is that the first and  second  applicants
    submitted on 17 May 2013 applications for leave to  remain  as  Tier  1
    entrepreneurs.  The remaining applicants were  their  dependants.   The
    applications by the first and second applicants  were  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 25 May 2015 and on the same  date  the  remaining
    applicants were refused as dependants.

 4) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  Secretary  of  State
    was not represented.  The judge concluded that the applications by  the
    first and second applicants had not been  properly  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State. The applications were considered on the basis  that
    the first and  second  applicants  were  self-employed.   However,  the
    evidence showed that they were  not  self-employed  but  they  operated
    their business through the medium of a limited company by the  name  of
    Apurba and Anowar Associates Ltd.  The first and second applicants were
    directors of this company.  Accordingly they did not require to  submit
    with  their  applications  specified  documents  required   under   the
    Immigration  Rules  from  applicants  who  are  self-employed  and  the
    Secretary of State's refusal of the application  on  the  grounds  that
    these documents were absent was wrong.

 5) The judge found that the relevant requirement under paragraph 41-SD  of
    Appendix A for a director of a limited company required the  applicants
    to submit a print-out from Companies  House  of  the  company's  filing
    history page and of the current directors' appointment report,  listing
    the  first  and  second  applicant's  names  therein.   The  judge  was
    satisfied  that  these  documents  were  submitted  with  the  relevant
    applications.

 6) The judge found also that the Secretary of State  had  made  a  mistake
    when considering the bank statements submitted by the  first  applicant
    as evidence  of  maintenance.   The  case  worker  who  considered  the
    application had omitted  to  look  at  the  second  page  of  the  bank
    statement.  Had this been examined it would have been  found  that  the
    first applicant met the relevant maintenance requirement.

 7) The second applicant relied on different bank statements  to  establish
    maintenance.  One of the pages of  the  bank  statements  on  which  he
    relied had not been submitted with his  application.   Accordingly  the
    Tribunal could not take this particular bank  statement  into  account.
    Having regard to paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules, however, the
    matter could readily have been  remedied  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    requesting of the second applicant the  final  bank  statement  in  the
    sequence,  which  would  have  shown  that  the  requisite  maintenance
    requirement was satisfied for the full 90 day period.

 8) The judge concluded that the Secretary of State acted unlawfully in not
    requesting a further statement and the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was not in accordance with the law.

 9) The conclusion of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
    first applicant succeeded under the Immigration Rules, as did the third
    applicant as his dependant.  The decision  in  respect  of  the  second
    applicant was not in accordance with the law,  so  similarly  were  the
    decisions in respect of his dependants, the  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth
    applicants.

10) An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  So far as the  first  and  third  applicants  were
    concerned, this stated that the judge  had  been  wrong  to  allow  the
    appeals outright without conducting an assessment of  whether  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 41-SD of Appendix AA had  been  met  for  the
    award of 75 points for attributes.  The judge had failed to set down in
    clear terms reasons for  finding  that  the  relevant  Companies  House
    documents were submitted with  the  application,  particularly  as  the
    Secretary of State's bundle was not complete.   The  judge  could  take
    account only of material which was before the original decision  maker.



11) Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that, having found the first and third applicants were directors  of  a
    limited liability company and not self-employed, the judge ought simply
    have stopped at that point and  allowed  all  of  the  appeals  to  the
    limited extent that the decisions under appeal were not  in  accordance
    with the law.  It was arguably not  open  to  the  judge  (and  on  the
    material before him  he  could  not  in  fact  ascertain)  whether  the
    applications of the first and third applicants met the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules for directors.

Submissions

12) At the hearing before me Mr Avery began  helpfully  by  explaining  the
    background to the appeal.   He  further  submitted  that  in  terms  of
    paragraph 41-SD the First-tier Tribunal did not have before it all  the
    evidence which should have been submitted in respect of the  first  and
    second  applicants  as  company  directors.   This  required  not  only
    documentation from Companies House but also evidence that the  business
    had a UK  bank  account  of  which  the  applicants  were  signatories.
    Evidence of the company bank account  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and accordingly the appeals by the first and third  applicants
    should have been sent back to the Secretary of State.

13) For the applicants, Mr Layne pointed out that  the  judge  had  made  a
    finding that the first and  third  applicants  were  employees  of  the
    company.  Business bank statements  had  been  produced  and  when  the
    application was made all the relevant  documents  had  been  submitted.
    This could be seen from a covering letter  dated  17  May  2013.   This
    listed all the documents submitted including,  at  item  14,  the  bank
    statement for the business for the period from 18 March to 2  May  2013
    in the name of Apurba and Anowar Associates Ltd.

14) Mr Avery acknowledged that the business bank statement was in the  Home
    Office file but pointed out that there was nothing to  show  that  this
    bank statement was before the First-tier Tribunal and nothing  to  show
    that the first and second  applicants  were  signatories  on  the  bank
    statement.  It was further pointed out, however, that the relevant part
    of paragraph 41-SD,  namely  sub-paragraph  (e)(vii)(2),  requiring  an
    applicant to produce evidence that the business has a UK  bank  account
    of which the applicant is a signatory, states that, if the applicant is
    currently a director, either a company bank statement showing that  the
    company has a UK account must be produced, or a letter from the UK bank
    in question on its headed paper confirming that the company has a  bank
    account and the applicant is a signatory of  that  account.   In  other
    words either the appropriate bank statement  must  be  produced,  or  a
    letter confirming the existence  of  the  bank  account  and  that  the
    applicant is a signatory of the account, but not  both.   If  the  bank
    statements are produced, a letter confirming that the  applicant  is  a
    signatory would not be required.

15) Mr Layne  resumed  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    identified the mistake by the Secretary of State and could have allowed
    the appeal on the basis of that mistake.  The judge went  on,  however,
    to consider the relevant requirements of paragraph 41-SD, including the
    company bank statements.  There was a letter from HMRC in  relation  to
    corporation tax which was submitted with the application.   Again  this
    was listed in the covering letter.  Although the company bank statement
    was not referred to at paragraph 16 of the  judge's  decision  all  the
    documents were before the judge.  At the hearing the judge went through
    the documents and asked questions about them.  The judge  was  entitled
    to find that the relevant documents were produced.

16) Mr Layne further informed me that  the  second  applicant  had  had  an
    interview with a case worker in April  and  was  expecting  a  decision
    following the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

17) I have considerable sympathy with the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    in this matter.  The judge  was  entirely  correct  to  find  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  considered  the  Tier  1   Entrepreneur
    applications correctly.  The Secretary of State erroneously treated the
    two main applicants as self-employed when  they  were  directors  of  a
    company.  Having identified this mistake, the judge might have expected
    the Secretary of State's representative  to  assist  in  resolving  the
    appeals.  Far  from  such  assistance  being  proffered,  however,  the
    Secretary of State was not represented at the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In these circumstances  there  might  be  a  school  of
    thought that where the Secretary of State did not send a representative
    to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary  of  State
    ought to accept some  responsibility  if  the  correct  answer  is  not
    achieved.  Nevertheless, it is the responsibility of  the  Tribunal  to
    ensure before allowing an appeal under Immigration Rules that  all  the
    requirements of the Rules are in fact met.  In this appeal the Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal specifically referred at paragraph  16  of  the
    decision to the documents which were required from Companies House  and
    also subsequently to the maintenance requirements.  The judge  did  not
    mention, however, the requirement in paragraph 41-SD in relation to the
    company bank account, as set out above.

18) Mr Layne drew my attention to  the  covering  letter  of  17  May  2013
    listing the items submitted with the applications.  He referred to item
    14 as being the business bank account although  this  is  headed  "both
    main applicants' bank statement for funds (Santander)".    I  did  not,
    however, appear to have before me a copy of his document either in  the
    bundle lodged for the Upper  Tribunal  or  in  the  bundles  originally
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

19) The absence of this item might not have  been  an  issue  had  it  been
    specified as having satisfied the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr
    Layne assured me at the hearing that all the documents in question were
    before the First-tier Tribunal and had been  before  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The difficulty for the applicants, however, is that  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not refer specifically to  the  business
    bank statement and therefore it is difficult to be  satisfied  that  he
    had proper regard to it and indeed therefore was satisfied that all  of
    the relevant requirements were met.

20) At this stage the only course that I can take  is  to  agree  with  the
    submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State that the appeals by the
    first and third applicants should, like the other  appeals,  have  been
    found by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal not to be  in  accordance
    with the law and therefore  the  applications  were  still  before  the
    Secretary of State for consideration.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal attempted to ascertain whether the relevant requirements  were
    met but unfortunately, without help from  the  Presenting  Officer,  it
    appears the judge omitted one of the requirements.  For this reason the
    decision in respect of the first and third applicants cannot stand.   A
    different decision must be substituted stating that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decisions in respect  of  these  two  applicants  were  not  in
    accordance with the law.

Conclusions

21) The making of the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  in  respect  of
    the first and third applicants involved the making of  an  error  on  a
    point of law.

22) The decisions in respect of the first  and  third  applicants  are  set
    aside.

23) I remake the decisions in respect of the first and third applicants  by
    allowing their appeals to the limited extent  that  their  applications
    remain outstanding for consideration by the Secretary of State.



Anonymity

24) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for doing so.



Fee Award   (Note: this is not part of the decision)

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a full  fee  award  on  the  basis
that all the appeals were allowed  and  a  mistake  had  been  made  by  the
Secretary of State in the consideration of  the  original  applications.   I
uphold the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on this issue.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

