

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21499/2011
      IA/21501/2011
      IA/21504/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|on 26 September 2013                          |on 27 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                         & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                             RK and two children
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin, Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The first appellant is aged 34.  The second and third appellants are
       her children, a boy and a girl, aged nearly 8.  All are citizens  of
       the Democratic Republic of Congo, and not of the UK.
    2. The respondent issued  notices  of  decisions  to  make  deportation
       orders against the appellants on  8  July  2011.   The  reasons  are
       explained in letters to the first appellant, dated 25 May 2011,  and
       to the second and third appellants, dated 2 June 2011.


    3. A panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising  Judge  Black  and  Dr
       Ravenscroft dismissed the appellants' appeals for reasons  explained
       in a determination promulgated on 26 January 2012.

    4. The appellants sought to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  various
       proposed grounds.   Both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
       Tribunal refused their applications.


    5. The Hon Mr Justice Collins granted permission to apply for  judicial
       review (CO ref 2592/2012) on 1 June 2012, saying this:

      The FtT decision does not refer to paragraph 364 of  the  Immigration
          Rules and it is clear that the tribunal did have regard to section
          55 [of the 2009 Act] and the best interests of the children.   The
          problem arises in paragraph 92 [of the determination] where it  is
          said that the presumption is in favour of deportation and it seems
          from the second sentence that the presumption applies to  all  the
          appellants i.e. the children are included.  That is  wrong  -  see
          paragraphs 365-367 of the Rules.  Despite the failure to argue  it
          and the taking of a thoroughly bad point, it is  a  point  of  law
          which can be raised and it  may  have  influenced  the  First-tier
          Tribunal against the children.


      This is underlined having regard to the mother's HIV condition.   The
          stage 2 medication point does not seem to have been addressed  and
          the effect on the children [of their mother] being without  proper
          medication and so very sick and perhaps unable to look after  them
          properly may have been insufficiently evaluated.

    6. On 5 July 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Southern granted  permission  to
       appeal:


           For the reasons given by Collins J ... and for the  reasons  ...
           set out in the consent order which followed, the effect of which
           was to  quash  the  earlier  decision  on  the  application  for
           permission to appeal, I am satisfied that permission should  now
           be granted.

    7. The solicitors  for  the  appellants  responded  conscientiously  to
       directions issued with the grant of permission.  In particular,  the
       following further evidence is tendered:


           Report, with addendum, by Dr M Kodi,  country  expert,  dated  3
           September 2013, on (a) the situation  for  children  in  eastern
           Congo and (b) availability of second line HIV therapy in eastern
           DRC.


           Updating medical report  by  Dr  J  Ainsworth  FRCP,  the  first
           appellant's medical consultant, dated 16 September 2013.


    8. There is no response from the  respondent  to  directions,  although
       copy correspondence on file shows that  the  appellants'  solicitors
       had pressed for clarification of the respondent's position.


    9. Ms Cronin clarified for us  that  the  husband  and  father  of  the
       family, also a  DRC  citizen,  is  subject  to  deportation,  having
       exhausted his  appeal  rights,  but  remains  in  the  UK  with  the
       appellants.  This appears to be in line with the respondent's policy
       of usually dealing with a family as a  unit.   Ms  Cronin  suggested
       that we should approach the case as  turning  on  whether  all  four
       family members stay in the UK, or are deported.

   10. Ms Cronin provided us with her skeleton argument on the day.  Having
       given Ms Holmes some time to consider it, she fairly  and  correctly
       conceded  that  she  could  not  dissent  from  the  gist   of   its
       submissions.

   11. We advised that the appeal would succeed.

   12. Error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal fell into  the  misconception
       that the Rules could properly make a presumption in  favour  of  the
       deportation of the children, compatibly with section 55 of the  2009
       Act.  As Ms Cronin emphasised, the interests of the child must be  a
       primary consideration.  While  those  interests  may  ultimately  be
       outweighed, there can be no presumption in that  direction.    There
       was also a failure to address the "second stage  medication"  point,
       which  carried  the  possible  consequence  of  the  children  being
       deprived of maternal care.

   13. Setting aside.  The errors went to the heart of the case, so we  set
       aside the determination, and proceed to remake the decision.

   14. Public interest in deportation of  the  first  appellant.   She  was
       sentenced in 2005  to  14  months  imprisonment,  cumulatively,  for
       offences of fraud and dishonesty.  The offences were  serious.   The
       presumption that the public interest  requires  her  deportation  is
       enhanced by the fact that her offences  went  directly  against  the
       integrity of immigration control.

   15. Best interests of the children.  The second and third appellants are
       not UK citizens, but they have lived  here  from  birth,  are  being
       educated here, and are of an age  to  have  developed  other  social
       links in their host community.  It is in  their  best  interests  to
       continue living with the first appellant,  and  with  both  parents.
       They would have a major adaptation to make to life in the  DRC,  but
       adaptation would be possible, and it  is  not  extraordinary  for  a
       child to have to cope with his  or  her  family  moving  to  a  very
       different country.  Their general prospects for the  rest  of  their
       childhood would probably be rather worse in the DRC than in the  UK,
       because of the different nature of the two countries, although  that
       alone is not a criterion by which a case might usually succeed.  The
       evidence  about  the  first  appellant's   medical   condition   and
       availability of treatment shows a  real  prospect  of  the  children
       losing their mother fairly soon after return.  Paternal  care  would
       continue.  All in all, the best interests of the children  would  be
       served by their remaining in the UK.  We find that remaining in  the
       UK represents not a small but a substantial margin of  advantage  to
       them.

   16. Proportionality.  The first appellant and her husband have  not  re-
       offended over the long period since their respective convictions for
       related offences of dishonesty.  The  second  and  third  appellants
       come  close  to  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
       Immigration Rules, as they now stand, for leave to remain on grounds
       of private life.  It  was  not  suggested  that  the  appeals  could
       succeed within the Rules, and Article 8 is not to be  applied  on  a
       "near miss" basis,  but  the  Rules  do  give  us  a  yardstick  for
       proportionality.  The children have been here from birth to such  an
       age that a strong case would be needed  to  justify  removing  them.
       The public interest in deportation of the first appellant is at  the
       lesser end of the scale, while the adverse effects which  that  step
       would have on the best interests of the two children are  relatively
       high.

   17. Decision.  The three appeals, as originally brought  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, are allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.




                               [pic]
                                26 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


