
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th September 2014                       |On 22nd October 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                            mrs Juhena Chowdhury
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Hussein, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 1st  September  1989.
    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  27th  June  2012  with  a
    family visitor's  visa,  valid  until  13th  December  2012.   She  had
    previously entered the United Kingdom in 2009 on a six month visit visa
    and in 2011 she had applied for  a  student  visa  and  that  had  been
    refused.

 2. On 12th December 2012 the Appellant's instructed solicitors applied  on
    her behalf for leave to remain on the basis of  her  relationship  with
    Faikul Chowdhury and Tahsin Chowdhury, who are respectively her partner
    and child.  That application was refused by  Notice  of  Refusal  dated
    23rd May 2013.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devlin, sitting at Manchester on 19th February 2014.  In  a  very
    detailed determination promulgated on 28th March 2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. On 4th April 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in law by:-

      i) failing to give adequate reasons why he did  not  accept  that  the
         Appellant and Mr Chowdhury were living together;

     ii) erred in law in finding that the Sponsor used his witness statement
         to deflect any suggestion he lied about his marital status when the
         evidence before the judge was  of  the  Sponsor's  ongoing  divorce
         proceedings;

    iii) erred in law in finding that the Appellant's child is  outside  the
         UK when she is inside  the  UK  residing  with  the  Appellant  and
         Sponsor;

     iv) that the Sponsor cannot easily care for the child if the  Appellant
         is refused leave to remain because she is being breastfed;

      v) the Appellant is pregnant with her second child by the Sponsor;

     vi) that the Appellant was suffering from severe  morning  sickness  at
         the appeal hearing and it had to be stood down for several hours to
         enable her to give evidence; and

    vii) the judge failed to take into account Chikwamba [2008] 1 WLR  1420,
         Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39  and  Section  55  of  the   Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in his Article 8 assessment.

 5. On 8th May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Grant considered that it may well be arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law by finding that the  Appellant's
    child was not in the United Kingdom and accordingly erred in law in his
    findings in relation thereto and on  that  basis  considered  that  all
    grounds could be argued.

 6. On 22nd May 2014 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds oppose the  appeal,  stating  that
    the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  considered  with  admirable
    thoroughness in a 168 paragraph  determination  every  possible  appeal
    ground that is alleged not to have been considered.

 7. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed solicitor  Mrs  Hussein.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

 8. Mrs Hussein wishes to address the Tribunal.  She advises that there has
    been a change of circumstances for the Appellant, in that she  has  had
    another  British  citizen  child  and  that   the   Sponsor's   divorce
    proceedings have now been completed.  She  advises  that  due  to  this
    change of circumstances it would be the intention of the  Appellant  to
    reapply for discretionary leave based  on  her  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor and under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 9. Mr Harrison indicates that he had no  objection  to  the  appeal  being
    withdrawn.

Finding and Determination

10. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The procedure is governed  by
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  this
    being an appeal to the Upper Tribunal it is not  merely  sufficient  to
    indicate that an Appellant wishes to withdraw but that the Tribunal has
    to consent to it.  Having heard Mrs Hussein's  submissions  and  having
    heard the consent of the Secretary of State I too am prepared to  agree
    that the Appellant has permission to withdraw this appeal.

Decision

11. On confirming to the Appellant's legal representative  that  permission
    is granted to withdraw the appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appeal  is
    marked withdrawn  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.

12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           30th September 2014
