
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21456/2015
                                                               IA/21469/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 March 2017                         |On 1 June 2017                   |
|Prepared 4 April 2017                    |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                         Ms Arlene Simone Williamson
                                    [A M]
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For the Appellants:    Miss A Nizami, Counsel  instructed  by  Perera  &  Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are nationals of Jamaica, dates of  birth  14  September
    1972 and [ ] 2012 respectively.  The first Appellant is the  mother  of
    the second Appellant.

2.   The Appellants appealed the Respondent's decision, dated 26  May  2015,
    to refuse their applications for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 and  under  Article  8
    ECHR. Their appeals were dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NMK
    Lawrence (the judge) on 6 October 2016. Permission to appeal was  given
    on 8 February 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on all grounds.

3.   The grounds of appeal raise a number of points but now only  grounds  3
    and 4 are pursued.  Those relate to issues of the existence  of  family
    life between the second Appellant and his father, [DM] and  the  impact
    of the second Appellant's removal.  The other issue pursued is that the
    judge  failed  to  properly  analyse  whether  there  were   compelling
    circumstances to consider the  case  in  relation  to  Article  8  ECHR
    outside of the Rules.

4.    The issue was also raised that the judge had made an error of  law  in
    failing  to  properly  consider  the  factual  situation  relating   to
    correspondence, dated 2 September 2013. For  reasons  given  the  judge
    explained how a letter requesting information on the  progress  of  the
    case had in fact led to that letter being treated  as  if  it  were  an
    application, giving rise to the decision dated 26 May 2015.    In  view
    of what was said by the judge in the decision  (D11,  13),  I  conclude
    there is absolutely nothing in that point come what may

5.    Judge Parkes, in granting permission to appeal, raised  the  issue  of
    the absence of a decision on an application dated 25 October 2011 which
    he refers to as "the date of the application under  consideration"  and
    that the old Immigration Rules applied.  The fact was  that  it  was  a
    decision referred to by the judge but it is clear that the  application
    of October 2011, seeking FLR(O), was refused on 2 November 2011 with no
    right of appeal.  Therefore that reference, in the grant of permission,
    I take to be immaterial. It is unclear what First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes' decision of 8 February 2017 is addressing.

6.    The fact of the matter was that before me  the  two  remaining  issues
    were as set out above.  So far as the first  Appellant  was  concerned,
    there were no very significant obstacles to reintegration into  Jamaica
    within the terms of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Rules.   The  judge
    gave cogent reasons why that was so (D12-15, 17 and 18).

7.   So far as the second Appellant  was  concerned,  he  had  no  route  to
    remain under Appendix FM because of the period of time he has  been  in
    the United Kingdom as a child. He was after all a Jamaican national who
    had not been in the United Kingdom seven years.

8.    The  judge  considered  the  second  Appellant's  best  interests  and
    extensively reasoned those matters (D19,  27-29).   The  judge  plainly
    considered  the  relationship  claimed  between  [DM]  and  the  second
    Appellant and concluded that as a matter of course the first Appellant,
    if there is a genuine and subsisting relationship between  them,  could
    approach this matter through the entry clearance provisions  and  there
    is nothing to stop [DM], if he chooses, maintaining a relationship with
    the Appellants.

9.    The judge considered the evidence relating  to  the  second  Appellant
    and contact between the child and [DM] (D25 and D26).  For the  reasons
    given the judge  was  particularly  sceptical  about  the  relationship
    claimed between the first Appellant with [DM] and the extent  to  which
    there was a relationship between [DM] and the second  Appellant  (D28).
     It is clear that the judge was not satisfied that the first  Appellant
    could not earn a living in Jamaica and it was evident  that  the  judge
    did not regard the first Appellant as likely to be dependent upon  [DM]
    (D14-16).The judge was unimpressed with the First  Appellants   claimed
    loss of connections with Jamaica (D29-31)

10.  In the circumstances, it does  not  seem  to  me  the  judge  made  any
    material error of law in considering the evidence and  the  conclusions
    that he reached are perfectly sustainable.  No other Tribunal with  the
    same material before it is in my view likely to  come  to  a  different
    decision.

11.  So far as the Article 8 issues are concerned,  the  position  was  that
    the judge concluded there was at least a route through entry  clearance
    for the first Appellant and second Appellant to return to the UK and be
    with [DM], if that is what they chose to do.  The judge looked  at  the
    matter  and  plainly   considered   whether   there   were   compelling
    circumstances and the grounds of appeal are no more than  a  repetition
    of the belief that there were compelling circumstances.  The conclusion
    that there were not,  reading  the  decision  as  a  whole,  cannot  be
    categorised as perverse or irrational or unsustainable.

12.    The relationship between [DM] and his son [KM] (15 years of  age),  a
    British national, is of course a matter for him as to the part he plays
    in his life of which the evidence was thin indeed. In considering  this
    matter I also read the statement of [KM], dated 1  September  2016  and
    understanding his wishes nevertheless it does not seem to me that  what
    is said therein amounts to compelling circumstances.

13.  However it does not seem to me that  such  rights  or  relationship  as
    there  may  be  between  the  two  of  them   demonstrates   compelling
    circumstances why the Appellants  should  remain  or  that  his  choice
    should be taken to be determinative of  the  compelling  circumstances.
    The  skeleton  argument  of  Miss   Nizami   simply   highlights   that
    relationship and the  fact  is  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  that
    demonstrates that the judge's decision was perverse  or  irrational  or
    indeed the circumstance amount to  compelling  ones.   Accordingly  the
    Original Tribunal decisions stand.

DECISION

The appeals are dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

None made.

FEE AWARD

The appeal has been lost and therefore no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 10 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
