
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/21509/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                         |    On 09 April 2018              |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                         Ms Ehinomen Barbara Eliboh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam, Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against  a  decision
    of the Respondent to revoke her Residence Card pursuant  to  Regulation
    20 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.  Her
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robinson who, in a
    decision promulgated on 21 April 2017 dismissed it.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was refused. However, a renewed
    application was granted by Judge of the Upper Tribunal Andrew Jordan on
    18 January 2018. His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  The determination is not assisted by the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge's  concluding  words  that   the   appellant   had   not
             established she had acquired a right to reside in  the  United
             Kingdom as an  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
             exercising Treaty rights. That was very  far  from  being  the
             issue.

         2.   This was an application for  a  retained  right  of  residence
             under reg. 10 which the respondent refused. The Judge did  not
             appear to appreciate that since he classified the decision  as
             a  decision  to  revoke  her  residence  card.  In  fact,  the
             revocation of the residence  was  merely  the  result  of  the
             refusal of her application for a retained right of residence.

         3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not set out the requirements
             for a retained right of residence. Had he done  so,  he  might
             then have considered whether those requirements were met. Reg.
             10 is a structured claim requiring certain  distinct  elements
             to be met which the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not address,
             including, perhaps,  whether  the  couple  were  married.  (No
             marriage certificate was before  the  decision  maker  or  the
             First-tier Tribunal). Does the grant of a residence card prove
             marriage? Does the divorce  court  concern  itself  about  the
             validity of a foreign marriage? - arguably it does not.  There
             are  then  the  additional   requirements   of   marriage   of
             convenience; 3 years of marriage;  12  months  in  the  United
             Kingdom (from when to when?); his exercising Treaty rights  at
             the date of decree absolute; the appellant   exercising  quasi
             (reg.10(6)  Treaty  rights)  and  when  (at  date  of   decree
             absolute; application; hearing)?

         4.   We know that the appellant's  husband  was  not  found  to  be
             truthful/persuasive about his relationship  with  Ms  Aroyewun
             but what does  that  say  about  his  relationship  with  this
             Appellant? The Judge seems to have assumed that as he lied  to
             Judges Farrelly  and  Boardman,  the  appellant  must  not  be
             telling the truth but this may be a non-sequitur.

         5.   This is far  from  saying  the  appeal  will  succeed  but  it
             acknowledges that, if the appeal is to be rejected, it has  to
             be rejected because the requirements of the  Regulations  were
             not  met.  The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant   had   not
             established a genuine and durable relationship but what is the
             relevance of a genuine and durable relationship in a  Reg.  10
             case? The genuine and durable relationship  plainly  does  not
             exist at the date of  decree  absolute  but  then  no-one  was
             suggesting it did.

         6.   Neither the grounds nor the  First-tier  Tribunal  refusal  of
             permission appear to address these Robinson-obvious points.

         Permission to appeal is granted."

 3.  Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Wilding accepted Judge Jordan's analysis in relation to the  failure
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to set  out  the  requirements  for  a
    retained right of residence. However, he contended that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not erred as the structured approach highlighted  by
    Judge Jordan only applied if it was found that this was not a  marriage
    of convenience. Only if it were a genuine marriage would  the  approach
    apply. Hence, he concluded the Judge had not erred.

 5. Mr Alam highlighted paragraph 4 of Judge Jordan's decision which  flows
    from paragraph 4 of the grounds seeking permission to appeal, where  it
    was submitted that there was perversity as  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider the prospect that as it was found that the Appellant's husband
    had lied to two previous Judges  that  might  not  necessarily  be  the
    position in this appeal.

 6. I find that the analysis of Judge Jordan reflects my own assessment  of
    the position in this appeal and for all the reasons therein highlighted
    the Judge has materially erred.

Decision

The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law the decision  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Robinson.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 5 April 2018.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard








