
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 21548 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2014                              |On 23 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SADIAT AJIKE FASOLA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Igezie Solicitor from Curling Moore Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  an  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,
    hereinafter "the claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State
    to refuse her leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system.

 2. For reasons that I shall explain, I have no hesitation  in  saying  that
    the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law.   I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I remake the decision dismissing
    the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

 3. The points-based system represented a sea-change in immigration  law  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Rules are extremely prescriptive, allowing very
    little discretion and in many cases requiring documents or  other  kinds
    of evidence to be produced when the application is made.

 4. Frequently appeals are little to do with what might be thought to be the
    inherent merits  of  the  application,  such  as  a  person's  means  or
    suitability, but are entirely technical and relate  to  whether  or  not
    certain things were  produced  or  proved  in  a  particular  way  at  a
    particular time as prescribed by the rules. We are not going to make any
    progress in our consideration of these appeals unless all of us who deal
    with them, applicants, practitioners and judiciary, move away from ideas
    learned over many years where we were concerned about a person's ability
    to comply with the Rules when the appeal was heard and look  instead  at
    what we are required to look at, which is whether or not the very strict
    prescriptive requirements of the Rules were met.

 5. The determination, on the face of it, is astonishingly short.  With  the
    considerable assistance of representatives  for  both  parties,  it  has
    taken me most of the morning to get to the position  I  am  in  now  and
    whilst First-tier Tribunal Judges might have  more  experience  in  this
    kind of work I fear that until we are all very familiar with the  Rules,
    assuming that they remain in force in their present form for long enough
    for that familiarity to develop, cases under these Rules are going to be
    tedious and time consuming.

 6. It is unclear exactly what the First-tier  Tribunal  decided.   The  key
    paragraph is paragraph 7 which states:

         "After careful consideration of the evidence  and  the  submissions
         made by both representatives I am of the view  that  the  appellant
         provided substantially the required documents which he  is  obliged
         to  provide  to  satisfy  the  Rules.   The  Tribunal  accepts  the
         submission that..."

 7. It is hard to see why an appellant who provided documents  substantially
    required can be thought to have satisfied the requirements of the  Rules
    where all of them have to be satisfied.  This paragraph is criticised on
    the basis that the meaning was obscure and I have to say that  criticism
    is well-founded. I do not know from reading  the  determination  exactly
    what the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided except  that  he  decided  to
    allow the appeal. The reasoning is not sufficient reasoning.

 8. Reference is made to "evidential flexibility" but is not explained and I
    cannot ascertain why that might  be  thought  to  be  relevant  in  this
    context.  I have to say that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    identify and grapple with the issues raised and the  decision  to  allow
    the appeal is not explained adequately.

 9. I remind myself that from the perspective of the claimant,  who  thought
    that she had won her appeal, it is particularly upsetting for me to  set
    aside that decision and replace it with another decision  and  I  should
    only do that if I  am  quite  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision is defective.  But it is defective.  It  is  not  clear
    what was decided, still less why it was decided, and I cannot uphold it.

10. Mr Igezie, for the claimant, did not spend much time trying to  persuade
    me that the determination was entirely satisfactory. Rather he said that
    there were no material errors.  The way he put his case is quite simple.
     He said that the claimant produced all the documents she  was  required
    to produce and the Secretary of State either lost them or did  not  look
    at them and the Secretary of State  wrongly  relied  only  on  documents
    produced at  a  subsequent  interview  and  made  mistakes  because  the
    Secretary of State had not looked at the right things.  This is a highly
    cogent argument capable of being right but it is not right for reasons I
    will explain. In short the documents that were relied on by the claimant
    did not meet the requirements of the  rules.  It  follows  that  nothing
    useful would be served by deciding what else  may  have  been  produced.
    Obviously I would have resolved this issues if  it  could  have  made  a
    difference. It may  well  be  that  the  claimant  did  provided  better
    documentation with the application and supplemented them with inadequate
    documentation at her interview and that the inadequate documentation has
    been considered and the better documentation ignored. However I have not
    seen  any  evidence  that  the  claimant  ever  produced  ALL   of   the
    documentation that was required of her.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal record that  there  was  no
    cross-examination by the respondent about the documents.  This is not an
    admission that the documents were genuine or adequate in any way.  It is
    merely a record that there was no cross-examination by  the  respondent.
    A possible explanation for that is the respondent did not want  to  give
    the claimant an opportunity to repair any damage.   I  suspect  that  is
    being overly sophisticated and in reality there was nothing about  which
    cross-examination was appropriate.  The documents were to be  considered
    for what they were and what they showed.

12. The reasons for refusal letter dated 20 May 2013 is in a  standard  form
    and puts in boxes the number of points claimed and the number of  points
    awarded.

13. The first is titled "Appendix A  -  Attributes"  and  requires  evidence
    about funds to be proved in a particular way.  This is a case where  the
    appellant was relying on third party funds.  The Rules provide for  that
    and they require confirmatory documents  from  a  legal  representative.
    The particular part of the Rules is set out in paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii) of
    Appendix A to HC 395.  Sub-paragraph (ii) is in the following terms:

         "A letter from the legal representative confirming the validity  of
         signatures on each third party declaration provided, which confirms
         that the declaration(s) from the third party/parties  contains  the
         signatures of the  people  stated.   It  can  be  a  single  letter
         covering all third  party  permissions,  or  several  letters  from
         several legal representatives.  It must be an original  letter  and
         not a copy, and it must be from the legal representative  permitted
         to practise in the country where the third party or money is.   The
         letter must clearly show the following:

         (i)-

         (ii)-

         (iii)-

         (iv) The applicant's name (and the name  of  the  applicant's  team
         partner if the  applicant  is  applying  under  the  provisions  of
         paragraph 52 of this Appendix).-"

14. Mr Jack says, and I find that he is right, that  although  one  or  more
    letters can be relied upon, every letter that is relied upon  must  meet
    these requirements and it must show the applicant's name.

15. There were letters relied on in the bundle but they  did  not  show  the
    applicant's name.  There was a letter at  page  36  in  the  appellant's
    bundle and another at page 38 in the appellant's bundle from solicitors;
    in one case a firm practising in the Broadway in Rainham in Essex and in
    another case a firm in Lagos that identified the signature but  did  not
    identify the claimant.  Not only is this a requirement of the Rules,  it
    is obviously a matter of very considerable importance because  it  is  a
    convenient way of showing that the  attestation  relates  to  the  right
    document.  In these two cases the Rules were not met.

16. In a sense that is sufficient to deal with  the  application  under  the
    Rules but there is more to be said.  It is a further requirement of  the
    Rules that the  applicant  produces  certain  evidence  of  her  trading
    activities.  Again,  it  is  prescribed,  this  time  at  paragraph  41-
    SD(c)(iii)  of  the  Appendix.   The  specified  documents  are  in  the
    alternative.  Three  of  them  relate  to  advertising  material,  trade
    information from a trade fair, or newspaper  article  showing  both  the
    applicant's name and the business activity.  The evidence relied  on  by
    the claimant does not.  Her name is shown but her business  activity  is
    not.

17. There is a fourth way of complying  with  this  Rule  and  that  is  the
    certificate showing personal registration with a trades body  linked  to
    the applicant's occupation.  This the applicant tried to do and referred
    to a document allegedly from a trade body at page 58 of the bundle which
    showed the appellant's  membership  of  the  Academy  of  Pharmaceutical
    Sciences.  I know nothing about the Academy of Pharmaceutical  Sciences.
    It may be this is just because I am ignorant about  something  which  is
    well known to the appellant but the burden of proof is on her and  there
    is nothing before me  to  show  that  this  is  indeed  an  organisation
    properly described as a trade body in accordance  with  the  Rules.   It
    follows that in my judgment this part of the  Rules  was  not  satisfied
    either.

18. In respect of the defective documents, Mr Igezie sought to rely on  part
    6A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  245AA  and  particularly
    245AA(d).  This does not assist him at all.  Firstly, I am not satisfied
    that it is a Rule in force at the relevant time.   Nobody  produced  the
    commencement dates.  Mr Jack's view is that it was not in force  at  the
    time.  I think Mr Jack is right but even if it was in force it does  not
    help because it is not a general power to decision makers but  it  is  a
    power granted to named people, that is an Entry  Clearance  Officer,  an
    Immigration Officer, or the Secretary of State and  it  is  an  enabling
    provision which in certain circumstances permits a  particular  decision
    maker (not a judge) to allow an application that would otherwise have to
    be refused.  Unless it is a power that is in someway governed by policy,
    and this has not been suggested,  then  I  see  no  basis  on  which  an
    appellant before the Tribunal can complain that  the  decision  has  not
    been given exceptionally on this basis.  Certainly there is nothing here
    which assists the claimant before me addressing the deficiencies in  the
    documents that she has produced.

19.   Other  deficiencies  alleged  related  to  funds  held  in   regulated
    financial institutions and funds disposable in the United Kingdom but no
    findings were made about that and I see no reason why  they  should  be.
    They were not made because the claimant could  not  satisfy  an  earlier
    part of the Rules.

20. It is also said that the claimant  had  not  provide  a  statement  from
    Lloyds Bank in the prescribed form.  Again, this, I  think,  has  to  be
    right.  Documents I have seen in the bundle were original documents  but
    they were produced from the internet. They were not stamped and it is  a
    requirement that they were.

21. All of these Rules had to be satisfied.  None of them were.

22. It follows therefore that the appellant has not proved  to  the  balance
    of probabilities  that  she  produced  the  required  documents  in  the
    required way at the required time and therefore her appeal  against  the
    present appellant's decision has to be dismissed.

23. I acknowledge receipt rather belatedly of a skeleton argument  from  the
    respondent.  I was able to read it briefly.  I do not  think  it  raised
    any point that had not been raised in argument before me and  Mr  Igezie
    certainly presented his case firmly and determinedly.

24. I am aware that this is an unhappy outcome in a way that must  frustrate
    the claimant but the Rules have to be applied I have no alternative  but
    to make the decision that I have.

25. For the sake of completeness,  I  record  that  human  rights  were  not
    raised or argued before me.  There is nothing in  the  case  to  suggest
    that that would have been anything other than a  time  wasting  exercise
    and Mr Igezie is to be commended for not taking that course.

26. It follows therefore  that  I  have  no  alternative  but  to  make  the
    decision I have and  I  summarise  it  again.   I  find  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.  I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I substitute a decision dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision.

27. I also want to make it plain that I have not  made  any  findings  about
    what was actually produced.  I do not see we can ever get to the  bottom
    of that.  On the evidence  before  me,  if  it  had  been  a  worthwhile
    exercise, in the sense that if all the documents could have been  proved
    that the appeal could have been allowed I might have had  to  deal  with
    this matter differently, but that is not the case.

    Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 April 2014                  |




