
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21526/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 4 September 2015                 |On: 8 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          MR MOHAMMAD MANSOOR AHMED
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell, counsel instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Ian Howard (hereinafter referred to as the  FTTJ),  promulgated  on  16
    March 2015.

Background

 2. On 7 August 2013, the appellant applied for further leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a dependant partner of a Tier  4  migrant.   That
    application was refused on 9 October 2013 with no right of appeal and a
    decision was also made to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.
    Following the appellant's judicial review of that decision,  a  further
    decision was served on 8 May 2014 against which he appealed. The  basis
    of the respondent's decision was that the  appellant  had  submitted  a
    false  document,  namely  a  passport  with  the  reference  number  of
    KC273212, with his application

 3. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant explained  that  the  Pakistani
    authorities had issued him passport KC273212 with an incorrect date  of
    birth and that he had later been issued a  further  passport  with  the
    date of birth corrected.  He  maintained  that  passport  KC273212  was
    genuinely issued by the Pakistani authorities and that he had submitted
    both passports to the Home Office with his application.

 4. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the respondent relied upon  a  document
    examination report of passport KC273212, which stated that it had  been
    altered in two places by mechanical abrasion, which was visible to  the
    naked eye. It was said that changes had been made to the year of  birth
    and the holder's identity card number. As passport KC273212 was used to
    obtain the appellant's current passport, the respondent considered that
    the subsequent passport was also fraudulently obtained.

 5. The FTTJ was satisfied that the evidential burden on the respondent  to
    show that deception was used had been discharged on the  basis  of  the
    document examiner's report. He further found that the original year  of
    birth was 1980 and not 1988 and consequently found that  the  appellant
    was not a minor at the time passport KC273212 was altered.  The  FTTJ's
    finding was made notwithstanding the witness  evidence  to  the  effect
    that the appellant was a minor  and  reliant  on  his  parents  at  the
    relevant time. The FTTJ also concluded  that  the  appellant's  removal
    from the United Kingdom would not amount to an  interference  with  his
    family life with his wife as her course was due to end in May 2015.

 6. The grounds seeking permission argued, inter alia, that the FTTJ failed
    to  refer  to  the  appellant's  documentary  evidence  which  included
    documents from the passport office in Lahore; that he gave  no  reasons
    for rejecting this evidence and gave no adequate reasons for  rejecting
    the oral evidence of the appellant and his witnesses.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers
    on 27 May 2015 on the basis that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of the appellant and his witnesses.

 8. At the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Pretzell  relied  upon  the  grounds,
    stressing that the FTTJ accepted the evidence contained in the document
    examination report but did not engage with any of  the  other  evidence
    before him. It was not in dispute that the  passport  in  question  had
    been altered as stated in the document examination report,  however  it
    was the appellant's case that it was not he that was responsible.

 9. Mr Pretzell  referred  me  to  copies  of  manual  records,  which  the
    appellant had obtained from the Pakistani authorities and which  showed
    that passport KC273212 was incorrectly issued with a year of  birth  of
    1987. He argued that the passport had been manually  corrected  by  the
    passport office in Lahore to show a year of  birth  of  1988  and  that
    subsequent electronic passports also showed 1988. The appellant had not
    used passport KC273212 to travel. I was also referred to  a  number  of
    other documents, which confirmed that the appellant was born  in  1988,
    including a school certificate, supplementary examination  results  and
    the appellant's marriage certificate. Mr Pretzell argued that the  FTTJ
    had looked for a motive for the appellant's date of birth to be altered
    and had decided that the appellant's date of birth was 1980 without any
    evidence to support that. That finding took no account of the  evidence
    from the Lahore passport office as to  the  date  of  birth  originally
    recorded for the  appellant.  There  had  been  no  dishonesty  by  the
    appellant.

10. Mr Avery did not make any arguments in support of  the  FTTJ's  finding
    that the appellant's year of birth was 1980. He argued that  there  was
    no  evidence  that  the  Pakistani  authorities  were  responsible  for
    altering the passport in  question.  The  evidence  from  the  passport
    office merely showed that his year of birth was  1987.  The  subsequent
    passports had simply been issued on the  basis  of  the  first  altered
    passport. He submitted that the remainder of the  appellant's  evidence
    was produced subsequent to the amendments to the first passport,  which
    was used in order to obtain that evidence. Mr Avery argued, relying  on
    AA (Nigeria), that a false document in  and  of  itself  is  enough  to
    warrant refusal and that the respondent does  not  have  to  prove  the
    appellant knowingly used  a  false  document.  There  was  no  evidence
    predating the passport to support a date of birth of 1988  and  it  was
    unlikely that the passport office would make a manual correction.

11. In reply, Mr Prezell disagreed  with  Mr  Avery's  reading  of  AA  and
    stressed that there must be some dishonesty shown by the appellant. The
    appellant was a minor at the time, regardless of whether  his  date  of
    birth was 1987 or 1988. The appellant had never used passport  KC273212
    to obtain entry clearance.

Decision on error of law

12. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the appellant  provided  evidence  from
    the office which issued passport KC273212, showing  that  his  year  of
    birth was recorded as 1987.  That  evidence  consisted  of  the  manual
    record made in 2003 (which was accompanied by the appellant's  passport
    photograph) as well as a letter from the same office dated  31  October
    2013, which makes reference to the aforementioned records. Had the FTTJ
    considered this evidence, there would have been  no  need  for  him  to
    speculate as to the year of birth which was  manually  altered  on  the
    appellant's first passport.

13. The oral and written evidence of the appellant, his uncle and aunt  was
    that it was the Pakistani authorities, which had rectified the year  of
    birth by manually changing the passport. However,  the  FTTJ  makes  no
    assessment of that evidence other than to  rely  upon  his  speculative
    finding that the appellant was born in 1980.

14. As indicated in the document examination report, the  alterations  were
    obvious in that they were "visible to the naked eye." Yet the Pakistani
    authorities have issued the appellant with two further passports giving
    his year of birth as 1988. On the face of it, this tends to support the
    appellant's contention that the Pakistani authorities were  responsible
    for altering the first passport and is a further reason  why  the  FTTJ
    ought to have provided adequate reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's
    account.

15. There was no evidence before the FTTJ to show that  the  appellant  was
    born in 1980. However, once the FTTJ decided that  any  dishonesty  was
    motivated by an intention to pose as a minor,  he  failed  to  consider
    whether the passport was dishonestly used in order to obtain  leave  to
    remain. In fact,  that  passport  was  never  used  in  an  immigration
    application. Furthermore, as indicated in AA, given the fact  that  the
    appellant would have been a minor in 2003, regardless of which year  of
    birth is referred to, it would be more likely than not that a parent or
    guardian would be involved in any dishonesty than the  appellant.  This
    scenario was not considered by the FTTJ either.

16. I therefore set aside the FTTJ's decision.

17. After hearing from the representatives, I  accepted  that  it  was  not
    appropriate for me to proceed to re-make the decision as the  appellant
    wished to obtain  further  evidence  and  in  particular  his  parents'
    marriage certificate. I indicated that the appellant might also wish to
    adduce his birth certificate. I decided to  remit  the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as I was of the view that the appellant had yet  to
    have his evidence adequately considered.

18. No anonymity direction has been made previously, and I  see  no  reason
    for one now.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo to  be
heard by any judge with the exception of FTTJ Ian Howard.


Signed      Date: 6 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
