
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/21142/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 September 2015                     |On 28 September 2015             |
|                                         |                                 |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                               HABIB UR REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr Iqbal of Equity Law Chambers
For the Respondent:   Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Gladstone promulgated on 28  August  2015  dismissing  the
   Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  24  April
   2014 to refuse to grant leave to remain as the spouse of a person settled
   in the United Kingdom.
Background
3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1985 and is a national of Pakistan.
4. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  16  December  2011  as  the
   spouse of Razeena Kazim a British  Citizen  with  leave  valid  until  28
   February 2014. On 20 February 2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  further
   leave to remain in order to obtain the relevant  qualifications  to  meet
   the Knowledge of Language and Life in  the  UK  (KOLL)  requirements  for
   indefinite leave to remain.
5. On  24  April  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application by reference to paragraph  284,  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
   276ADE of the Immigration Rules and found there was no  reason  to  grant
   leave outside the Rules. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   (a)The Appellant did not provide an  English  Language  in  speaking  and
   listening  from  an  English  language  test  provider  approved  by  the
   Secretary of State which showed that the Appellant met the level of A1 of
   the common European Framework of Reference.
   (b) The certificate produced by the Appellant from EMD  is  not  from  an
   approved provider as set out in Appendix O of the Rules.
   (c) In considering EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  there  were  no  insurmountable
   obstacles as to why the Appellant and his wife could not continue  family
   life in Pakistan.
   (d) The Appellant did not meet the private life requirements of paragraph
   276ADE.
   (e) There were no circumstances that warranted a grant of  leave  outside
   the Rules.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that  the
   Respondent had erroneously applied paragraph 284 to the application which
   should have been considered under R-LTRP of Appendix FM and his  language
   certificate submitted with  his  initial  application  should  have  been
   accepted and there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being
   pursued in Pakistan.
7.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Gladsone ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
   against the Respondent's decision. The Judge found :
   a) The Judge was satisfied that paragraph 284 was  properly  applied  and
      set out her reasoning in relation to that issue.
   b) The Appellant was required to provide a language certificate  from  an
      approved  test  provider  and  had  not  done  so  and  therefore  the
      application was properly refused under paragraph 284(ix).
   c) While the Appellant claimed to have sat another  language  test  there
      was no evidence of the result or that it was  with  an  approved  test
      provider.
   d) The Appellant did not meet the private life requirements of  paragraph
      276ADE of the Rules.
   e) The Judge considered EX.1 and EX.2 of Appendix FM.
   f) The Judge found that his claim before her that he was not close to his
      family in Pakistan because he spent long periods  away  from  home  at
      school and college was contradicted by  the  leave  application  which
      stated that he had family ties in Pakistan and the evidence  submitted
      in support of his appeal in 2011 in  which  it  was  claimed  that  he
      worked in the family business as an agriculturalist.
   g) The Judge found that the Appellant and his wife could  therefore  live
      and work with his family on return.
   h) The Sponsor had the relevant language abilities to  live  in  Pakistan
      and had visited there.
   i) There was little evidence of any claimed medical problems suffered  by
      the sponsor and therefore the Judge could  not  make  findings  as  to
      whether or not there would be difficulties in Pakistan. She noted that
      the sponsor was not incapacitated as she was in employment.
   j) The Judge found there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life
      continuing in Pakistan.
   k)  The Judge found that alternatively  the  Appellant  could  return  to
      Pakistan and take the language test and re apply for  entry  clearance
      and this was not a disproportionate interference with his rights under
      Article 8.
8. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  18  November  2014  First  tier
   Tribunal Judge Chohan refused permission.  The  application  was  renewed
   arguing that the Judge should have  applied  the  evidential  flexibility
   provisions to the English  Language  certificate  requirement;  that  her
   assessment of proportionality was flawed; that the Judge failed  to  take
   into account material facts about  the  sponsor's  health.  Deputy  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission on the  basis  of  the  renewed
   grounds and the issue of  procedural  fairness  raised  in  the  original
   grounds on the basis that the Judge may  have  misunderstood  submissions
   made by the Appellant's former legal representative.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Iqbal  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that (a) He conceded that paragraph 284 of the Rules  had  been
   properly applied.

   (b) He pursued two arguments: that  the  hearing  had  been  procedurally
   unfair and that the Judges assessment under Article 8 had been flawed.

   (c) In relation to the issue of procedural unfairness the  Appellant  had
   been confused about the language  requirements  in  his  application  for
   further leave.

   (d)The Appellant's representative  before  the  Judge  had  been  legally
   qualified as otherwise he was committing a criminal offence.

   (e) What was unclear was the manner in which  the  Judge  considered  the
   representatives submissions in  relation  to  the  Sponsors  income  from
   employment in the proportionality assessment.

   (f) In relation to the Judges assessment under Article 8 the Judge failed
   to take into account the Sponsors medical issues that would  prevent  her
   from living in Pakistan.

   (g) The financial requirements of the Rules were too onerous.

   (h) He conceded that the decision was 'fairly reasonable' but there  were
   factors relating to the medical history of the sponsor and the  financial
   requirements of the Rules that merited further consideration.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnstone submitted that :

   a) The Appellant's representatives had  in  respect  of  the  application
      being  appealed  submitted  a  covering  letter  conceding  that   the
      Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

   b) The Judge gave ample opportunity to the solicitor to address the court
      and considered the bundle of documents.

   c) Any suggestion that the Judge interrupted the witnesses when they gave
      evidence had not been raised previously and had not been  the  subject
      of the permission.

   d) In relation to Article 8 the Judge  considered  all  of  the  relevant
      factors.

   e) The Judge at paragraph 99 set out her  consideration  of  the  medical
      evidence. There was also evidence before her that the sponsor had been
      to Pakistan at a time she claimed to be too ill to travel.

   f) The Judge did not make findings as to whether the parties  could  meet
      the financial requirements as there was no evidence in acceptable form
      that they could.

Legal Framework

11. In relation to claims under Article 8 these are addressed  by  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Guidance. If an applicant does not meet the criteria  set  out  in  the
    Rules then guidance issued by the Secretary of State  in  the  form  of
    instructions provides in effect, that leave to remain outside the rules
    could be granted in the exercise of residual discretion in 'exceptional
    circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be  exercised
    on the basis of Article 8 considerations, in particular  assessing  all
    relevant factors in determining whether  a  decision  is  proportionate
    under Article 8.2.

12. It is now generally accepted that the new IRs do not provide in advance
    for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in  individual  cases.
    At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:


   "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
       that the claim for leave to remain under them  fails,  the  relevant
       official  or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear   that   the
       consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any family life or
       private life issues arising under Article 8, it would be  sufficient
       simply to say that; they would not have to go on,  in  addition,  to
       consider the case separately from the Rules. If there is no arguable
       case that there may be good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules by reference to Article 8, there would be no point
       in introducing full separate consideration of Article 8 again  after
       having reached a decision on application of the Rules."

13. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):
   "64.     ... there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
       article 8 outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the  circumstances  of  a
       particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in   the
       consideration under the Rules."

14. More recently the Court of Appeal in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    stated in paragraph 33:


   "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply  in
   every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say
   that the general position outside the sorts of special contexts  referred
   to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be identified  to
   support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In
   our view, that is a formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
   exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred
   to in MF (Nigeria) in the context of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
   criminals),  but  which  gives  appropriate   weight   to   the   focused
   consideration of public interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
   Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also
   reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has  been  tested
   and has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at  [44],
   per Beatson LJ. "

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. This was an application by the Appellant for further leave to remain  as
   the spouse of a  British  Citizen  which  was  refused  by  reference  to
   paragraph 284 of the Rules and Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. No basis
   was found to grant leave outside the Rules.

13. The first  challenge  to  the  Judges  decision  is  one  of  procedural
   unfairness in that it is suggested that the Judge may have  misunderstood
   submissions made by the Appellant's representative at that time  who  was
   Mr Adissianya of Verax Solicitors. It is clear from  the  bundle  and  he
   signed s84 Form before me that  Mr  Adisianya  was  qualified  to  appear
   before the Tribunal indeed he appears to have had the same  qualification
   as Mr Iqbal. This of course does not signify that  he would be  the  most
   able advocate to appear before the courts but that is not  a  requirement
   of fairness: in the same way that it is always possible for decisions  to
   be better written  it  is  always  possible  to  find  a  more  competent
   representative, one who is a more  persuasive  advocate  or  one  who  is
   better able to explain the legal requirements of the Rules or caselaw.

14. It is evident from reading the Judges detailed account  of  the  hearing
   that in the absence of a Home Office Presenting Officer and in the  light
   of the late submission of additional documents and  a  skeleton  argument
   the Judge endeavoured to narrow the issues that were of relevance in  the
   case seeking to clarify with Mr Adisianyia why he advanced  arguments  at
   length in both his skeleton argument and before her  that  paragraph  284
   did not apply in this case. The Judge noted  at  paragraph  68  that  she
   found his final  submissions  difficult  to  follow  on  this  issue  and
   'requested him to try to collect his thoughts  so  I  could  understand.'
   Given that it is now conceded that the arguments advanced by Mr Adisianya
   in relation to paragraph 284 were entirely without merit  it  is  perhaps
   not surprising that the Judge found them 'hard to follow.' I am satisfied
   that  the  Appellant  through  his  representative  was  given   a   fair
   opportunity to advance his case and the fact that unmeritorious arguments
   were advanced in did not make the proceedings unfair.

15. The grounds did not suggest that the Judges assessment under EX.1 and  2
   of Appendix FM was flawed and therefore it is accepted that there were no
   insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Pakistan.  Given
   therefore that it was conceded that the only basis on which the Appellant
   could  hope  to  succeed  was  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules   I
   specifically  asked  Mr  Iqbal  to  identify  for   me   any   compelling
   circumstances that Mr Adisianya had failed to advance  before  the  Judge
   that might suggest that his limited advocacy skills in some way  amounted
   to procedural unfairness or suggested that the Article 8  assessment  was
   flawed. I am satisfied that he was unable to do so and the  argument  was
   one solely as to weight which is a matter for the Judge.

16. The Judge's assessment  under  Article  8  is  found  at  paragraphs  85
   onwards and takes into account the Appellant's failure to meet the  Rules
   that address Article 8 family and private life and I  am  satisfied  that
   she has comprehensively and accurately addressed every issue of relevance
   to the assessment of proportionality. Mr Iqbal suggests  that  the  Judge
   gave insufficient weight to the Sponsors medical  circumstances  in  that
   she claimed to have an eating disorder and sleep problems. The Judge made
   clear findings in relation to the sponsors  medical  needs  on  what  she
   described as the 'very little evidence before me': in essence she  had  a
   GPs letter and a record of a telephone consultation. She  had  of  course
   the oral evidence of the sponsor and Appellant but their evidence had  to
   be assessed against the background of  adverse  credibility  findings  in
   relation to their account of their family relationships  in  Pakistan  as
   there were a number of discrepancies. Given the  limited  nature  of  the
   medical evidence she was entitled to conclude that 'I cannot know whether
   or not there will be difficulties in Pakistan in relation to these.'

17. In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to take  into  account
   that the financial requirements are 'too onerous' as advanced by Mr Iqbal
   this is an argument entirely without merit as the financial  requirements
   have been upheld by the court in MM(Lebanon) and others 2014 EWCA Civ 985
   where it was said that in setting the maintenance limits the Secretary of
   State had "discharged the burden of demonstrating that  the  interference
   was both the minimum necessary and strikes a  fair  balance  between  the
   interests  of  the  groups  concerned  and  the  community  in   general.
   Individuals will have different views on  what  constitutes  the  minimum
   income requirements needed to accomplish the stated policy  aims.  In  my
   judgment it is not the  court's  job  to  impose  its  own  view  unless,
   objectively  judged,  the  levels  chosen  are  to  be  characterised  as
   irrational, or inherently unjust or inherently unfair. In  my  view  they
   cannot be". Nor indeed was it an argument advanced by  Mr  Adisianyia  as
   the Judge noted at paragraph 104 that :

   "it is not argued that this is a case that  simply  would  be  unable  to
   succeed, which was a concern in MM before the High Court,  and  thus  the
   sponsor need not leave her country  of  nationality,  pending  a  further
   application under the Rules."

18. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

19. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date 27
9 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
