
IAC-MD-BFD-V1
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21446/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th December 2014                        |On 23rd December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                              mr raja asad khan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Jamil
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  1st  February  1990.  He
    appeals with permission the decision of the FtT (Judge Henderson) which
    in a determination promulgated on  4th  September  2014  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse him  indefinite
    leave to remain as a spouse and to remove him under Section 47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant's claim is that the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 287/289  of  HC  395)
    and was unlawful as it would disrupt his family life developed with his
    wife and his private life shared with his friends.

 3. The Respondent's case has always been that the  Appellant  fails  under
    the Immigration Rules because he and his wife are not in  a  subsisting
    relationship.

 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing before the FtT on 20th  August
    2014. The Judge was not satisfied that there was good  reason  for  the
    Appellant's non-attendance and therefore proceeded to hear  the  appeal
    in his absence. After considering the evidence before her she dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal.

 5. The grounds of appeal criticise the  Judge  in  general  terms  stating
    that,

         "The learned Immigration Judge with respect to himself, misdirected
         himself as to the effect of the evidence in its totality."

    The grounds continue by criticising the Judge's decision to proceed  in
    the Appellant's absence by saying,

         "He accepts (para 13) to his determination that telephone call been
         made to the court before hearing start that the Appellant's  unable
         to come to court because (illness) (sic)."

 6. The grounds continue,

         "He could have delayed the hearing until he find out (sic)".

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. Mr Jamil appeared on behalf of the Appellant and made submissions. I am
    bound to say that Mr Jamil's submissions were in general  terms  rather
    than particular ones. He submitted that the Judge should have adjourned
    the hearing until  a  later  date  and  this  would  have  allowed  the
    Appellant to "come back" to court and give his evidence. He referred to
    Rule 19 and Rule 21 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ( Procedure)
     Rules 2005. His final submission  was  to  say  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence for his case was crucial.

 8. Mr Diwnycz unsurprisingly referred to the Rule 24  response  served  by
    the Respondent and said he could do no  better  than  to  point  me  to
    paragraph 3 contained therein. He submitted that there is no  error  in
    either the Judge's approach to the case, nor in her findings  that  the
    Appellant's credibility is significantly undermined. The  determination
    should stand.

Consideration and Decision

 9. A First-tier Tribunal Judge may hear an appeal  in  the  absence  of  a
    party or his  representative,  if  satisfied  that  the  party  or  his
    representative -

          a) has been given notice of the  date,  time  and  place  of  the
             hearing; and;

          b) has given no satisfactory explanation for his absence.

10. It is plain that the above Rule allows a Judge to decide a case  unless
    there is a satisfactory explanation for absence. The Judge  records  at
    [11],

         "...At the outset of the hearing I was informed by the court  clerk
         that a call had been received from customer services  stating  that
         they had received a call from the  Appellant's  friend  who  stated
         that the Appellant had a fall down a flight of stairs  and  had  to
         attend hospital and as a result  wished  for  an  adjournment.  The
         clerk informed the customer service agent that it would be unlikely
         that an adjournment would be granted without receipt of any medical
         evidence confirming the Appellant was not well enough to attend the
         hearing day. The message was passed on to  advise  the  Appellant's
         friend to fax an adjournment  request  with  evidence  as  soon  as
         possible."

11. In [12] the Judge goes on to set out a fax was received. It was a  copy
    of  an  outpatient  prescription  for  co-codamol  and   another   drug
    diclofenac. Attached to this was  a  copy  of  another  document  which
    appeared to have been overlaid by  the  outpatient  prescription.  This
    stated  that  Asad  Khan  had  attended  the  Accident  and   Emergency
    Department on 20th August 2014 at 1.12pm. it gave no further details.

12. The Judge did not regard the scant evidence put before her, for absence
    and seeking an adjournment, as satisfactory. I do not see how she could
    reasonably have found otherwise. There was no medical evidence that the
    Appellant was not fit to attend the  hearing.  In  fact  there  was  no
    explanation at all put forward at all why the Appellant was not fit  to
    attend.

13. Further, to date, despite Mr Jamil's general plea before  me  that  the
    Judge should not have proceeded in the absence of the Appellant, he had
    nothing to add either in the form of a statement from the Appellant  or
    more pertinently medical evidence, by way of  explanation  of  why  the
    Appellant could not attend the hearing on 20th August  2014.  I  cannot
    think that  Mr  Jamil  would  have  been  in  any  way  hesitant  about
    indicating to me  any  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  Appellant's
    absence since there has certainly  been  ample  time  to  acquire  such
    evidence since 20th August 2014.

14. I deal with the suggestion in the grounds that the  Judge  should  have
    delayed the proceedings and Mr Jamil's plea that it is crucial that the
    Appellant's evidence be heard. Since I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge
    correctly assessed that she was entitled to proceed in the  Appellant's
    absence, it follows that she was correct  to  proceed  without  further
    delay.

15. The Judge's consideration of whether to proceed was  not  one  made  in
    haste - indeed she took it upon herself to try  and  enquire  from  the
    Appellant his reasons for not attending. Why she did this I am  unsure,
    but it adds strength to my view that  the  Judge  has  given  her  full
    consideration on whether it is fair and reasonable to  proceed  in  the
    Appellant's absence.

16. So far as Mr Jamil's final plea to me that the matter should be reheard
    because it is crucial that the Appellant give his evidence in the case,
    that was simply as far as his plea went. He gave no indication of  what
    this crucial evidence consists of; nor indeed why it would  change  the
    decision which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made,  after  careful
    consideration of the evidence before her.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge conducted a full hearing on the  evidence
    before her. She found discrepancies in  the  evidence  which  seriously
    undermined the Appellant's credibility. Nothing that was put forward by
    Mr Jamil, led me to the conclusion that the FtT Judge had erred in  her
    findings of fact.

Notice of Decision

 For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Judge ROBERTS
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date

Judge ROBERTS
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

