
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21716/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 March 2014                               |On 6 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                 GIRISH BORA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood, S.Z. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to Mr Bora as the  appellant
    and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of  India,  born  on  26  November  1987,  was
    granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) student on 22 January 2011
    until 30 July 2012.

 3. On 5 April 2012 he made an application for further leave to  remain  in
    the Tier 1 (Post Study Work) category.

 4. That application was refused on 27 September 2012. The material  reason
    for the refusal was that the appellant had not been awarded an eligible
    qualification in the 12 months prior to the date of the application. He
    therefore did not meet paragraph 245FD(c) or paragraph 245FD(d)  of  HC
    395 (the Immigration Rules).

 5. The appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Kharwar  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  11
    December 2012.

 6. The respondent appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  but,  following  the
    reported case  of  Khatel  and  others  (s.85A;  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044  (IAC),  in  a  determination  dated  25
    February 2013, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup found no error of law
    in the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  simple  terms,
    Khatel found that the "date of  application"  should  be  construed  as
    continuing up until the date of  the  decision  by  which  time  it  is
    accepted the appellant had obtained the required qualification.

 7. The Court of Appeal did not agree with the ratio  of  Khatel,  however,
    and overturned it in the case of Prasad Raju and others v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 754. Raju found that the "date of application" is simply that,
    the date on which the appellant applied to the respondent  for  further
    leave and the  appellant  must  show  that  he  obtained  the  required
    qualification in the 12 months prior to that date. As above, it is  not
    disputed that this appellant cannot do so. Raju represents the  current
    law on this matter, regardless of  any  outstanding  challenge  to  the
    Supreme Court.

 8. When, on 2 March 2013, the respondent applied to the Upper Tribunal for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, in the light of Raju,  the
    Upper Tribunal issued a direction dated 8 July 2013 indicating that  it
    was minded to set aside the Upper Tribunal decision under rule  45  (1)
    (b)  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  The
    direction also proposed that a fresh decision would then be substituted
    finding an error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal   decision  and
    dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 9. The direction invited any objections from the parties to this course of
    action proceeding without the need for an oral hearing.  The  appellant
    did object and so the matter came before me.

10. A further direction was issued drawing the attention of the parties  to
    the reported case of Nasim and others (Raju; reasons  not  to  follow?)
    [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC).

Decision to Set Aside

11. The first matter I must decide is whether I can and  should  set  aside
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

12. Section 10 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007)
    states:

        10. Review of decision of Upper TribunalE+W+S+N.I.



        (1)The Upper Tribunal may review a decision made by it on a matter
        in a case, other than a decision that is an excluded decision for
        the purposes of section 13(1) (but see subsection (7)).

        (2) The Upper Tribunal's power under subsection (1) in relation to
        a decision is exercisable-

          (a) of its own initiative, or

          (b) on application by a person who for the purposes of section
          13(2) has a right of appeal in respect of the decision.

        ...

        (4) Where the Upper Tribunal has under subsection (1) reviewed a
        decision, the Upper Tribunal may in the light of the review do any
        of the following-

        ...

           (c) set the decision aside.

        (5) Where under subsection (4)(c) the Upper Tribunal sets a
        decision aside, the Upper Tribunal must re-decide the matter
        concerned.

        (6) Where the Upper Tribunal is acting under subsection (5), it may
        make such findings of fact as it considers appropriate... .


13. Section 11 of the TCE 2007 therefore allows me to review  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal of my own initiative. Section 11 also  allows  me
    to set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal. When deciding  whether
    to do so I referred to rule 45 (1) (b) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 which states:

        45.-(1) On receiving an application for permission to appeal the
        Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance with rule 46
        (review of a decision), but may only do so if-
        ...
        (b) since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made a
        decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and which, had it
        been made before the Upper Tribunal's decision, could have had a
        material effect on the decision.

14. In this case, the respondent has applied for permission to  appeal  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal to the Court of Appeal.  Raju is binding
    on the Upper Tribunal and, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision, would have had a material effect on that decision.

15. It is my conclusion that I should review the decision of Upper Tribunal
    and set it aside given the significant  materiality  of  Raju.  I  must
    therefore re-make the decision on the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Re-Making the Decision

16. In re-making the appeal I referred to the  case  of  Nasim  and  others
    (Raju; reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC). The  head  note
    of that case is as follows:


        "(1)  It is not legally possible for the First-tier Tribunal or the
        Upper Tribunal to decline to follow the judgment in Raju and others
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754 on
        the basis that the Secretary of State's Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
        policy of July 2010 (concerning the approach to be taken to  "late"
        submission of certain educational awards)  continued  to  apply  in
        respect of decisions taken by the Secretary of State on or after  6
        April 2012, when the Immigration Rules were changed  by  abolishing
        the Tier 1 PSW route.


        (2) The Secretary of State was under  no  duty  to  determine  Post
        Study Work applications made before that date by reference to  that
        policy,  the  rationale  for  which  disappeared  on  6  April.  In
        particular:


          (a)  a person making such an application had no  vested  right  or
          legitimate  expectation  to  have  his  or  her   application   so
          determined;


          (b) it was not legally unfair of the Secretary of State to proceed
          as she did;


          (c) the de minimis principle cannot  be  invoked  to  counter  the
          failure of  applications  that  were  unaccompanied  by  requisite
          evidence regarding the award;


          (d)  the Secretary of State's May 2012  Casework  Instruction  did
          not  gloss  or  modify  the  Immigration  Rules  but  merely  told
          caseworkers to apply those Rules;


          (e)  evidential flexibility has no bearing on the matter;


          (f)  an application was not varied by the submission  of  evidence
          of the conferring of an award on or after 6 April 2012;  but  even
          if it were, the application would fail on the basis that it  would
          have to have been decided under the Rules in force at the date  of
          the variation; and


          (g) an  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  falls  to  be
          determined by reference to  policies  in  force  at  the  date  of
          decision, not those in force at the date of application.


        (3)  The date of "obtaining the  relevant  qualification"  for  the
        purposes of Table 10 of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules  as  in
        force immediately before 6 April 2012 is  the  date  on  which  the
        University or other  institution  responsible  for  conferring  the
        award (not the institution where the applicant physically  studied,
        if different) actually conferred that award, whether in  person  or
        in absentia.


        (4)  As held in Khatel  and  others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
        application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC),  section   85A   of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 precludes a  tribunal,
        in  a  points-based  appeal,  from  considering  evidence   as   to
        compliance with points-based Rules, where  that  evidence  was  not
        before the Secretary of State when she took her decision;  but  the
        section does not prevent a tribunal from considering evidence  that
        was before the Secretary of  State  when  she  took  the  decision,
        whether or not that evidence reached her only  after  the  date  of
        application for the purposes of paragraph 34F  of  the  Immigration
        Rules."

17. Firstly, I find that the First-tier Tribunal  made an error on a  point
    of law in allowing the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.  Following
    Raju, the appellant had not obtained his educational  qualification  as
    of the date of application. Mr Mahmood argued that a  letter  from  the
    appellant's university dated 2 April 2012 should be taken as  an  award
    of the appellant's degree. I did not  accept  that  could  be  so.  The
    letter is not expressed in terms of the degree having been  awarded.  A
    further letter dated 20 June 2012 from the university states  that  the
    degree was awarded on 12 June 2012. The appellant argued  that  he  was
    not required to provide the degree itself, merely a letter showing that
    he had completed all the requirements  for  the  degree  and  would  be
    awarded the degree. His arguments in that regard are addressed fully in
    Nasim; by the date of the decision  the  respondent's  policy  guidance
    required the degree to  have  been  awarded  as  of  the  date  of  the
    application and that is the policy relevant  to  the  application  made
    here.

18. For the same reasons, having found an error on a point of law such that
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  had to be set aside, when
    re-making the decision, I dismissed it under the Immigration Rules.

Article 8

19. The First-tier Tribunal did not deal with the ground of  appeal  before
    it concerning Article 8 of the ECHR. That omission  has  never  been  a
    ground of appeal against the First-tier Tribunal to the Upper  Tribunal
    at any point, however. There was no application to me for  the  grounds
    of appeal to be varied. Even if such a challenge had been made,  it  is
    not my view that an Article 8 claim had any prospect of  success  where
    the appellant came to the UK to obtain an education qualification,  has
    obtained it, cannot now meet the Immigration Rules for  further  leave,
    was given proper notice of the changes to the Post Study Work  category
    and given the comments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v  SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 72 which express the limited utility of  Article  8  to  an
    appellant such as this where physical and moral integrity  are  not  in
    issue; see also Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).

Section 47

20.  Mr  Smart  withdrew  the  respondent's  decision  under  s.47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 in line with SSHD v Ahmadi
    [2013] EWCA Civ 512.

Decision

21. The decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup  dated  25  February
    2013 is set aside.

22. I find an error of law in the determination of First-tier Tribunal  and
    set it aside to be re-made.

23. I re-make the appeal as follows:

      a. The appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

      b. The section 47 decision is withdrawn by the respondent.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
refusing it, I make no fee award.





Signed [pic]                                 Date: 4 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


