

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21386/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 July 2016                            |On 01 August 2016              |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                              MR DUPLAY BISWAS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the respondent: Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer

                             DECISION AND REASONS

   1.The appellant has permission to challenge the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge James dated 9 November 2015 dismissing his appeal  against
   a decision made by the respondent on 19  May  2015  to  refuse  leave  to
   remain in the UK. The principal ground of appeal is that the judge  erred
   in refusing to adjourn. It is also argued that the  judge  was  wrong  to
   reject the Article 8 grounds.


   2. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
   the appellant. There was, however, a fax from  his  representatives,  SEB
   Solicitors, stating that he had been taken to the  emergency  service  of
   Newham Hospital today at 830 am, was currently undergoing tests for urine
   and kidney infection and so was unable to attend his hearing.  The letter
   however, was silent about the Solicitors' reasons  for  being  unable  to
   attend beyond saying that should the Tribunal  decide  not  to  allow  an
   adjournment "we are not instructed to  represent  the  appellant  on  the
   hearing". I am bound to say I  find  this  hard  to  follow.  Either  the
   Solicitors had decided  before  this  morning  they  were  not  going  to
   represent or this was a last-minute decision not to attend. If it was the
   former, then the Tribunal should have been informed earlier.  If  it  was
   the latter, then there should have been an explanation for why they  were
   not attending. This was listed for an error of law hearing.  It  was  not
   essential for the appellant to attend anyway if he  was  represented.  In
   the circumstances I decided it was in the interests of justice to  refuse
   this application to adjourn. I decided to proceed to determine  the  case
   in the absence of one of the parties. I heard brief submissions from Miss
   Ahmed.


   3. The grounds of appeal  contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
   should have adjourned the hearing because  after  refusal  of  the  first
   adjournment request the appellant had faxed  a  second.  The  reason  the
   first request had been refused was because  the  medical  letter  from  a
   homeopathic medical centre saying he was unfit did not specify  inability
   to attend a hearing. The further fax contained a further letter from  the
   same medical practitioner stating that the appellant was unfit to travel.




   4. This ground is devoid of merit. The hearing  before  Judge  James  was
   fixed for 16 October at 1000 hours. The further adjournment  request  was
   not faxed until 1252 the same day.  Not only was there no  error  on  the
   part of the judge in failing to address the  request  but  there  was  no
   error of process because the Solicitors did not make the request in  time
   for the hearing.


   5. Even had I considered there was procedural unfairness in  the  failure
   to adjourn, I would not have found an error of law. As emphasised by  the
   Upper Tribunal in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
   (IAC), for there to  be  error  of  law  it  must  be  material.  In  the
   appellant's case his appeal was based solely on his  private  and  family
   life and the judge gave cogent reasons for concluding (i)  he  could  not
   succeed under the Immigration Rules on the basis of his private or family
    life; and (ii) the state of the evidence regarding his situation in  the
   UK  (e.g. the fact that at all time his immigration status as  a  student
   has been precarious; that he has  no  dependents;  that  he  provided  no
   evidence he was studying; that he failed  to  substantiate  that  he  had
   adequate finances and a partner; and that he had  not  shown  there  were
   significant obstacles to his return to Bangladesh) failed to  demonstrate
   any exceptional or compelling circumstances such as to warrant a  finding
   that his Article 8 rights had been violated.  His  Article  8  claim  was
   inherently weak.


   6. For the above  reasons,  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  rejected.  The
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal must stand






                               Signed


                               Date:        29 July 2016
                                         [pic]


                                Dr H H Storey
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
