
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21323/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                      Decision & Reasons|
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 9 December 2015                    |                      On 4 January 2016 |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              MRS SUMAIA AKTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hussan, a legal representative instructed by
                    Universal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is a resumed hearing to consider the Article  8  claim  of  Mrs
       Akter ('the claimant').

The History of the appeal

    2. The claimant, a citizen of Bangladesh, applied for an  extension  of
       stay in the UK as the partner of a person present and settled in the
       UK. The application was refused by the Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department (the 'Secretary of State') under appendix FM of  the
       Immigration Rules  HC395  (as  amended)  ('the  Immigration  Rules')
       because the Secretary of State was not satisfied that  the  claimant
       was in a subsisting relationship and  that  she  did  not  meet  the
       financial requirements of appendix FM.

    3.  The  claimant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 13 May 2015 First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Quinn ('the judge') allowed the claimant's appeal.   The  First-tier
       Tribunal found that the  claimant  was  exempt  from  the  financial
       requirements  under  appendix  FM  because  she   had   transitional
       protection at the time of her application on 27 February 2014 on the
       basis that she had been granted leave as a Tier I (post study  work)
       dependant in May 2012. The judge also found that the claimant was in
       a subsisting genuine relationship and was living with  her  husband.
       The judge considered Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
       Rights ('the Convention') outside of the Immigration Rules and found
       that  removal  of  the  claimant   would   be   a   disproportionate
       interference with her rights under the Convention.

    4. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal.  On 31 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta granted
       permission to appeal.  The grounds of appeal were  essentially  that
       the judge erred in finding that the claimant  was  exempt  from  the
       financial  requirements  of  appendix  FM   because   her   original
       application was  granted  pre  9  July  2012  so  that  transitional
       protection applied and that the  Article  8  assessment  was  wholly
       inadequate.

    5. The hearing of the appeal was listed on 30 September 2015 before me.
       Both representatives invited me to adjourn for a further hearing  if
       I found a material error of  law.   After  the  hearing  I  made  my
       decision and provided my reasons in writing. Having found that there
       were material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  I
       set-aside the decision. I decided to adjourn for a  further  hearing
       on the Article 8 issue. I re-made the decision on  the  transitional
       protection and failure to meet the financial requirements issues.

    6. The parties were provided with a copy of my  decision  the  relevant
       parts of which were that:

         "The claimant in this case applied in May 2012 for leave  to  enter
         as a dependant of a Tier 1 migrant. On 2 April 2013 she applied for
         leave to remain as a dependant of a Tier  4  migrant.  The  current
         application is different again. It is for  leave  to  remain  as  a
         dependant of a person settled in the UK. The leave granted prior to
         9 July 2012 is no longer extant. I find therefore  that  the  judge
         erred in law by finding that the transitional provisions applied to
         the claimant.

         I have considered Appendix FM and the evidential requirements under
         Appendix FM-SE and Paragraphs E-LTRP 3.1 of the Immigration  Rules.
         They, as relevant to the claimant, provide that the  claimant  must
         provide, in the form of  specified  evidence,  a  gross  income  of
         �24,800 (this includes amounts for 2  children).  Paragraph  E-LTRP
         3.2 provides that the only sources that can be taken  into  account
         are income from legal employment or self-employment  (there  is  no
         evidence in this case of savings).

         The claimant has not provided any  evidence  that  she  meets  this
         requirement. The claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's
         decision on the failure  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  is
         dismissed.

         The Secretary of State's appeal on  Article  8  grounds  is  to  be
         considered at a further hearing."

Attendance at the hearing on 9th December 2015

    7. The claimant attended the hearing with her representative Mr Hussan.
       Mr Norton appeared on behalf of the Secretary of  State.  Mr  Hussan
       handed up a bundle of documents at the  beginning  of  the  hearing.
       Directions had been given that any evidence must be served  14  days
       in advance of the hearing. Mr Hussan said that he had received  late
       notice of the hearing and had been waiting for  a  letter  from  the
       claimant. I note that  the  notice  of  hearing  was  issued  on  18
       November  2015,  3  weeks  before  the  date  of  the  hearing.    I
       reluctantly admitted the  bundle  of  documents  into  evidence  and
       allowed a brief adjournment to enable  Mr  Norton  to  consider  the
       bundle.

Summary of the Submissions

    8. Mr Norton submitted that the statutory provisions in  s117B  of  the
       Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 (the '2002 Act') must be  taken
       into consideration. Whilst the Immigration Rules are not a  complete
       code what remains outside of them is narrow. It has to be shown that
       it would not be reasonable to expect the children or the  claimant's
       partner to leave the UK or  in  other  words  that  there  would  be
       insurmountable obstacles to their  integration  in  Bangladesh.  The
       children are  young  and  could  integrate  easily.  The  claimant's
       husband is from Bangladesh. He submitted that unless the  individual
       circumstances of the case raised issues not already considered under
       the Immigration Rules, such as a life threatening health  condition,
       then the fact that the claimant cannot meet the requirements of  the
       Immigration Rules must factor  into  any  free  standing  Article  8
       assessment. There was nothing in this case that had been  identified
       as a factor to consider in addition to the factors considered  under
       the Immigration Rules.

    9. In this case Mr Norton submitted the claimant does  not  fulfil  the
       requirements of appendix FM and that it essentially comes down to  a
       matter of choice. The  claimant  and  her  partner  wish  to  remain
       together in the UK with their  children  but  there  is  nothing  to
       prevent them from living together in Bangladesh. The fact  that  the
       claimant's partner is now a British citizen as are her  children  is
       only relevant if, as a consequence  of  the  claimant  returning  to
       Bangladesh, they would be forced to leave the UK. Article 8 does not
       provide that Member states must accede to a choice of domicile.  The
       best interests of the children in this case are  to  be  with  their
       parents. It is open to the family  to  return  to  Bangladesh  as  a
       family unit.

   10. Mr Norton, in response to the claimant's citation of the case of  VW
       (Uganda) ('VW') [2009] EWCA Civ 5 referred to paragraph  46  of  the
       decision submitting that it is  the  individual  circumstances  that
       must be considered. The VW  case  relied  on  is  different  to  the
       instant case. In VW the partner had no connection to Uganda where VW
       was from. It was the lack of connection  that  was  unreasonable  in
       that case. In this case the husband is a British citizen but also is
       a citizen of Bangladesh.

   11. Mr Hussan referred me to pages 12-17 of the bundle provided  at  the
       beginning of the hearing. He submitted that these pages showed  that
       the claimant's children were attending pre-school. He referred me to
       page 4 of  the  bundle  which  was  a  letter  from  the  claimant's
       husband's employer to say that he was  now  working  part  time.  He
       referred me to paragraphs 24-55 of the grounds of appeal which  sets
       out the grounds in relation to the welfare of the children.

   12. Mr Hussan took  me  to  paragraphs  30  and  37  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision. He submitted that the judge took  into  account
       section 117B. He submitted that s55 does not support removal of  the
       claimant. The claimant's two children deserve to grow up in the  UK.
       If the claimant were removed it would not be in the  best  interests
       of the children. It would be  disproportionate  to  remove  her.  In
       relation to VW Mr Hussan submitted that the facts in that case  were
       similar and in that case the judge allowed the appeal so the  appeal
       should also be allowed in this case.

  Legislative Provisions



   13. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new Part  5A  of  the
       2002 Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires, in
       legislative form for the first time, the Tribunal  to  take  certain
       factors into account when determining whether a decision made  under
       the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private and  family  life.
       The decision in the instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

   14. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article 8
       of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:
         117A Application of this Part


         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life
         under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.


         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the
         considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of
         whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to  respect  for
         private and
         family life is justified under Article 8(2).


   15. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable to all cases  and
       are:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public
         interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
         because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
         because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person
         at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with
         a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

   16. Section 117D provides the definition of a number of  terms  used  in
       Part 5A. A "qualifying child" means a person under the age of 18 who
       is either a British citizen or  who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
       continuous period  of  seven  years  or  more.   The  definition  of
       "qualifying partner" is also included.  The  court  or  Tribunal  is
       required to give the new Rules (see Dube  (ss.117A  -  117D)  [2015]
       UKUT 90 (IAC) at [47]): "greater weight than as  merely  a  starting
       point  for  the  consideration  of   the   proportionality   of   an
       interference with Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo)  and
       Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387).

   17. Relevant Immigration Rules



         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

               (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
               relationship with a child who-

               (aa) is under the age of 18 years;

               (bb) is in the UK;

               (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
               continuously for at least the 7 years immediately preceding
               the date of application; and

               (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
               the UK; or

               (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
               with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
               settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
               humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
               obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
               outside the UK."




         Paragraph 276ADE (in force from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014)
         The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         ...
          (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
         to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."







Re-making the Decision

Article 8 private and family life under the Immigration Rules

   18. The claimant married Mr Naser on 13 September  2011  in  Bangladesh.
       Her husband, at that stage, had limited leave to remain in  the  UK.
       In May 2012 the claimant applied for entry clearance as a  dependant
       of her husband who had been granted limited leave as a Tier  1  post
       study student. The claimant entered the UK  on  21  July  2012.  The
       claimant made a further  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  15
       February 2013 as a dependant of her husband, who had  limited  leave
       as a tier 4 general student which was granted to 28  February  2014.
       On 27 February 2014 the claimant  made  a  further  application  for
       leave to remain as a partner of a person  settled  in  the  UK.  The
       claimant's husband's application for settlement was pending at  that
       stage. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on 16  April  2014.
       He has since, on 4th November 2015, been granted naturalisation as a
       British citizen. The claimant has two children both born in the  UK.
       ('M') was born on 13 April 2013 and ('MS')  on  19  September  2014.
       Both children are British citizens.

   19.   In  my  decision  of  9  October  2015,  having  found  that   the
       transitional provisions did not apply, I found that the claimant did
       not meet the financial requirements of appendix FM. Although I  note
       that the claimant's husband is now working part-time his  income  is
       far  below  the  requirements.  I  do  not  need  to  summarise  the
       substantive provisions  of  Appendix  FM.  The  Secretary  of  State
       considered the requirements of EX.1 (b) under  the  'Partner  -  Ten
       Year Route'. The Secretary of  State  decided  that  there  were  no
       insurmountable obstacles to the claimant and her partner  relocating
       to Bangladesh. The Secretary  of  State  did  not  consider  EX.1(a)
       because the claimant had not mentioned her first born child  (M)  in
       the application (her second child (MS) was born  subsequent  to  the
       application having been made). The  Secretary  of  State  also  gave
       consideration to the claimant's private life under paragraph  276ADE
       of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State considered  in  the
       absence of evidence to the contrary that the claimant had  not  lost
       her ties to Bangladesh having spent 18 years  in  Bangladesh  and  2
       years in the UK.

   Paragraph EX.1.(b) Insurmountable obstacles

   20. Considering EX.1(b) first, it is not now disputed that the  claimant
       is in a relationship with a qualifying partner. The issue is whether
       or not there would be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
       that partner continuing outside the UK. In R (on the application  of
       Agyarko and others) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2015] EWCA Civ 440, (2015) ('Agyarko') the Court of appeal held:

         '[21]  The  phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  used  in  this
         paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a high hurdle to be overcome
         by an Applicant for leave to remain under the Rules.  The  test  is
         significantly more demanding than a mere test of whether  it  would
         be reasonable to expect a couple  to  continue  their  family  life
         outside the United Kingdom.

         [22] This interpretation is in line with  the  relevant  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" has its origin
         in the Strasbourg jurisprudence in relation to immigration cases in
         a family context, where it is mentioned as one factor among  others
         to be taken into account in determining whether any right under art
         8 exists for family members to be granted leave to remain or  leave
         to enter a  Contracting  State:  see  eg  Rodrigues  da  Silva  and
         Hoogkamer v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR 34, para 39 (". . .  whether
         there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the family  living
         together in the country of origin of one or more of them .  .  .").
         The phrase as used in the  Rules  is  intended  to  have  the  same
         meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is  clear  that  the
         ECtHR regards it as a formulation  imposing  a  stringent  test  in
         respect of that factor, as is illustrated by Jeunesse v Netherlands
         (see para 117: there were no insurmountable obstacles to the family
         settling in Suriname, even though  the  Applicant  and  her  family
         would experience hardship if forced to do so).

         [23]  For  clarity,  two  points   should   be   made   about   the
         "insurmountable obstacles" criterion. First, although it involves a
         stringent test, it is obviously intended in both the  case-law  and
         the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and practical rather than
         a purely literal way ...

         [25] ...The mere facts that Mr Benette is a  British  Citizen,  has
         lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a job here  -  and
         hence might find it difficult and might be reluctant  to  re-locate
         to Ghana to continue their family life there- could not  constitute
         insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.'

   21. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT
       640 (IAC) it was held that the term  'insurmountable  obstacles'  in
       provisions  such  as  Section  EX.1  are  not  obstacles  which  are
       impossible to surmount: they concern the practical possibilities  of
       relocation.

   22. It was submitted in the grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal[1] that the claimant has no connections left in  Bangladesh
       and she has no support financially  and  emotionally  in  Bangladesh
       (paragraphs 52 and 53). At paragraph 36 it was  submitted  that  the
       claimant does not have any home or property in Bangladesh to go back
       to and no financial resources to survive. It is not  clear  in  this
       paragraph if it is the claimant or her husband who is being referred
       to as  'the  appellant'  is  used  but  the  reference  is  to  'he'
       throughout. I have therefore considered the submissions on the basis
       that it is either or both that are referred to. In this paragraph it
       is also submitted that there is no hope of finding a  job,  shelter,
       medication and other life saving support should they  be  forced  to
       return to Bangladesh. It would be extremely difficult for them to go
       back and settle. They would have  to  live  in  very  degrading  and
       inhumane conditions.

  23. At paragraph 38 it is submitted that the claimant arrived in  the  UK
      under extenuating circumstances. 'He' was living a degrading life and
      did not have any shelter or food or  anyone  to  support.  After  his
      arrival he used to work in the cleaning sector. At paragraph 57 it is
      submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to  consider  that
      Bangladesh is not a welfare  state  and  is  unstable.  The  claimant
      suffers fear of a future degrading life and 'he' would  face  extreme
      hostility from the regime and rivals  which  will  put  his  life  in
      serious danger.



  24. No evidence to support these assertions has been submitted. There was
      nothing  in  the  claimant's  witness  statement  to  support   these
      assertions. There is no detail as to why in a  matter  of  only  just
      over 3 years the claimant has no hope of finding a job or ability  to
      re-integrate in Bangladesh. With regard to the claimant's husband  he
      is now 35 and lived in Bangladesh for the majority of his  life  some
      25 years. He returned to Bangladesh in 2012 to marry the claimant.

  25. The claimant's husband has had the benefit of an education in the  UK
      which would provide an enhanced opportunity to find work.  There  are
      no language difficulties for either the appellant or her  husband.  I
      also consider that in terms of obstacles to  continuing  family  life
      outside the UK there is a  world  of  difference  between  a  British
      citizen who has spent their entire  life  in  the  UK  relocating  to
      another country that they have never visited and a person  who  is  a
      National of the country having lived the vast majority of his life in
      the country that it is expected that he can re-locate to.

   26. As held in Agyrako the test of insurmountable  obstacles  imposes  a
       high hurdle to be overcome by an Applicant for leave to remain under
       the Rules. Whilst there may be some hardship for  the  claimant  and
       her husband in re-locating,  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to
       support the wide ranging assertions made I find  that  the  claimant
       has not discharged the burden upon her  to  demonstrate  that  there
       would be insurmountable obstacles  to  either  her  or  her  husband
       continuing family life outside the UK.

   Paragraph EX.1.(a) Whether it would be reasonable to expect the children
   to leave the UK


   27. EX.1(a) was not considered by the Secretary of State because  M  (MS
       not having been born  at  the  date  of  the  application)  was  not
       mentioned in the application. There  was  no  consideration  by  the
       Secretary of State of the best interests of the children pursuant to
       her duty under s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
       2009.  There is no criticism of the Secretary of State. She was  not
       made aware of the claimant's child.  In AJ (India) and Others v SSHD
       [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 the Court of Appeal concluded, at paragraph 24,
       that the Tribunal can deal with Section 55 even where the respondent
       has not and that is  not  necessary  to  remit  the  matter.  In  MK
       (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT  223  (IAC)
       in the headnote at (v) the Upper Tribunal considered that:


         'In considering the appropriate order, Tribunals should have regard
         to their adjournment and case management powers, together with  the
         overriding  objective.   They  will  also  take  into  account  the
         facilities available to the Secretary of State under the  statutory
         guidance, the desirability of finality and  the  undesirability  of
         undue delay.  If  deciding  not  to  remit  the  Tribunal  must  be
         satisfied that it is sufficiently  equipped  to  make  an  adequate
         assessment of the best interests of any affected child.'

   28. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal set  out,  from
       paragraph 24 - 33, submissions on the welfare of  the  children.  Mr
       Hussan made submissions at the hearing on the s55 duty and the  best
       interests of the children in this case. The hearing was adjourned on
       the first occasion so that full  consideration  could  be  given  to
       Article 8 and any further evidence could be provided. A small bundle
       of documents was provided at the commencement  of  the  hearing.  In
       Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;   onward
       appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered  that  a
       judge primarily acts on the evidence in the case.   I  am  satisfied
       that the claimant has had  every  opportunity  to  provide  all  the
       relevant information. Given the very  young  ages  of  the  children
       ascertaining their views is not possible. I am of the view that I am
       sufficiently equipped to make an assessment of the best interests of
       M and MS.

   29.  The  second  limb   of   Paragraph   EX.1.a.   is   essentially   a
       proportionality exercise. The question asked is whether it would  be
       reasonable for M and MS to leave the UK. In  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
       [2011] UKSC 4 the Supreme Court noted that  s  55  of  the  Borders,
       Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 was enacted to incorporate  the
       UK's obligation under article 3(1) United Nations Convention on  the
       Rights of the Child  that,  'In  all  actions  concerning  children,
       whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions,
       courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the
       best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.'

   30. The court held:
             26 'This did not mean (as it would do in other contexts)  that
             identifying their best interests would lead  inexorably  to  a
             decision in conformity with those interests. Provided that the
             Tribunal did not treat any other consideration  as  inherently
             more significant than the best interests of the  children,  it
             could conclude that the strength of the  other  considerations
             outweighed  them.  The  important  thing,  therefore,  is   to
             consider those best interests first...


             33.     We now  have  a  much  greater  understanding  of  the
             importance of these issues in assessing the overall well-being
             of the child. In making the proportionality  assessment  under
             article 8, the best interests of the child must be  a  primary
             consideration. This means that they must be considered  first.
             They can, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative effect of
             other  considerations.  In  this  case,   the   countervailing
             considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
             immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
             immigration history and the  precariousness  of  her  position
             when family life was created. But,  as  the  Tribunal  rightly
             pointed out, the children were not to be blamed for that.'


   31.  In Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
       appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) the Upper Tribunal in considering  the
       case law in relation to decisions affecting children identified  the
       following principles to assist in the determination of appeals where
       children are affected by the appealed decisions:

         'i)  As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
         be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being  removed
         from the United Kingdom then the starting point  suggests  that  so
         should dependent children who form part of their  household  unless
         there are reasons to the contrary.

         ii)  It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
         stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
         the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
         which they belong.

         iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin
         can lead to development of social  cultural  and  educational  ties
         that it would be  inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
         compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What  amounts  to  lengthy
         residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present  policies  have
         identified seven years as a relevant period.

         iv)  Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
         Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to be  more
         significant to a child than the first seven years  of  life.   Very
         young children are focussed on  their  parents  rather  than  their
         peers and are adaptable.

         v)   Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave or
         the reasonable expectation of  leave  to  enter  or  remain,  while
         claims are promptly  considered,  are  unlikely  to  give  rise  to
         private life deserving of respect in  the  absence  of  exceptional
         factors.  In any event, protection of the  economic  well-being  of
         society amply justifies removal in such cases.

   32. In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  it  was
       held that a decision as to what is in the best interests of children
       will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their  age;  (b)  the
       length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they have been
       in education; (c) what stage their education  has  reached;  (d)  to
       what extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it
       is proposed that they return; (e)  how  renewable  their  connection
       with it may be; (f)  to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
       medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in  that  country;
       and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere  with
       their family life or their rights (if  they  have  any)  as  British
       citizens.




   33. I have considered the factors identified in  ZH  (Tanzania),  Azimi-
       Moayed and EV Philippines set out above. M is now  aged  2  years  8
       months and MS is aged 15 months. These are very young  children.  No
       private life can be said to have built up in the United Kingdom.  At
       paragraph 28 of the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal
       it is asserted that the children are  studying  in  the  UK  and  at
       paragraph 39 that they are attending school in the UK. It is plainly
       incorrect to say that the children are studying in the UK.   Only  M
       had been born at the date that these grounds  were  drafted  and  he
       would have been 14 months old. He is now 2 years 8 months of age. He
       attends  a  Local  Authority  Children's  day  centre  part  time  5
       afternoons a week. It cannot be considered to be disruptive  in  any
       long-term sense for him to be have to leave the  day  centre  if  he
       were to move to Bangladesh.


   34. Mr Hussan submitted  that  s55  does  not  support  removal  of  the
       claimant. The two children deserve to grow up  in  the  UK.  If  the
       claimant were removed it would not be in the best interests  of  the
       children. Relying on VW Uganda Mr Hussan submitted that the facts of
       this case were very similar. In that case the appeal was allowed and
       so in this case it ought to be allowed also. The grounds assert  (at
       paragraph 24) that the children's welfare will be in serious  danger
       should the claimant be forced to return to Bangladesh. At  paragraph
       27 it is asserted that the decision has a fundamental impact on  the
       future of the child and at paragraph 28 that for the welfare of  the
       children they should not be sent to Bangladesh and  that  Bangladesh
       is not a welfare state. The children are  emotionally  dependant  on
       the claimant.


   35. None of the above submissions or grounds have  been  particularised.
       No detail is given as to why the  children's  welfare  would  be  in
       serious danger. Although the decision will have a fundamental impact
       on the future of both M and MS that does  not  equate  with  it  not
       being in their interests. No particulars are provided.


   36. In the bundle of documents submitted at the hearing there  were  two
       documents from Barts and the London Hospital Trust. I was not  taken
       to these documents by Mr Hussan. However, I  have  considered  them.
       The documents recorded that M had been admitted into hospital  on  3
       March 2015 with tonsillitis and a chest infection and  that  MS  had
       been admitted on 28 February 2015 with bronchiolitis. They were both
       treated for the conditions and after a few days were discharged.  It
       is indicated that MS might be having follow  up  investigations  and
       possibly treatment for anaemia. There is  nothing  to  suggest  that
       either M or MS has any long term serious medical conditions. It does
       not appear that they have subsequently been admitted to hospital.


   37. Having considered the evidence and submissions outlined above I take
       into consideration that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
       more significant to a child than the first seven years of life, that
       very young children are focussed on their parents rather than  their
       peers and are very adaptable and as a starting point it  is  in  the
       best interests of children to be with both their parents.   M  is  2
       years 8 months and  MS  is  15  months  of  age.  They  are  not  in
       education. I do not have any information as to the language  ability
       of M but at 2 years 8 months, even if he speaks and understand  only
       English, there would not be any  great  difficulty  in  adapting  to
       another language. MS is unlikely to have developed  any  significant
       language skills. Both M and MS are not at a  stage  in  their  lives
       when they will have  developed  a  social  awareness  and  built  up
       independent friendships. Both children are at a very young  age  and
       are very adaptable and would be able to quickly integrate  into  the
       culture in Bangladesh. It would be reasonable  to  expect  that  the
       claimant and her husband would be able to assist both M  and  MS  to
       integrate fully in Bangladesh so any difficulties  which  M  and  MS
       encounter  will  be  mitigated.  There  are   no   serious   medical
       difficulties. With regard to the best interests of both M and MS, at
       this very young age, their interests are predominantly met by  being
       cared for by their parents.

   38. Both parents are from Bangladesh  (this  factor  distinguishes  this
       case from the VW case relied on by Mr  Hussan).  The  claimant  only
       left Bangladesh in 2012. Being cared for  by  both  parents  can  be
       facilitated if the claimant's husband chose to  move  to  Bangladesh
       with the children if the claimant were removed. The  best  interests
       of both M and MS are to be cared for by both parents but  this  does
       not require that the children live in the UK.


   39. There is a further consideration which is the children's  rights  as
       British citizens. I accept that the  children's  nationality  is  of
       particular importance and must be given proper  recognition  because
       British children 'have  rights  which  they  will  not  be  able  to
       exercise if they  move  to  another  country.  They  will  lose  the
       advantages of growing up and being educated in  their  own  country,
       their own culture and their own language', ZH  (Tanzania)  para  32.
       In this case no-one is requiring  the  children  or  the  claimant's
       husband to re-locate. In  Sanade  and  others  (British  children  -
       Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT  00048  (IAC)  in  the  headnote  the
       position was summarised as:
             6. Where  in  the  context  of  Article  8  one  parent  ("the
             remaining parent") of  a  British  citizen  child  is  also  a
             British citizen (or cannot be removed as a family member or in
             their own right), the removal of the  other  parent  does  not
             mean that either the child or the  remaining  parent  will  be
             required to leave, thereby infringing the Zambrano  principle,
             see C-256/11 Murat Dereci. The critical  question  is  whether
             the child is dependent on the parent  being  removed  for  the
             exercise of his Union right of residence and  whether  removal
             of that  parent  will  deprive  the  child  of  the  effective
             exercise of residence in the United Kingdom  or  elsewhere  in
             the Union.

   40.  In this case the claimant is being refused leave  to  remain.  This
       will not deprive the children in this case of effective residence in
       the United Kingdom as their father is not being removed. It will  be
       a matter of choice for the claimant's husband if he chooses  to  re-
       locate to Bangladesh with his wife and children.

   41. M and MS are British citizens but  their  mother  is  a  citizen  of
       Bangladesh and although the claimant's  husband  is  now  a  British
       citizen he is also a citizen of Bangladesh.  Nationality  is  not  a
       trump card (paragraph 30  ZH  Tanzania).  In  this  case  there  are
       countervailing factors. The claimant and her husband are in  receipt
       of benefits and  cannot  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules. They entered into their relationship and marriage
       at a time when the immigration status of the claimant's husband  was
       precarious and the claimant was not in the UK. They conceived  their
       children when they knew that neither of them had an  entitlement  to
       remain in the UK.  In R (on the application of Mahmood) v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2001] INLR the court held:

          "Article 8 does not impose on the state any general obligation  to
         respect the choice of residence of a married couple".

   42. These factors cannot be held against the children in assessing their
       interests as they had no knowledge  of  their  parent's  immigration
       status.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  these  factors   are
       irrelevant. In MH (Pakistan) [2011] CSOH 143, at Paragraph  56,  the
       court held:

        'The propriety  of  taking  account  of  immigration  history,  the
        precariousness of the position  when  a  relationship  was  entered
        into, and the need to maintain immigration control is confirmed  by
        Lady Hale at paragraph 33 in ZH (Tanzania).



   43. At Paragraph 10 of MH Pakistan the court held:

         "None of this was a matter of controversy between the parties and I
         noted that in one  of  the  cases  to  which  I  was  referred,  ZH
         (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]  2
         WLR 148, Baroness Hale of Richmond  considered  how  these  factors
         would apply in an ordinary immigration case where a person  was  to
         be removed because he has no right to be or remain in the  country.
         At  paragraph  18  she  noted  that  the  Convention  jurisprudence
         recognised that the starting point was the right of all  states  to
         control the entry and residence of aliens..."

   44. I find that the best interests of both M and MS are to be cared  for
       by both parents. However, to  safeguard  those  interests  does  not
       require that they live in the UK. The level of  integration  of  the
       children in  the  UK  is  limited.  The  children  are  unlikely  to
       encounter any serious difficulties in Bangladesh. It is  reasonable,
       on the facts of this case, to expect the family to  leave  with  the
       claimant. Further, there are countervailing factors in this case  as
       set out above. However, even  without  those  factors,  taking  into
       consideration the best interests of the children I am satisfied,  on
       the evidence, that it would be reasonable to expect the children  to
       leave the United Kingdom.

   Private Life

   45. The Secretary of State considered the claimant's private life  under
       paragraph 276ADE concluding that the  claimant  could  not,  in  the
       absence of other evidence, be considered to have lost  her  ties  to
       Bangladesh. The grounds of appeal assert that the claimant has fully
       adapted to the way of life in the UK and has  become  accustomed  to
       the norms and values of British  society  (paragraph  23).  In  that
       paragraph it also asserts that the claimant has also developed  very
       strong ties with 'his wife's' parents in law,  other  relatives  and
       friends in the UK. It is not clear if this is  a  reference  to  the
       claimant or her husband. It is asserted  that  all  ties  have  been
       lost.

   46. The test is whether or  not  the  claimant  has  lost  her  ties  to
       Bangladesh. In YM  (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 the court  of  appeal  approved  the
       construction of the concept set out by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
       case of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)(Nigeria) v  SSHD.  In  that
       case the Upper Tribunal stated, at  paragraph , that:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the words 'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation and  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless".

   47. There has been no evidence submitted as to why the claimant who  has
       lived in Bangladesh for 18 years and in the UK for just over 3 years
       has lost her links to Bangladesh. Reliance in the grounds  has  been
       placed on the links to the UK but no evidence or even detail of  the
       other relations and friends in the UK has been provided. No evidence
       as to what has happened to  her  family,  friends  or  relations  in
       Bangladesh has been provided.

   48. The claimant has not discharged the burden of satisfying me that she
       has lost connection with life in Bangladesh.

   49. The claimant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
       in respect of private and/or family life.

Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules


   50. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT
       640 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal set out the correct approach to appeals
       involving both  Article  8  and  the  new  Immigration  Rules.   The
       headnote reads as follows:
         "On the current state of the authorities:
         ...
          (b)  after applying the requirements of the Rules, only  if  there
         may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
         them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider
         whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently
         recognised under them: R (on the application of) Nagre v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);


   51. There is no 'exceptionality test' or 'threshold' test but there is a
       requirement to carry out a balancing exercise  where  an  individual
       cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  The  public
       interest will generally only be outweighed if an applicant can  show
       that 'compelling circumstances' exist -  see  [40]  to  [42]  of  SS
       (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

   52. Mr Norton submitted that there are no  compelling  circumstances  or
       factors  that  were  not  considered  under  the  Rules.  Mr  Hassan
       submitted that separation of the children from  their  mother  is  a
       compelling circumstance.

   53. In this case the Secretary of State did not  consider  the  children
       when deciding if there were any  circumstances  that  might  warrant
       consideration  of  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  For  this  reason  to  ensure  fairness  I  have
       considered the Article 8 claim outside of the Immigration Rules.


   54. The correct approach to determining a claim under Article 8 is  that
       set out in R v SSHD ex parte  Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.  A  Tribunal
       should consider 5 questions, namely:

          (i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public
          authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect
          for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

          (ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such
          gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

          (iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

          (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
          in the interests of national security, public safety or the
          economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder
          or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
          protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          (v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
          public end sought to be achieved?"

   55. In this case I do not consider it necessary to consider the first  4
       questions posed as it is not disputed that there is family life  and
       that a decision that would potentially result in a wife  and  mother
       being parted from her husband and children is an  interference  with
       family life, that the consequences in the circumstances of this case
       are of such gravity to engage Article 8, that the interference is in
       accordance with the law and is necessary. The core issue is  whether
       the interference in the claimant's, her husband's and the children's
       Article 8 rights is proportionate to a legitimate aim.



   56. In this case the Mr Norton submitted  that  the  family  can  remain
       together. There is no requirement for the family to be separated. It
       is a matter of choice for them. It is not however a matter for  them
       to be able to choose where they live together if they are unable  to
       meet the requirements for leave to remain in the UK.




   57. I am mandated by Parliament to give effect to  section  117  of  the
       2002 Act. Section 117A is engaged because I am  required  to  decide
       whether the impugned decision to refuse leave to remain would breach
       the right to respect for private and family  life  under  Article  8
       enjoyed by the claimant, her husband and their children.


   58. Sufficient weight must be accorded to the  public  interest  in  the
       maintenance of effective immigration controls  (s117B(1)).  In  this
       case the claimant does not meet the requirements for leave to remain
       in the UK. Further,  sufficient  weight  must  be  accorded  to  the
       interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, in  that
       persons who seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  must  be
       financially independent (s117B(3)). The claimant was unable to  meet
       the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Little  weight
       is to be accorded  to  a  private  life  formed  when  the  person's
       Immigration status is precarious (s117B (5)). Very little detail  of
       the private life of the claimant has been provided but in any  event
       I would afford it very little weight in the balancing exercise.


   59. Section 117B(6) is of a different nature and is  directly  relevant.
       The claimant is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
       qualifying children. In  Treebhawon  and  others  (section  117B(6))
       [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  held,  at  paragraph  20
       that :


         '...
         Within this discrete regime, the  statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
         Ambiguity there is none.'


   60. In the headnote in that case the position was set out as
         (i) ... In any case  where  the  conditions  enshrined  in  section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  are
         satisfied, the section 117B(6) public interest  prevails  over  the
         public interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3).


   61. In considering section 117B(6) therefore the only real  question  in
       this case is whether or not it would not be reasonable for M and  MS
       to leave the UK. The test is essentially the same  as  in  Paragraph
       Ex.1(a).


   62. The Court of Appeal stated in VW (Uganda):
             "19. ...  While it is of course possible that the facts of any
             one case may disclose an insurmountable obstacle  to  removal,
             the inquiry into proportionality is not a search for  such  an
             obstacle and does not end  with  its  elimination.   It  is  a
             balanced judgment of what can reasonably be  expected  in  the
             light of all the material facts...
              "24.    EB (Kosovo) now confirms that the  material  question
             in gauging the proportionality of  a  removal  or  deportation
             which will or may break up a family unless the  family  itself
             decamps is not whether there is  an  insuperable  obstacle  to
             this happening but whether it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             family to leave with the appellant..."


   63. For the reasons I have already set out above I have  found  that  it
       would be reasonable for M and MS to leave the UK even in the absence
       of any of the countervailing factors that I identified.


   64. I identified a number of factors above in relation to the  claimant,
       her husband, M and MS when considering private and family life under
       the Immigration Rules. They do  not  need  to  be  repeated.  Having
       weighed all the factors set out above the cumulative effect  of  the
       factors  in  favour  of  refusal  of  leave  to  remain,  i.e.   the
       precariousness of the claimant's and  her  husband's  position  with
       regard to leave to remain at the relevant time, the public  interest
       in maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  and  the  public
       interest in ensuring that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
       United Kingdom are financially independent, outweigh the  Article  8
       interests of the children, the claimant and the claimant's  husband.
       I find  that  the  interference  with  their  Article  8  rights  is
       proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought  to  be  achieved
       namely, the  aim  of  preserving  the  economic  well-being  of  the
       country. The refusal to grant the claimant leave to remain in the UK
       is proportionate  and  therefore  the  appeal  is  allowed  and  the
       Secretary of State's decision stands.

   65. I have considered whether any parties require the protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

   66. The decision to refuse the claimant leave to remain is  a  justified
       interference with the family's right to family and private life such
       interference being proportionate to the legitimate aim of preserving
       the economic well-being of the country. The appeal  is  allowed  and
       the Secretary of State's decision stands.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 26 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw











-----------------------
[1] The grounds of appeal are lengthy, rambling and in parts very unclear
as to who is being referred to. I have attempted to extract the points made
doing so in the most favourable manner to the claimant that I can.

