
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA / 21822 / 2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 16 November 2017                   |On 20 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |[Z A]                                             |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud of International Immigration Advisory
Services.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background facts:

 1. This is the re-making of the decision on the appeal of [ZA]. His appeal
    was allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8) by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mitchell in a decision promulgated on  1  December  2016.
    The judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  (hereafter
    the "Rules").

 2. Following a hearing on 23 August 2017 and in a decision promulgated  on
    11 September 2017, I decided that the judge had materially erred in law
    and set aside the decision of the judge, for the reasons  given  in  my
    decision (the "EOL decision"). My decision is attached to this decision
    and speaks for itself.

 3. I shall continue to refer to [ZA] as the "claimant". The  claimant  had
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent of 22 May 2015 to refuse his application of  16  March  2015
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the carer of his  brother,
    [NA] (hereafter the "sponsor").

 4. To summarise the judge's decision briefly: The  sponsor  was  diagnosed
    HIV positive in 2013. His condition was under control. The judge  noted
    that the sponsor was due to have an operation in the  near  future  and
    that no one could  say  what  his  long-term  prognosis  was.  He  also
    suffered from depression and anxiety and had difficulty with day-to-day
    tasks as well as attending appointments. He needed  prompting  to  take
    his medication. The judge accepted that the  relationship  between  the
    sponsor and his wife had broken down and that she did not feel able  to
    look after him although they continued to live in the  same  flat.  The
    stigma of HIV was such that the sponsor did not  wish  to  tell  anyone
    that he was HIV positive. The judge said that it appeared that "at  the
    present time" there were no family or friends  who  would  be  able  to
    provide assistance to the sponsor other than the claimant except on  an
    infrequent basis.

 5. At para 30 of his decision, the judge  decided  that  the  decision  to
    refuse the claimant a limited period of leave to care for  his  brother
    was not proportionate to any legitimate aim sought to be  achieved  and
    that "the claimant could be  granted  a  limited  period  of  leave  to
    establish the long-term prognosis of the brother and to  ascertain  the
    outcome of any treatment that is planned in the next six months".

 6. The judge was referred to the Secretary of State's  Carer's  Policy  in
    Chapter 17, section 2 of the Immigration Directorate  Instructions.  It
    is plain that he took the Carer's Policy into account in  reaching  his
    decision on proportionality.

 7. In the EOL decision, I decided (in summary) that:

    (i)    The judge had materially erred in law by taking into account the
         Carer's Policy because it was not relevant to  the  proportionality
         exercise. I decided that the  Carer's  Policy  is  a  policy  which
         operates  in  relation  to  the  Secretary  of   State's   residual
         discretion and does not throw light on  the  needs  of  immigration
         control ([42]) for the reasons given at [21]-[45], and that, in any
         event, the judge had failed to apply the  high  threshold  for  the
         grant of such limited leave under the Carer's Policy ([46]-[49]).

    (ii)   The judge speculated when he said, at [34], that  "(t)he  health
         services cannot provide day-to-day care" for the sponsor given that
         there was no evidence before  him  that  such  care  could  not  be
         provided by social services and at [33] where  he  found  that  the
         claimant would presumably be able to meet the terms of the  Carer's
         Policy "if he had provided details from social services as  regards
         their inability to provide care" for the sponsor ([58]-[62] of  the
         EOL decision).

    (iii)  The judge's ultimate  conclusion,  that  the  decision  was  not
         proportionate, could only have been  reached  by  an  impermissible
         failure to take the state's interests into account ([65]-[66]).

 8. I therefore set aside the judge's decision  on  proportionality  ([70])
    and  decided to re-make the decision in the Upper Tribunal  as  opposed
    to remitting the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  as  requested  by
    both parties, for the reasons given at [71]-[76] of the EOL decision.

 9. At [77] and [78] of the EOL decision, I said:

         "77.     The findings of Judge Mitchell at [16]-[23] stand  on  the
             evidence that was before him. His findings  do  not  otherwise
             stand. This means that, if the evidence before me at the  next
             hearing is different from the evidence that was  before  Judge
             Mitchell and such evidence puts credibility in issue,  I  will
             be entitled to make my own  findings  and  where  appropriate,
             depart from the findings of Judge Mitchell.

         78.      I will approach the Carer's Policy and  my  assessment  of
             proportionality under Article 8 as follows:

             i)  In the first place, by  treating  the  Carer's  Policy  as
                  irrelevant to the proportionality exercise  under  Article
                  8, i.e. I will assess proportionality as  if  the  Carer's
                  Policy did not exist.

             ii) In order to adopt a "belts and braces"  approach,  I  will
                  consider,  in   the   alternative,   whether   there   are
                  particularly compelling and compassionate circumstances in
                  the instant case having regard to the list of points  that
                  are set out at para 17.3 of the Carer's Policy along  with
                  any other considerations I consider  relevant  and  decide
                  whether the decision is disproportionate  in  all  of  the
                  circumstances of the case."

10. I now record the following:

    (i)    At the commencement of the  hearing  of  the  re-making  of  the
         decision, Mr Moksud asked me if I wished to hear oral  evidence.  I
         informed him that it was for him to decide. He decided to call oral
         evidence. He informed me that  he  would  call  the  claimant,  the
         sponsor and the sponsor's wife. He said that the claimant  and  the
         sponsor's wife speak fluent English but the  sponsor  did  not.  An
         interpreter had not been requested in advance. I asked him  whether
         he was requesting an adjournment for an interpreter to be provided.
         He informed me that, having taken instructions  from  the  claimant
         who did not require  an  adjournment,  he  was  not  requesting  an
         adjournment.

    (ii)   As matters transpired, the sponsor said he was  unwell  when  he
         was answering the first question. He said he  was  dizzy.  At  this
         point, I asked Mr Moksud whether he was requesting  an  adjournment
         in the hope that the sponsor will be better on another occasion. He
         said he did not request an adjournment because it  was  clear  from
         his instructions that the sponsor was always unwell.

    (iii)  The claimant's case before the judge was that he  only  required
         leave for a limited period to provide day-to-care for  the  sponsor
         which no one else could provide and which the sponsor preferred  to
         receive from him whilst the sponsor's  long-term  prognosis  became
         clear and in order  to  ascertain  the  outcome  of  any  treatment
         planned in the following six months. However, this is no longer the
         case. Given that more  than  six  months  have  elapsed  since  the
         judge's decision, I specifically asked Mr  Moksud  whether  it  was
         still the claimant's case that the  decision  was  disproportionate
         having regard to the limited period for  which  he  was  requesting
         that he be granted leave. Mr Moksud said that,  if  his  appeal  is
         allowed, the Secretary of State usually grants leave for 2 � years.
         When pressed, he accepted that it is not the claimant's  case  that
         the decision was disproportionate in view of the limited period  of
         leave requested. This means that it is  not  necessary  for  me  to
         adopt the "belts and braces" approach mentioned at [78] of the  EOL
         decision. In other words, even on the claimant's case, the  Carer's
         Policy is now irrelevant.

    (iv)   Finally, I record that, as the  hearing  progressed,  it  became
         clear that the oral evidence given at the  hearing  before  me  put
         into issue the credibility of the witnesses  before  me  and  their
         evidence.  Indeed,  Mr  Moksud  and  Ms  Ahmad  addressed   me   on
         credibility in submissions without it being  necessary  for  me  to
         invite them to do so and without any objection by Mr Moksud.

Oral evidence before me

11. The claimant and the sponsor's wife, Mrs. [A], spoke fluent English.

12. In evidence, the claimant described the care he provides  the  sponsor.
    He  administers  to  the  sponsor  medication  for  the  sponsor's  HIV
    condition and depression. The sponsor requires prompting  to  take  his
    medication. The sponsor  also  suffers  from  dizziness  and  has  been
    diagnosed with memory problems by his doctor. He has mobility problems.
    The claimant helps the sponsor with his  toilet,  washes  his  laundry,
    deals with his financial affairs, takes him to  hospital  and  doctor's
    appointments,  interprets  for  him,  pays  his  bills  and  gives  him
    emotional support. When  the  sponsor's  medication  needs  to  be  re-
    ordered, the claimant tells the social  worker  that  the  medicine  is
    about to finish and social services then order the medication which  is
    then delivered to  the  home  address.  Asked  if  he  could  name  the
    medication he prompts  his  brother  to  take,  he  said  he  does  not
    remember.  When  pressed,  he  remembered  the  name  of  one  medicine
    (Setraline) which his brother  no  longer  takes  and  which  has  been
    replaced by another medicine which he could not name. However, he  said
    that  the  anti-depressant  medication  was  in  strips  and  the   HIV
    medication in boxes.  He named the sponsor's  psychiatrist  as  someone
    called Martha Kenyon.

13. There are only a few members of the claimant's family  who  know  about
    the sponsor's HIV condition.  Mrs. [A] does not  do  anything  for  the
    sponsor. She cooks for herself and her son. The sponsor and Mrs [A]  do
    not have a  "husband-and-wife"  relationship.  They  continue  to  live
    together only for the sake of their son who  does  not  know  that  his
    father has HIV although he knows that the sponsor  has  depression  and
    mobility issues. If the sponsor and Mrs  [A]  were  to  separate,  this
    could affect the health of their son. Although the relationship between
    the sponsor and Mrs [A] has broken down, Mrs [A] is in  court  to  give
    evidence because the sponsor is the father of her son and would have no
    one to look after him if the claimant were to leave the United Kingdom.
    On that basis, she is compassionate.

14. The claimant and the sponsor do not eat their meals with  Mrs  [A]  and
    her son. The claimant's nephew is 16 years old. He does not  know  that
    the relationship between his parents has broken down. Asked to  explain
    how a 16-year old does not  know  that  the  relationship  between  his
    parents has broken down if he and the parents do not  eat  their  meals
    together, the claimant said: "I don't know" and that  the  nephew  does
    understand that his father is not well, that he has mobility issues and
    keeps to himself. The nephew understands that they do not eat  together
    because his father's health is poor. When asked again  to  explain,  he
    said that it is not that the sponsor and Mrs [A] do not  interact  with
    each other at all. They do interact once in a while. He also said  that
    the sponsor and Mrs [A] pretend in the presence of their son that there
    is nothing to worry about.

15. At this point, when asked whether it was still his  evidence  that  the
    sponsor and Mrs [A] do not eat together, he said that  they  might  eat
    together in the living room but they do not eat together  as  a  normal
    husband and wife. Sometimes, it is a coincidence that  his  brother  is
    eating and Mrs [A] also comes to eat. He  does  not  know  if  this  is
    regarded as "eating together". He then said that the  sponsor  eats  in
    his room most of the time.

16. The claimant said that they all live  in  a  2-bedroom  flat  with  one
    living room. The sponsor stays in his room most of the time. If  it  is
    necessary, the sponsor and Mrs [A] talk to each other. Otherwise,  they
    keep their distance.

17. In her evidence, Mrs [A] said that, ever since she found out about  the
    sponsor's HIV condition, she has not had a relationship with him.  They
    do not talk to each other. She sleeps in the same room as him but  they
    do not share a bed. They have separate beds. This is because they  only
    have a 2-bedroom flat. The claimant and her son share the second room.

18. If the sponsor needs the toilet in the middle of  the  might,  Mrs  [A]
    goes to the claimant's bedroom and asks him to take the sponsor to  the
    toilet. This happens more than once every night. She cooks for  herself
    and her son. The claimant cooks for himself and the  sponsor.  She  and
    her son do not eat with the claimant  and  the  sponsor.   The  sponsor
    normally eats in his bedroom.

19. Mrs [A] said that, although she separated from the sponsor in 2013, her
    son does not know about the separation because she and the  sponsor  do
    not make it obvious. They try to make it look as if they are  a  normal
    family. During the four years' of separation, she and her son have  not
    sat down to have a meal with the sponsor.  Nevertheless, her  son  does
    not know that his parents have separated because he is at  college  and
    comes home at different times.

20. Asked to explain why her earlier evidence, that she and the sponsor  do
    not communicate at all with each other, was inconsistent with her later
    evidence, that they pretend to be a normal family in  the  presence  of
    her son, she said that they just pretend to be a normal family so  that
    the situation will not affect her son's studies. Asked to  explain  how
    she pretends to be a normal family when it was her  evidence  that  she
    does not communicate with the sponsor at all, she  said  that,  in  the
    presence of her son, she just pretends to say  something  like:  "would
    you like something to eat" and that, once her son has  left  the  room,
    she returns to doing whatever it was that she was doing.

21. If the claimant were not in the United Kingdom, Mrs [A]  would  not  be
    able to support or help the sponsor in any way. She has no  alternative
    plan. The sponsor cannot be looked after by social services because  he
    is attached to the claimant. It would be  very  difficult  for  him  if
    someone else were to come and provide care.  Asked  why  it  would  not
    unreasonable  to  expect  the  sponsor  to  receive  care  from  social
    services, she said she did not know.

22. The sponsor gave brief evidence before he stopped giving  evidence.  He
    said he felt dizzy. In the brief evidence he gave, he said that Mrs [A]
    still lives with him. They do not sleep in the same room. They sleep in
    separate bedrooms. When I asked him if he was able to continue to  give
    evidence, he said he did not understand the question and then  said  he
    was not able to continue. This is the point at which Mr Moksud said  he
    was not seeking an adjournment to enable the sponsor to  give  evidence
    on another day.

23. I pointed out to Mr Moksud at this point that, although I am aware from
    the decision of the judge that the sponsor has  a  personal  preference
    for the claimant to provide the care that he needs, I do not  have  his
    evidence as to why he cannot reasonably be expected to obtain care from
    social services.

Assessment

24. The claimant must prove that he has established family and private life
    in the United Kingdom such as to engage  Article  8;  that  his  rights
    would be interfered with if he were  to  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom; and that any interference would  be  disproportionate  to  the
    lawful and legitimate aim of the  Secretary  of  State  in  maintaining
    immigration control.

25. The judge found that the claimant cannot meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules and dismissed his appeal on immigration  grounds.  This  was  not
    challenged by the claimant. It was not asserted before me at the  error
    of law hearing or at the hearing of the re-making of the decision  that
    the claimant could meet the requirements of the  Rules.  He  relies  on
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

26. Nevertheless, insofar as the claimant relies upon his right to  private
    life, my starting point is that the claimant has failed to  demonstrate
    that he satisfies the requirements of the Rules.

27. There is no threshold requirement  of  arguability  before  a  case  is
    considered outside the Rules, although the extent of any  consideration
    outside the Rules will, of course, depend on whether all the issues  in
    question have been  adequately  addressed  under  the  Rules.   In  the
    instant case, it is plain that the claimant's  Article  8  family  life
    claim is based on the caring duties that it is said he performs for the
    sponsor. There is  no  provision  for  this  under  the  Rules.  It  is
    therefore  necessary  to  carryout  the  full   five-stage   assessment
    explained at [17] of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

28. I consider the rights of the sponsor and Mrs  [A]  pursuant  to  Beoku-
    Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.

29. I made it clear at [77] of my EOL decision that  the  findings  of  the
    judge will stand on the evidence that was before him but that,  if  the
    evidence before me at the next hearing was different from the  evidence
    that was before the judge and such evidence puts credibility in  issue,
    I will be entitled to make my  own  findings  and,  where  appropriate,
    depart from the findings of the judge.

30. In view of the evidence  that  I  heard,  which  was  contradictory  as
    explained below and which materially called into question the  findings
    of the judge, I am justified in departing  from  the  findings  of  the
    judge. It is therefore necessary for me to assess  the  credibility  of
    the evidence before turning to answer the Razgar questions. My  reasons
    for departing from the findings of the judge are as follows:

    (i)    Despite saying in his  evidence  that  he  tells  the  sponsor's
         social worker when the sponsor's medication is about to finish  and
         that he prompts the sponsor to take his  medication,  the  claimant
         was unable to name the medication. He  is  fluent  in  English  and
         therefore there is no reason on the basis of any inability to  read
         or understand the language that he would not be able  to  name  the
         medication if he does prompt the sponsor  to  take  his  medication
         and, more importantly if he rings social services  to  advise  them
         when medication is about to finish.  It is incredible that,  if  he
         telephones social services to tell them when medication is about to
         finish, he does not know the name of the medication that is running
         short. It would not be enough for him simply to describe to  social
         services the packaging in which the medication is dispensed, as  he
         did in evidence before me, even assuming that I accept his evidence
         that he is able to place an order for a  repeat  prescription  with
         social services as opposed to the sponsor's doctor or consultant.

    (ii)   Initially, the claimant gave clear evidence  that  the  sponsor,
         Mrs [A] and their son do not eat together  as  a  family.  However,
         when he got into difficulties when asked to explain how his 16-year
         old nephew does not know that his parents have  separated  if  they
         have not eaten together for four years, he initially  said  he  did
         not know but later on in his evidence, he changed his evidence  and
         said that they might eat together in the living room but do not eat
         together as husband and wife, evidence which I found ambivalent, as
         if he was trying to say both things at the same time  in  order  to
         avoid being seen as giving contradictory evidence.  He  ended  this
         part of his evidence by saying that if his brother  is  eating  and
         Mrs [A] also comes to eat, this would be a coincidence and he  does
         not know if this is counted as "eating together". However,  he  had
         no difficulty understanding the question when first  asked  whether
         the sponsor and Mrs [A] eat together. It was clear to  me  that  he
         was simply feigning ignorance on  the  basis  of  language  to  get
         himself out of difficulty in his evidence.

    (iii)  The claimant's evidence that the sponsor and Mrs [A] do interact
         once in a while  and  that  they  talk  to  each  other  if  it  is
         necessary, contradicted Mrs [A]'s initial evidence  when  she  said
         clearly that she and the sponsor do not talk  to  each  other.  Her
         initial evidence that she and the sponsor do not talk to each other
         contradicted her later evidence that they pretend to be a family in
         the presence of her son at which times she might  ask  her  husband
         whether he would like to eat  something.  Mrs  [A]  said  that  the
         sponsor normally eats in his  bedroom  but  the  claimant  made  no
         mention of the sponsor eating in his room.

    (iv)   Mrs [A]'s attendance to give oral evidence, not once but  twice,
         does not sit with her professed unwillingness to do anything at all
         to help the sponsor if he needed help, beyond  helping  him  if  he
         fell down.

31. I simply do not believe the evidence I heard. I found both the claimant
    and Mrs [A] totally lacking in credibility. I reject  the  entirety  of
    their evidence. I find that they  have  given  untruthful  evidence  to
    cover up the fact that Mrs [A] is the sponsor's primary  carer  and  to
    portray the claimant instead as  his  primary  carer.  Given  that  the
    sponsor professed to be feeling ill in giving his  evidence,  I  am  of
    course wary about relying upon anything he said but it is  nevertheless
    telling that he said that he and his wife sleep in separate bedrooms, a
    simple point which it is very unlikely a person would get wrong on  the
    basis of not feeling well.  I  make  it  clear,  however,  that  in  an
    abundance of caution, I do not rely upon the evidence of the sponsor in
    this regard to make my adverse assessment of credibility.

32. For the reasons given above, I am entitled to depart from the  findings
    of the judge. On the whole of  the  evidence  before  me,  I  make  the
    following finding of fact:

    (i)    I do not accept that the claimant provides care to  the  sponsor
         to the extent claimed. I find that he may well help out  there  and
         there as many  people  would  if  a  sibling  living  in  the  same
         household is ill with serious health problems and needs assistance.
         I find that any such care that he gives does not go  beyond  normal
         emotional ties.

    (ii)   I do not accept that Mrs [A] does not provide any  care  to  the
         sponsor. I do not accept that they are  separated  and  that  their
         relationship has broken down.  I do not accept that  they  are  not
         living together as a normal family.  I find that  Mrs  [A]  is  the
         sponsor's primary carer.

    (iii)  In short, I find that the evidence the claimant, Mrs [A] and the
         sponsor gave to the judge and the claimant and Mrs [A] gave  to  me
         is nothing but a tissue of lies. For the same reasons, I find  that
         they have given false accounts  to  the  medical  professionals  in
         order to bolster the claimant's Article 8 claim.

33. I turn to answer the Razgar questions. For the above  reasons,  I  find
    that the claimant has not shown that he  has  established  family  life
    with his brother within the meaning of Article 8(1). Nevertheless,  his
    relationship with the sponsor forms part of his private life. I  accept
    that, during the period of his residence in the  United  Kingdom  since
    arriving as a student on 17 March  2012,  he  has  established  private
    life. However, there was no evidence before me of the quality  of  such
    private or that he had formed any links in the  United  Kingdom  beyond
    his relationship with the sponsor, Mrs [A] and his nephew.

34. I find that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  will  amount  to  an
    interference with the claimant's private life, encompassing as it  does
    his relationship with the sponsor, his nephew and Mrs [A]. I find  that
    the  interference  will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as   to
    potentially engage the operation of Article 8  ECHR,  bearing  in  mind
    that, although the interference must be  real,  the  threshold  is  not
    exceptionally high.

35. I am satisfied that any interference is in accordance with the law  and
    for the legitimate public end necessary in a democratic society in  the
    interests of the economic well-being of  the  country  referred  to  in
    Article 8(2) which  includes  the  maintenance  of  proper  immigration
    control (Shahzad (Article 8: Legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT  00085  (IAC))
    refers.

36. I turn to the ultimate question, i.e. whether the interference  is  one
    that is in all the circumstances proportionate to the legitimate public
    aim to be achieved.

37. In considering the public interest question, I must have regard to  the
    considerations listed in s.117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") by virtue of s.117A.  Section  117A(2)
    provides that "the public interest  question"  means  the  question  of
    whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2). Section 117A(3) states
    that the Tribunal is required to carry out a  balancing  exercise.  The
    maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.

38. Mr Moksud relied upon the fact that  the  claimant  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully since his arrival as  a  student  on  17  March
    2012. He has not committed any  offences.  He  provides  care  for  the
    sponsor and saves the public purse money. The rights of  three  British
    citizens would be  affected  if  the  claimant  is  removed,  i.e.  the
    sponsor, Mrs [A] and their son.

39. The claimant is fluent in the  English  language.  However,  the  Upper
    Tribunal held in AM (S117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  that  an
    appellant can gain no positive rights to a grant  of  leave  to  remain
    from either s.117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree  of  his  fluency  in
    English, or the strength of his financial resources.  The same  applies
    to the fact that the claimant has not committed any criminal offences.

40. I have already found that the claimant does not provide  all  the  care
    that the sponsor needs, although he may well help out there  and  there
    as most people would if a sibling living in the same household was  ill
    and needed assistance. On the evidence I heard and  given  my  findings
    and my adverse credibility assessment, I have found that Mrs [A] is and
    has been the person who is primarily providing care to the  sponsor.  I
    find that she can reasonably continue to do so. However, if this proves
    too onerous for her, it is reasonable to expect the sponsor to  receive
    additional care from social services or to pay for such care  from  his
    financial  resources,  bearing  in  mind  that  he  receives   Personal
    Independence Payments.

41. It is not part of the claimant's case that  any  private  life  he  has
    established in the United Kingdom (to the extent that he has  developed
    private life beyond his relationship with the sponsor, his  nephew  and
    Mrs [A]) is such as to render his removal disproportionate. His Article
    8 claim is entirely based on the care he provides to the sponsor.

42. The Upper Tribunal concluded  in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /
    public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014  (IAC)  that  the  "little
    weight" provisions in Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  do  not  entail  an
    absolute, rigid measurement or  concept;  "little  weight"  involves  a
    spectrum which, within its self-contained boundaries,  will  result  in
    the measurement of the quantum of weight considered appropriate in  the
    fact sensitive context of every case;  and  that,  in  every  balancing
    exercise, the scales must be properly prepared by the  judge,  followed
    by all necessary findings and conclusions and  buttressed  by  adequate
    reasoning.

43. I do indeed give little weight to the claimant's private life  for  the
    following reasons:

    (i)    There is a dearth of evidence about the private life established
         by the claimant beyond his relationship with the sponsor,  Mrs  [A]
         and his nephew.

    (ii)   I have not accepted that his relationship with the sponsor,  Mrs
         [A] and his nephew amounts to family life. It  forms  part  of  his
         private life.

    (iii)  He does not meet the requirements of para 276ADE(1) of the Rules
         in relation to his right to his private life. That is  to  say,  he
         has not established that there would be very significant  obstacles
         to his reintegration in Pakistan. In any event,  he  has  not  said
         that he will experience any difficulties in returning  to  Pakistan
         and re-establishing his private life.

    (iv)   Any such private life encompassing  his  relationship  with  the
         sponsor,  Mrs  [A]  and  his  nephew  was  established  whilst  his
         immigration status was precarious.

44. In all of the circumstances, and  giving  such  weight  as  I  consider
    appropriate to the  individual  aspects  of  the  evidence  and  having
    considered all of the evidence in the round, I find that the  Secretary
    of State's decision is proportionate. The public interest in this  case
    far outweighs the claimant's right to his private life,  which  I  have
    assessed to include his relationship with the sponsor, Mrs [A] and  his
    nephew.

45. I should make it clear that, even  if  I  had  not  departed  from  the
    findings of the judge and made an adverse assessment of credibility,  I
    would still have dismissed this appeal on human rights grounds, for the
    following reasons:

    (i)    Whilst the sponsor may prefer to  receive  care  from  a  family
         member, this does not mean that his wishes are determinative. There
         are many people all over  the  United  Kingdom  who  require  care,
         including  care  concerning  intimate  aspects  of  their  personal
         routines and who receive care from social services. There are  many
         people who prefer not to disclose their medical condition to carers
         and their communities. I informed Mr Moksud that, as  a  result  of
         the sponsor being unable to give evidence, I do not  have  evidence
         from him on the question whether it is reasonable to expect him  to
         receive any care he requires from social services.

    (ii)   Despite the fact that it is clear from my EOL decision that  the
         fact that there was no evidence from social services as to the care
         that they would be able to provide the sponsor was material,  there
         is still no such evidence from them.  Since  the  decision  of  the
         judge, the claimant submitted two bundles of documents,  one  under
         cover of a letter dated 21 August 201 and  one  under  cover  of  a
         letter dated 31 October 2017, which I will now summarise  and  deal
         with.

    (iii)  The bundle under cover  of  the  letter  dated  21  August  2017
         includes a letter from the Department for Work and  Pensions  dated
         10 January 2017 which confirms that the sponsor  receives  Personal
         Independence Payments. It is not evidence of the care  that  social
         services can or cannot provide the sponsor, nor does it  help  with
         the question whether it is reasonable for the  sponsor  to  receive
         care from social services.

    (iv)   The document attached to the cover letter dated 31 October  2017
         is entitled  "Face  Overview  Assessment  (Social  Care)"  and  was
         prepared by a Mr Paola Marin Blanco, Social Worker, Information and
         Assessment  Team,  Adults  Social  Care.   I  reject  Mr   Moksud's
         submission that what is stated  in  this  document  represents  the
         assessment of Mr. Blanco. It is plain that all Mr Blanco did was to
         record the answers he was given why the claimant and the sponsor to
         questions on the  form.  This  is  not  evidence  from  the  social
         services of the care that they would be able to  provide  or  would
         not be able to provide the sponsor or the  care  that  the  sponsor
         requires, nor  does  it  help  with  the  question  whether  it  is
         reasonable for the sponsor to receive care from social services.

    (v)    Whilst I accept that the care that a family member  can  provide
         is qualitatively different from the care that can  be  provided  by
         social services and whilst I accept that a family member's presence
         in the same home means that he/she is available to assist at  times
         when a social worker or carer may not be, it  is  nevertheless  the
         case that the social services are obliged to provide such  care  as
         is required. It is entirely reasonable to  expect  the  sponsor  to
         receive such care from social services or to pay for his care  from
         his financial resources. In reaching this decision,  I  have  taken
         into account the public interest considerations.

    (vi)   The claimant's case before  the  judge  was  that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to refuse to grant  him  leave  to  remain  for  a
         limited period until the long-term  prognosis  of  the  sponsor  is
         established and to ascertain the outcome of any  treatment  planned
         for the following six months. Nearly a year has elapsed  since  the
         judge's decision. There is still no evidence  about  the  sponsor's
         long-term prognosis nor  any  evidence  of  any  treatment  he  has
         received in the  period  of  almost  one  year  since  the  judge's
         decision or the treatment that he will  receive  in  the  next  six
         months. In the absence of such evidence, the circumstances  in  the
         claimant's case, taken cumulatively, cannot  outweigh  the  state's
         interests, on any legitimate view, giving due weight to the state's
         interests and the circumstances in the claimant's case.

46. Finally, I make it clear that I have considered  the  medical  evidence
    (such as was submitted) in reaching my conclusions. I have not found it
    necessary to consider whether the weight to be given to  this  evidence
    is to be reduced on account of the fact that, for example, the evidence
    that  the  sponsor  is  suffering  from  depression  is  not   from   a
    psychiatrist. Even taking the whole of the  medical  evidence  at  face
    value, this appeal falls to be dismissed. Firstly,  on  account  of  my
    finding that the claimant does not provide the care it  is  claimed  he
    provides and that, contrary to the evidence I heard, Mrs  [A]  and  the
    sponsor are not separated. Secondly, and in  any  event,  even  if  the
    claimant does provide all the care that the sponsor needs, the  sponsor
    can reasonably be expected to obtain adequate care from social services
    or pay for adequate care himself.

47. The claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
    therefore dismissed.

    Decision

    The making of the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mitchell
    involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  to
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8) was set aside. The
    decision to dismiss the appeal on immigration grounds stands.

    The Upper Tribunal re-made the decision on the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds by dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.


[pic]

Signed      Date: 19 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                            ANNEX - EOL decision

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21822/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 23 August 2017                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |[ZA]                                              |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Warren, of Counsel, instructed by Silverdale
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background facts:

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Mitchell who, following a hearing on  17  November  2016,  allowed  the
    appeal of [ZA] (hereafter the "claimant") against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent of 22 May 2015 to refuse his application dated 16 March 2015
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the carer of his  brother,
    a [NA] (hereafter the "sponsor").  The judge allowed the appeal outside
    the Immigration Rules (hereafter the "Rules") on the basis of Article 8
    of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms ("ECHR").

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, born on  9  November  1991.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 March 2012 with entry clearance  as
    a  Tier  4  student,  valid  until  30  August  2014.  His  leave   was
    subsequently curtailed to expire  on  3  November  2013.  He  was  then
    granted further leave to remain  until  18  March  2015  as  a  Tier  4
    student.

 3. The sponsor is a British citizen. He is married. He and his wife have a
    child. The claimant lives with the sponsor and the sponsor's  wife  and
    child (the judge's decision at [20]).

The Carer's Policy

 4. The judge was provided with Chapter 17, section 2  of  the  Immigration
    Directorate  Instructions  ("IDIs").  According  to  the   department's
    website, this is  a  document  which  "deals  with  how  UK  visas  and
    Immigration handles applications from carers". I shall  refer  to  this
    hereafter as the "Carer's policy". The relevant paragraphs read:

         "17.     Introduction

         The United Kingdom's position  on  carers  and  the  'Care  in  the
         Community' policy stems from existing case  law,  particularly  the
         case of R v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ex  parte
         Zakrocki.

         ...

         It is important to note that UKBA and the Department of Health have
         consistently argued that the care in the community  policy  is  not
         designed to enable people to stay in the UK who would otherwise not
         have leave to do so. Rather, leave should only be granted where  it
         is  warranted  by   particularly   compelling   and   compassionate
         circumstances.

         17.1     Entry Clearance

         There is no provision in the Immigration Rules  for  issuing  entry
         clearance on the basis of an applicant coming to the UK to care for
         a sick family member or friend. A person who wishes to enter the UK
         to provide short-term care or make alternative arrangements for the
         long term care of a friend/relative  may  do  so  under  the  Rules
         relating to general visitors.

         17.2

         There is no provision in the Immigration Rules for leave  to  enter
         to be granted solely to allow a person to  care  for  a  friend  or
         relative in the UK. Where an applicant wishes to care for a  friend
         or relative for  a  short  period,  s/he  must  first  satisfy  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to general visitors.



         17.3     Leave to remain

         Whilst each case must be looked at on its individual  merits,  when
         considering whether a  period  of  leave  should  be  granted,  the
         following points are amongst those that should be borne in mind  by
         caseworkers:

         (  the type of illness/condition (this should  be  supported  by  a
         Consultant's letter); and

         (  the type of care required; and

         (  care which is available (e.g. from the Social Services or  other
         relatives/friends); and

         (  the long-term prognosis.

         Caseworkers should be aware that whilst most applications will come
         from carers who are in the UK as visitors this will not  always  be
         the case.

         17.3.1.

         Where the application is to care for a sick or disabled relative it
         will normally be appropriate to grant leave to remain for 3  months
         on Code 3 (no records to employment or public  funds)  outside  the
         Rules.

         The applicant must be informed that leave has been granted  on  the
         strict understanding that during this period arrangements  will  be
         made for the future care of the patient by  a  person  who  is  not
         subject to the Immigration Rules.

         The following wording must be added to the grant letter:

         'I must advise you/your client that this  leave  has  been  granted
         exceptionally outside the normal requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules to enable you/your client to make permanent arrangements  for
         the future care of your/his/her relative, by a person  who  is  not
         subject to immigration control. It is  unlikely  that  any  further
         leave will be granted on this basis'.

The judge's decision

 5. Before the judge, it was accepted that the claimant did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules ([18]). The appeal  was  pursued  before  the
    judge in relation only to his Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

 6. The judge heard oral evidence from the claimant, the  sponsor  and  the
    sponsor's wife.

 7. The judge's reasons for allowing the appeal under Article 8 outside the
    Rules may be summarised as follows:

 8. In his decision, the judge said that the sponsor was HIV positive, that
    this condition was under control, that he also suffered from depression
    and anxiety, that he had difficulty in engaging with  other  day-to-day
    tasks such as attending appointments and taking his medication, that he
    has memory problems ([22]), that he was due to have  another  operation
    in the relatively near future and that no one could say what his  long-
    term prognosis was ([22]).

 9. The judge appeared to accept the credibility of  the  witnesses  before
    him, stating that there  was  no  reason  to  doubt  their  credibility
    although the family arrangements of  the  sponsor  and  his  wife  were
    "somewhat unusual" ([17]).

10. The judge accepted that the relationship between the  sponsor  and  his
    wife had irretrievably broken down, although they continued to live  in
    the same house ([20]). He appeared to accept the wife's  evidence  that
    she was psychologically unable to care for the sponsor. He  noted  that
    she gave evidence that, if the sponsor fell down, she would assist  him
    but she finds herself unable to provide any other form of care ([21]).

11. The judge noted that the sponsor had two sisters who live in the United
    Kingdom and that they visit him on a weekly  basis.  The  sisters  were
    married and had their own families. He said that there were no  reasons
    to doubt that it would not be practical for them to provide  assistance
    to the sponsor. Both sisters work ([24]).

12. At [25] the judge said that it appeared that "at  the  present  moment"
    there were no family or friends who would be able to provide assistance
    other than the claimant except on an infrequent basis.

13. At [27] the judge referred to R v Zackrocki [1996] EWCA Civ  1326  and,
    at [28], said that the instant case had some similarities when compared
    with Zackrocki, i.e. that  there  was  evidence  that  the  family  was
    receiving  some  support  from  the  community  and  that   there   was
    considerable evidence that the sponsor  was  entirely  reliant  on  the
    claimant to provide care as  his  wife  was  unable  to  do  so.  These
    paragraphs read:

         "27.     I was referred to the case of R-v- Zackrocki  [1996]  EWCA
             Civ 1326 where Mr Justice Carnwath's judgement  also  referred
             to in [sic] the carer's concession of the respondent. In  that
             case the court accepted the evidence of a brother-in-law,  not
             a doctor, as regards the effects on the patient  who  required
             the care. There was  however  evidence  from  social  services
             backed by a doctor that there are no satisfactory  alternative
             arrangements would could [sic] be  made  for  that  particular
             subject's care. Mr Carnwath considered that the evidence  that
             had been provided was consistent with the government's  policy
             that existed at that time. The Secretary of State in that case
             had asserted that he was satisfied that adequate  arrangements
             could be made for the care of the subject  in  that  case  but
             there was no evidential basis to support that.  That  is  also
             the situation in this case.

         28.      There are some similarities with this  appellant  and  his
             brother. There is evidence that the family is  receiving  some
             support from the community as a result [sic] letter  from  the
             building stronger families, family action, head office  letter
             dated 13 October 2016  that  appears  [sic]  page  10  of  the
             appellant's bundle. There is consistent evidence from both the
             GP and the hospital that the appellant's brother  is  entirely
             reliant on the appellant to provide the care as  the  wife  is
             unable to do so."

14. At [29] the judge  noted  that  there  was  a  "potential  gap  in  the
    evidence" as there was no independent  assessment  by  social  services
    before him and that the letters from the  health  professionals  before
    him showed that the  professionals  appeared  not  to  have  considered
    whether social services should be involved as they were satisfied  with
    the care that the claimant was giving the sponsor.

15.  At [30] the judge said:

         "30.      The  [claimant's]  representatives  have  addressed  this
             matter by suggesting that care by social services would be  at
             cost to the public funds and the care would  not  fully  cater
             for the needs of the brother who at the present moment is only
             comfortable discussing the matters  with  the  [claimant].  It
             does appear that the brother does require care and support not
             only during the day but frequently and at odd intervals during
             the night. His mental health is also indicative that he  finds
             it increasingly difficult to relate to other  individuals  and
             to take any notice of  them.  He  is  reluctant  to  take  his
             medication relating to his depression and anxiety and he  also
             is reluctant to take exercise. All in  all,  the  [claimant's]
             brother seems  to  be  reluctant  to  take  notice  of  health
             professionals and to require to be persuaded and  reminded  by
             the [claimant] to take his medication."

16. Having then reminded himself of the 5-step approach explained  at  [17]
    of R (on the application of Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL  27,  the  judge
    said at [32]-[34] as follows:

         "32.     The [claimant] has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
             relatively short period of time. He came to the United Kingdom
             as a student. He has taken on the role of carer for his  older
             brother. The unusual circumstances of the brother's  household
             mean that the [claimant] is the only person in  the  household
             who is willing and able to provide care for the  brother.  The
             [claimant] has developed a private and family  life  with  the
             brother in the United Kingdom. The proposed removal would have
             consequences of such gravity  as  to  potentially  engage  the
             operation of article 8 as the care of the brother would almost
             certainly not be of such  high  quality  and  it  is  entirely
             possible that the brother's  health  would  deteriorate  as  a
             result of not taking his medication or even attending hospital
             appointments.

         33.       The  [claimant]  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
             immigration rules. There is a  concession  however  which  the
             [claimant] would presumably be able to meet if he had provided
             details from social services as  regards  their  inability  to
             provide care for the brother.

         34.       There   are   significant   compassionate   circumstances
             concerning the condition of the brother and the fact  that  he
             is  receiving  appropriate  treatment  from  both  the  health
             services  and  the  [claimant].  The  health  services  cannot
             provide day-to-day care  for  this  [claimant].  It  does  not
             appear necessary in this society  for  the  [claimant]  to  be
             removed at this stage.  In  fact,  his  presence  is  actually
             protecting the health of a British citizen. Having  considered
             the evidence as a whole I consider that the decision to refuse
             the [claimant] a limited period of leave in the United Kingdom
             to care for his brother is not proportionate to any legitimate
             public end sought  to  be  achieved.  I  considered  that  the
             [claimant] could be granted  a  limited  period  of  leave  to
             establish the  long-term  prognosis  of  the  brother  and  to
             ascertain the outcome of any treatment that is planned in  the
             next six months. I therefore allow the appeal under article  8
             ECHR."

The Secretary of State's grounds and the issues

17. In response to the Secretary of State's grounds, the claimant submitted
    a Reply (hereafter the "Reply") pursuant to rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. In her Reply, Ms Warren  relied,
    inter alia, upon [43] of the decision of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal ("AIT") in AG and  others  (Policies;  executive  discretions;
    Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082,  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in AB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1302 and Zackrocki.

18. The Secretary of State's grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i)     (Ground 1) The Judge erred by failing to make any findings as to
         whether the claimant meets the criteria  for  the  grant  of  leave
         under the Carer's Policy. The grounds contend that this is relevant
         to the balancing exercise outside the Rules.

         In this regard, I raised the question at the  commencement  of  the
         hearing whether the claimant's submissions on ground  1  (see  [21]
         below) rely upon [43] of the decision in AG out of context.

    ii)    (Ground 2) The judge failed to properly apply the weight  to  be
         given  to  the  public  interest.  The  grounds  contend  that  the
         Secretary of State's policy on immigration control is  set  out  in
         the Rules and that there are a number of policies outside the Rules
         which allow individuals who meet the terms of such  polices  to  be
         granted permission to remain in the United Kingdom. The  Rules  and
         the policies represent a statement by the Secretary of State as  to
         where she considered the public interest lies. The grounds  contend
         that this is a weighty consideration  which  the  judge  failed  to
         apply properly.

    iii)    (Ground  3)  The  judge  failed  to  identify  any  exceptional
         circumstances  in  this  case  which  would  outweigh  the   public
         interest.

    iv)    (Ground 4) The judge had no power to  direct  the  Secretary  of
         State to grant  the  claimant  six  months'  leave  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

         Mr Armstrong confirmed that ground 4 was misconceived  because  the
         judge had not directed the Secretary of State to grant the claimant
         six months' leave. He therefore did not pursue ground 4.

19. During the course of the hearing, I asked Ms Warren to  address  me  on
    the question whether the judge erred in his reliance upon the  decision
    of Carnwath J (as he then was) in Zackrocki.

20. At the commencement of the hearing, I asked the parties to  address  me
    on the question whether there was any  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    support his finding at [24] that: "there is no reason to doubt that  it
    would not be practical for  [the  sponsor's  two  married]  sisters  to
    provide assistance to the sponsor" and  at  [34]  that:  "(T)he  health
    services cannot provide day-to-day care for  this  [sponsor]".   During
    the course of his submissions in reply, Mr Armstrong submitted that the
    judge had also speculated  in  the  second  sentence  of  [33]  of  his
    decision.

Assessment

21. In relation to ground 1, the key point that Ms  Warren  made  was  that
    ground 1 misstates the law. Ms Warren submitted, in reliance upon  [43]
    of the decision AG, that the judge was not obliged to make any findings
    as to whether the claimant met the criteria under the  Carer's  Policy.
    She submitted that it was clear from AG that the judge was  obliged  to
    "take into account" the Carer's Policy which, she submitted, is exactly
    what he did.

22. Para 43 of AG reads:

         "43.     For the foregoing reasons we reject the argument that  the
             Tribunal is bound  or  entitled  to  consider  or  review  the
             exercise of a discretion outside the Immigration Rules.   Both
             principle and statute are against it;  and  the  decisions  to
             which we have been referred do not support it.   The  Tribunal
             is  bound  to  consider  whether  a  particular  decision   is
             proportionate, and in so doing has to assess the force of  the
             Secretary of State's claim that the decision is  necessary  in
             order to  maintain  immigration  control.   When  making  that
             assessment it takes into  account  any  declared  policy  that
             incorporates a presumption that immigration control  will  not
             be enforced against persons  of  a  category  into  which  the
             claimant falls.  The reason for  taking  such  a  policy  into
             account is that it throws light on the  needs  of  immigration
             control and so helps to  assess  the  proportionality  of  the
             decision in the individual case.  If there is no  policy  that
             creates a presumption, or if  the  claimant  is  not,  on  the
             facts, entitled to a benefit of any presumption in  a  policy,
             the policy is not likely  to  be  of  relevance  in  assessing
             proportionality and hence the claimant's Convention rights."

         (My emphasis)

  23. Ms Warren submitted that this guidance in AG was approved by the Court
      of Appeal in AB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1302. She relied upon
      paras 25, 26 and 29 of the judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AB
      (Jamaica) which read:

         "25.     There appears to  be  little  if  any  authority  on  this
             question. It is common ground  that  a  failure  by  the  Home
             Secretary to apply his own policy  will  render  his  decision
             "not in accordance with the law"  within  ground  (e)  of  the
             permissible grounds of  appeal  set  out  in  s.84(1)  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. But  it  is  the
             Home Secretary's contention that if  a  Home  Office  decision
             fails this test before the AIT, the immigration judge  has  no
             power to apply the policy and is limited to remitting the case
             so that the Home Office can do so. This is what the AIT in  AG
             (Kosovo) v Home Secretary [2007] UKIAT 0082,  �51,  considered
             to be the situation. For the rest, Parishil Patel for the Home
             Secretary submits that the proper course of  reasoning  is  to
             ask first whether the case comes within the  Rules  and  if  -
             like this case - it does not, to proceed to consider it  under
             the Convention. As to whether, in doing this, any  weight  can
             be given to the Home Secretary's own policy, he was  unwilling
             to commit himself.

         26.      The starting  point,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  that  no
             principle of law makes inadmissible on an appeal to the AIT  a
             policy used by the Home Secretary for the very  purpose  which
             the AIT is now addressing in the light of  the  Home  Office's
             submissions. Indeed, I find it troubling that the Home  Office
             presenting officer does not appear herself to have  drawn  the
             immigration judge's attention to the policy or to have  sought
             to put forward a case consistent with it. Doing so might  well
             have involved accepting that the Home Office did not regard  a
             simple  breach  of  immigration  control,  once  there  was  a
             qualifying marriage, as by  itself  a  sufficient  reason  for
             removal or deportation. It would also have  involved  pointing
             out that the Home Office  did,  however,  regard  insufficient
             proof of unreasonableness in relation to the settled spouse as
             justifying removal.

         ...

         29.      It follows in my view that the  determination  is  further
             flawed by its failure to bring  into  the  assessment  of  the
             proportionality of removing the appellant the  fact  that  the
             executive as a matter of policy does not regard an  overstayer
             who is now in a qualifying marriage as  ordinarily  liable  to
             removal if the settled spouse cannot reasonably be expected to
             go too. The immigration judge appears to have directed himself
             that policy is for the executive (which is what I take him  to
             have meant by "the elected powers in the state") and  not  for
             him. For the reasons given above, he was right  in  the  first
             half of this proposition but wrong in the second."

24. Ms Warren submitted that AG and AB (Jamaica) confirm that the judge was
    not required to decide, and indeed had  no  statutory  jurisdiction  to
    decide, whether the Carer's Policy was met, this being a  discretionary
    policy. Ms Warren submitted that what the judge had to do was to  "take
    into account" the Carer's policy "to ascertain whether the terms of the
    policy tell generally in favour of non-removal",  relying  upon  AG  at
    para 40. Ms Warren submitted that this was  precisely  what  the  judge
    did, at [27], [28] and [33] of his decision.

25. Ms Warren submitted that the Secretary of  State's  reliance  upon  the
    Supreme Court's  judgment  in  Mandalia  v  SSHD  [2015]  UKSC  59  was
    misguided because Mandalia was not concerned at all with  the  question
    of how the Tribunal should approach the question of policy in  a  human
    rights appeal. Mandalia concerned the question of whether the Secretary
    of State had correctly applied her own policy to the application of the
    claimant in that case.

26. I asked Ms Warren whether reliance upon AG was misconceived or  out  of
    context. In essence, Ms Warren maintained her position.

27. I am satisfied that Ms Warren  is  relying  upon  [43]  of  AG  out  of
    context, for the following reasons:

28. At [30] of AG, the Tribunal explained that claims based on human rights
    must be assessed  in  priority  to  claims  based  on  the  hope  of  a
    favourable exercise  of  a  discretion.  The  Tribunal  said  that,  in
    general, the order  must  be  rights  first,  then  possibilities.  The
    Tribunal said at [43] that, where  one  is  dealing  with  "a  declared
    policy that incorporates a presumption that  immigration  control  will
    not be enforced against persons of a category into which  the  claimant
    falls", then a judge, in considering whether a particular  decision  is
    proportionate, "takes into account" the policy because "it throws light
    on the needs  of  immigration  control  and  so  helps  to  assess  the
    proportionality of the decision in the individual case".  The  Tribunal
    went on to say that:

         "If there is no policy  that  creates  a  presumption,  or  if  the
         claimant is not, on  the  facts,  entitled  to  a  benefit  of  any
         presumption in a  policy,  the  policy  is  not  likely  to  be  of
         relevance in assessing proportionality  and  hence  the  claimant's
         Convention rights."

29. In AG, there were three claimants. In the cases of the claimants AG and
    PB, the relevant policy was  D5/96  which  was  said  to  set  out  the
    criteria to be considered when deciding whether to  pursue  enforcement
    action against families of  minor  dependent  children  who  have  been
    living continuously in the UK for seven years or more.

30. The decision in AG was promulgated on 7 August 2007 and published on 13
    September 2007, some years before the implementation of the  amendments
    to the Rules by HC 194 with effect from 9 July 2012. The  policy  D5/96
    is now incorporated in modified form both in  primary  legislation  and
    the Rules, in the case of the former by s.117B(6) and the definition of
    "qualifying child" in s.117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") and, in the case of the latter, by  EX.1  (a)
    of Appendix FM.

31. In the case of the claimant BE in AG, the policy in question was DP3/96
    which was described in the  refusal  letter  addressed  to  BE  in  the
    following terms:

         "Guidelines  have  been  laid  down  for  dealing   with   marriage
         applications from over-stayers (a document commonly referred to  as
         DP3/96).   These  guidelines  state  that  it  will   normally   be
         appropriate to consider granting leave to remain, exceptionally, on
         the basis of a marriage if we are satisfied that, (i) the  marriage
         is genuine and subsisting; and (ii) that it pre-dates  the  service
         of an enforcement notice by at least two years; and (iii)  that  it
         is unreasonable to expect the settled spouse to  accompany  his/her
         spouse on removal."

32. The requirement in DP3/96 for  the  marriage  to  pre-date  enforcement
    action by at least two years is now present, in modified  form,  as  an
    eligibility requirement in Appendix FM of the Rules and the requirement
    that it be unreasonable for the settled  spouse  to  accompany  his/her
    spouse on removal is now present,  in  modified  form,  in  EX.1(b)  of
    Appendix FM of the Rules.

33. AB (Jamaica) was decided on 6 December 2007, i.e. before 9  July  2012.
    AB (Jamaica) concerned DP3/96. It is clear from the Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment that DP3/96 did "throw  light  on  the  needs  of  immigration
    control" because it described circumstances in which there  should  not
    be enforcement action against a spouse who did not  qualify  for  leave
    under the Rules. In other words, DP3/96 indicated policy considerations
    that were relevant to proportionality.

34. Accordingly, it is plain that D5/96 and DP3/96 were  each  "a  declared
    policy that incorporates a presumption that  immigration  control  will
    not be enforced against persons of a category into which  the  claimant
    falls" in the words of the Tribunal at [43]  of  the  decision  in  AG.
    Thus, they were relevant in deciding proportionality because they threw
    light on the needs of immigration control.

35. Whilst the principles that emerge from AG and AB (Jamaica) continue  to
    apply, care needs to be  exercised  in  view  of  the  fact  that  many
    policies that were considered to be  relevant  to  the  proportionality
    exercise under Article 8 now fall for consideration in deciding Article
    8 claims through having become incorporated in primary legalisation  or
    the Rules or both. It is a matter of common sense and logic  that  such
    policies as were relevant to the assessment  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8 should have been, or should be, incorporated within s.117B or
    the Rules. One would therefore expect  that  those  policies  that  now
    exist outside the Rules relate to the general discretion of  discretion
    outside the Rules, although of course one should bear in mind that this
    may not necessarily be the case. It is therefore important  to  examine
    carefully the terms of any policy relied upon  in  order  to  ascertain
    whether it does throw light on the needs of immigration control in  the
    particular case.

36. I have quoted the relevant parts of the  Carer's  Policy.  Whilst  para
    17.3, which concerns the grant of leave to remain,  sets  out  "points"
    that are amongst those that "should be borne in mind  by  caseworkers",
    the points in question do not indicate the circumstances in  which  the
    Secretary of State considers that leave to remain should be granted  or
    removal should not take place. The second paragraph under  the  heading
    "Introduction" states that "leave should only be granted  where  it  is
    warranted by particularly compelling and compassionate  circumstances".
    However, there is nothing at all  in  the  policy  which  explains  how
    caseworkers will assess whether there are "particularly compelling  and
    compassionate circumstances" in any case.

37. Ms Warren submitted that the Carer's Policy shows that the Secretary of
    State recognises that, in some cases  where  there  are  "compassionate
    circumstances", it can be in the public  interest  to  grant  leave  to
    remain if there is a family member who provides care  that  is  needed.
    However, the fact is that there is something  nothing  in  the  Carer's
    Policy which assists in determining when  the  circumstances  are  such
    that the Secretary of State recognises that the public interest  yields
    to the individual case,  save  that  the  opening  para  17  refers  to
    "particularly compelling and compassionate circumstances", a  threshold
    that did not feature in the judge's reasoning.

38. In addition, para 17.3.1 of the Carer's Policy specifically states that
    applicants must be informed that leave is being granted on  the  strict
    understanding that during the period  of  the  leave  that  is  granted
    arrangements will be made for the future care of the patient  and  that
    it is unlikely that any further leave will  be  granted.  The  guidance
    does not require caseworkers to consider an individual's  human  rights
    at this stage. If the Carer's Policy  was  relevant  to  the  needs  of
    immigration  control,  one  would  expect  to  see  some  guidance   to
    caseworkers by which they are reminded to consider the human rights  of
    any individuals involved when considering an  application  for  further
    leave to remain. Para 17.4 of the  Carer's  Policy,  which  deals  with
    requests for further leave to remain, is silent on this point.

39. Furthermore, as is well-known, applications for leave to remain on  the
    basis of an individual's human  rights  are  made  on  forms  that  are
    specifically designated for such applications, whereas it is clear from
    paras 17.1 and 17.2 of the Carer's Policy, that  applicants  for  entry
    clearance and for leave to enter in order  to  care  for  someone  must
    satisfy the Rules that relate to general visitors.  Para  17.3  of  the
    Carer's Policy, which deals with applications for leave to remain, also
    makes the point that most applications  for  leave  under  the  Carer's
    Policy will be from individuals  who  are  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    visitors. Applications for leave under the Carer's Policy are not  made
    on the forms that are used for applications for leave to remain on  the
    basis of Article 8. The type of form to be used and the fact  that  the
    Carer's Policy states that the Rules relating to general visitors  must
    be satisfied suggest strongly that the Carer's Policy  relates  to  the
    Secretary of State's exercise of  discretion  outside  the  Rules  when
    considering an application for leave as a visitor in order to care  for
    someone.

40. Importantly, the  phrase  "particularly  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances" is one that requires an evaluative judgment, in my view.
    Equally important is the fact that there  is  nothing  in  the  Carer's
    Policy that states that leave for a short period will be granted in all
    cases  in  which  there   are   such   "particularly   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances". The sentence: "... leave should  only  be
    granted  where  it  is  warranted  by   particularly   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances" indicates that, whilst  the  Secretary  of
    State requires there to be particularly  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances  for  leave  to  be  granted,  the  existence   of   such
    particularly  compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances  does   not
    automatically lead to a decision to  grant  such  leave.  This  further
    suggests  that,  even  if  there  are   particularly   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances, a decision is taken whether to grant leave
    in the exercise of discretion.

41. Furthermore, unlike DP5/96 and DP3/96 which set out clear criteria  for
    the application of the policy in question, there is no such clarity  in
    the case of the Carer's Policy. All we have are the words "particularly
    compelling and compassionate circumstances" in the opening paragraph 17
    and a list of points at 17.3 that are amongst  those  that  caseworkers
    should bear in mind.

42. All  of  the  above,  taken  together  with  the  phrase  "particularly
    compelling and compassionate circumstances"  and  the  fact  that  that
    phrase is one that requires an evaluative judgment, lead me to conclude
    that the Carer's Policy  operates  in  relation  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's residual discretion and does not throw light on  the  needs  of
    immigration control in the Tribunal's assessment of proportionality  in
    relation to Article 8. In the words of the Tribunal in AG at [43],  the
    Carer's Policy is not one that "creates a presumption that  immigration
    control will not be enforced against persons of a category  into  which
    the claimant falls".

43. I have considered whether the judgment in Zackrocki indicates that  the
    Carer's Policy is relevant to the assessment of proportionality  in  an
    individual case. I have concluded  that  it  does  not.  In  the  first
    paragraph, Carnwath J (as  he  then  was)  said  specifically  that  he
    considered it unnecessary to seek assistance from the ECHR.

44. It is clear that the judge in the instant case took  into  account  the
    Carer's Policy. He referred to the "concession" at [33]. Indeed, it was
    Ms Warren's submission that he took the Carer's Policy into account (as
    opposed to making factual findings on the policy) and did  not  err  by
    doing so.

45. Since the  Carer's  Policy  does  not  throw  light  on  the  needs  of
    immigration control, the judge erred in law by taking into  account  an
    irrelevant consideration. This error is material given that  the  judge
    said, at [33], that there was a concession which "the [claimant]  would
    presumably be able to meet if  he  had  provided  details  from  social
    services as regards their inability to provide care for  the  brother".
    Plainly, he relied upon his entirely speculative assumptions about  the
    evidence that the claimant may be able to produce and the evidence that
    may be forthcoming from social services in a material way to reach  his
    decision on proportionality.

46. However, even if I am wrong in concluding that the Carer's  Policy  was
    irrelevant to the assessment of proportionality under  Article  8,  the
    judge materially erred in law for the following reasons:

47. Ms Warren submitted that ground 1 is  incorrect  in  stating  that  the
    judge was obliged to make any findings as to whether the claimant meets
    the criteria for the grant of  leave  under  the  Carer's  Policy.  She
    submitted that the Tribunal made it clear at [43] of its decision in AG
    that a judge was not obliged to make any findings  as  to  whether  the
    claimant met the Carer's Policy.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    obliged  to  take  the  Carer's  Policy  into  account   in   assessing
    proportionality, which, she submitted, is exactly what he did.

48. I reject this submission. At  [43]  of  AG,  in  particular  the  first
    sentence, the Tribunal was dealing  with  the  submissions  before  it,
    summarised at [33] of its  decision  to  the  effect  that,  where  the
    Secretary of State has published a policy incorporating  a  discretion,
    the Tribunal is to make the discretionary decision for itself.  In  the
    first  sentence  of  [43],  the  Tribunal  was  merely  rejecting  that
    submission and  making  the  point  that  a  judge  is  precluded  from
    exercising any discretion under the policy. The Tribunal was not saying
    that the judge was precluded from making relevant findings of  fact  in
    order to decide what light is shed on the needs of immigration  control
    in a given case in assessing proportionality. By relevant  findings  of
    fact, I refer to findings concerning whether  an  individual  satisfies
    any criteria that may be set out in a policy for it to be applied in an
    individual's favour. In the instant case, the judge should have decided
    whether  there  were   "particularly   compelling   and   compassionate
    circumstances" in the instant case.

49. However, even if I am wrong in concluding that the  judge  should  have
    decided whether there were particularly  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances in the instant case and even if Ms Warren is correct that
    AG required the judge to "take into account" the Carer's Policy without
    making findings of fact in relation to it,  there  is  nothing  in  the
    judge's decision that shows that he was even aware of, or applied,  the
    relevant high threshold that is  necessarily  implicit  in  the  phrase
    "particularly  compelling   and   compassionate   circumstances",   the
    threshold at which the Carer's Policy indicates that the  Secretary  of
    State's view is that the state's interests in immigration  control  may
    in the exercise of discretion yield to the individual circumstances, at
    least so as to result in a the grant of leave for a short  period.  The
    judge's failure to have  regard  to  the  relevant  high  threshold  is
    plainly a material error of law in the assessment  of  proportionality.
    In this regard, I have noted that, at [34] of his decision,  the  judge
    said  that  there   are   "significant   compassionate   circumstances"
    concerning the condition of the sponsor.  However, this is a different,
    and lower, threshold.

50. I shall now turn to the judge's reliance upon Zackrocki.

51. It is clear from [27]-[28] of his  decision  that  the  judge  drew  an
    analogy between the instant case and Zackrocki on  the  basis  that  in
    both cases there was no evidential basis to support  the  Secretary  of
    State's assertion that adequate arrangements could be made for the care
    of the relative who was said to require care.

52. However, not only was Zackrocki a judicial review case,  the  Secretary
    of State had stated in terms in Zackrocki  that  adequate  arrangements
    could be made for the care of the relative in question but she had  not
    given any reasons for not accepting the view expressed  by  the  social
    services authority backed by a doctor that there were  no  satisfactory
    alternative arrangements which could be  made  and  that  care  by  the
    claimants in that case was by far the best solution. The conclusion  in
    Zackrocki was therefore simply that the Secretary of  State's  decision
    should be quashed as being Wednesbury unreasonable.

53. I agree with Ms Warren that the  Carer's  Policy  gave  effect  to  the
    judgment in Zackrocki, not  least  because  Zackrocki  is  specifically
    mentioned in the opening paragraph under  the  heading  "Introduction".
    However, as I have explained, the conclusion in  Zackrocki  was  simply
    that the Secretary of State had not given  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    view expressed by the social services authority backed by a doctor that
    there were no satisfactory alternative arrangements which could be made
    and that care by the claimants  in  that  case  was  by  far  the  best
    solution. In other words, the process by which the Secretary  of  State
    made her decision was in error. No doubt this is the rationale for  the
    list of points  set  out  at  para  17.3  of  the  Carer's  Policy  for
    caseworkers to bear in mind.

54. Ms Warren submitted that Zackrocki was relevant because it  is  a  case
    that concerns where the balance lies in relation to proportionality.  I
    reject this submission. Not only did Carnwath J make it  clear  in  the
    opening paragraph that it was unnecessary to seek assistance  from  the
    ECHR, I could not see anything in  Zackrocki  from  which  any  general
    guidance can be drawn on the assessment of  proportionality  generally,
    much less the proposition that Ms Warren drew from Zackrocki,  that  it
    decided that if a judge finds that a relative is providing unique  care
    then  the  public  interest  does  not  require  removal.  That  is  an
    astonishing generalised proposition  which  I  have  no  hesitation  in
    rejecting.

55. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law
    in drawing the analogy he drew between the instant case and  Zackrocki.
    Whereas there was evidence in  Zackrocki  from  social  services  which
    stated positively that no satisfactory alternative  arrangements  could
    be made, there was no such evidence from social services in the instant
    case.

56. Furthermore, in Zackrocki, Carnwath J (as he then was) considered it "a
    critical issue" that the individual who required care  was  "a  British
    citizen and  entitled  to  remain  here  and  to  be  looked  after  in
    accordance with the policies and duties which apply to citizens of this
    country". However, in R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11,  the  Supreme
    Court, including Lord Carnwath (as he now is) held (at  [68]),  in  the
    context of a marriage case, that, whilst the right of a British citizen
    under section 1(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 was an important  right,
    it does not entitle the British citizen to insist that his or her  non-
    national partner should also be entitled to live in the United  Kingdom
    when that partner may lawfully be refused leave to remain to remain.

57. Thus, even if some general guidance can be drawn from Zackrocki on  the
    issue of proportionality, which I do not accept,  it  is  by  no  means
    clear  that  such  guidance  remains  unaltered   notwithstanding   the
    amendments to the Rules by HC 194 with effect from  9  July  2012,  the
    implementation of s.117B of the 2002 Act and Agyarko.

58. This is a convenient point at  which  to  consider  whether  the  judge
    speculated at [24], [33] and [34] of his decision.

59. Ms Warren submitted that the reason why the  judge  did  not  have  any
    evidence from social services that the care  that  the  sponsor  needed
    could not be provided by social service is  because  the  claimant  was
    providing the  required  care  adequately  and  it  was  the  sponsor's
    preference that he should do so. She submitted that the  judge  had  to
    reach a decision on proportionality on such evidence as he had.

60. In effect, the submission is that  the  subjective  preference  of  the
    sponsor for the claimant to provide the care that he requires makes  it
    unnecessary to consider whether such care can adequately be provided by
    social services or someone who is not subject the immigration  control.
    In other words, that there is no need to inject  any  objectivity  into
    the analysis. I reject this submission as wholly untenable. Just  as  a
    judge must consider, in a case involving  the  right  to  family  life,
    whether family life can be enjoyed  elsewhere,  so  too  must  a  judge
    consider whether it is reasonable for a patient who  requires  care  to
    receive such care from social services or someone who is not subject to
    immigration control if adequate care can be provided. In the absence of
    any evidence from social services, it is difficult to see how  a  judge
    can conclude that the decision is disproportionate, if  due  weight  is
    placed on the state's interests.

61. In the instant case, it is the personal preference  of  the  claimant's
    brother that he should receive care from the claimant. Given that there
    was no evidence before the judge that such care as he needed could  not
    be adequately provided by the social services, I am satisfied that  the
    judge speculated when he found, at [34]  that  "(t)he  health  services
    cannot provide day-to-day care" for the sponsor and that  he  erred  in
    law by so speculating.

62. I am also satisfied that the judge speculated at  [33]  when  he  found
    that the claimant would presumably be able to meet  the  terms  of  the
    Carer's Policy "if he had provided  details  from  social  services  as
    regards their inability to provide care" of the sponsor.

63. I am further satisfied that, in speculating as he did at [33] and [34],
    the judge materially erred in law. It is therefore not necessary for me
    to consider whether the judge speculated at [24].

64. Finally, I turn to grounds 2 and 3.

65. In relation to ground 2, I have considered the judge's  reasoning  very
    carefully. It is plain, in my judgement, that he did not make it  clear
    that he had placed due weight on the state's interests  in  immigration
    control. It may be possible to infer that  his  mind  was  directed  at
    certain points to the state's interests  in  immigration  control.  For
    example, in the first and second sentences  of  [32]  of  his  decision
    where he mentioned that the claimant has been in the United Kingdom for
    a relatively short period of time and that he came as a student and the
    sentence  at  [34]:  "I  consider  that  the  decision   ...   is   not
    proportionate to any legitimate public end sought to be achieved".

66. However, there is nothing that shows that he was aware that the state's
    interests are a weighty consideration. Indeed, I am satisfied that  his
    ultimate conclusion, that the decision  was  not  proportionate,  could
    only have been reached by an impermissible failure to take the  state's
    interests into account, given that there was  no  evidence  before  him
    that the care which was required by the sponsor could not be adequately
    provided by the social services. He effectively completely marginalised
    the state's interests impermissibly.

67. I am also satisfied that ground 3, that the judge  failed  to  identify
    any exceptional circumstances which outweigh the state's interests,  is
    established, once  one  strips  away  the  judge's  erred  approach  in
    relation to the Carer's Policy  and  the  decision  in  Zackrocki,  his
    speculative findings at [33] and [34] and his impermissible failure  to
    take into account the state's interests in immigration control  (ground
    2).

68. In summary:

    i)     (Ground 1) The judge erred in law by  taking  into  account  the
         Carer's  Policy  in  his  assessment  of  proportionality.  In  the
         alternative, he erred in law by failing make  any  findings  as  to
         whether  there  were  particularly  compelling  and   compassionate
         circumstances in the instant case. In the further alternative,  the
         judge erred in law by failing to apply or "take into  account"  the
         correct  high  threshold  indicated  by  the  phrase  "particularly
         compelling and compassionate circumstances".

    ii)    The judge erred in law in drawing the mistaken analogy  he  drew
         between Zackrocki and the facts in the instant case. Whereas  there
         was  evidence  in  Zackrocki  from  social  services  which  stated
         positively that no satisfactory alternative arrangements  could  be
         made, there was no  such  evidence  from  social  services  in  the
         instant case.

    iii)   I am satisfied that the judge erred in  law  by  speculating  at
         [33] and [34] of his decision.

    iv)    (Ground 2) The judge erred in law by  failing  impermissibly  to
         take into account the state's interests in immigration control.

    v)     (Ground 3) The  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  identify
         exceptional circumstances which outweigh the state's interests.

69. I am further satisfied that each of the above errors were  material  to
    the judge's decision that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was  not
    proportionate.

70. I set aside the judge's decision on proportionality.

71. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of
    the Upper Tribunal recognises that it may not be possible for the Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

72. At the hearing, Ms Warren submitted that the appeal should be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal because the appellant  would  wish  to  rely
    upon further evidence. Mr Armstrong agreed that the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal given that a period of two and half
    years have elapsed since the appeal was heard by  Judge  Mitchell   and
    also because his appeal was allowed by Judge Mitchell.

73. The fact that the appellant wishes to rely upon further evidence is not
    a good enough reason to justify remittal, nor  is  the  lapse  of  time
    since the appeal was heard by Judge Mitchell.

74. I have considered whether the appeal should be remitted in view of  the
    fact that the appellant's appeal was allowed on the last  occasion.  As
    will be seen (below), I have decided to preserve some of  the  findings
    made by Judge Mitchell in relation to the appellant's Article 8  claim.
    In any event, the appellant's case  has  been  put  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and considered by it,  albeit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in its assessment. It cannot therefore be  said
    that para 7.2(a) of the Practice Statements applies.

75. This is not a complicated  case.  It  does  not  raise  any  issues  in
    relation to  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection  or  Article  3.  The
    appellant only relies upon Article 8. The issues raised in relation  to
    Article 8 are not complicated. It cannot therefore be  said  that  para
    7.2(b) of the Practice Statements applies.

76. I am therefore not satisfied that para 7.2 (a) or (b) of  the  Practice
    Statements apply.   The  Upper  Tribunal  will  therefore  re-make  the
    decision on the appellant's appeal. The case is reserved to myself.

77. The findings of Judge Mitchell at [16]-[23] stand on the evidence  that
    was before him. His findings do not otherwise stand. This  means  that,
    if the evidence before me at the next hearing  is  different  from  the
    evidence  that  was  before  Judge  Mitchell  and  such  evidence  puts
    credibility in issue, I will be entitled to make my  own  findings  and
    where appropriate, depart from the findings of Judge Mitchell.

78. I will approach the Carer's Policy and my assessment of proportionality
    under Article 8 as follows:

    i)     In the first place, by treating the Carer's Policy as irrelevant
         to the proportionality exercise under Article 8, i.e. I will assess
         proportionality as if the Carer's Policy did not exist.

    ii)    In order  to  adopt  a  "belts  and  braces"  approach,  I  will
         consider,  in  the  alternative,  whether  there  are  particularly
         compelling and compassionate  circumstances  in  the  instant  case
         having regard to the list of points that are set out at  para  17.3
         of the  Carer's  Policy  along  with  any  other  considerations  I
         consider   relevant   and   decide   whether   the   decision    is
         disproportionate in all of the circumstances of the case.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of material
    errors of law. I set aside the decision. The case will be re-listed for
    a resumed hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.


[pic]
Signed      Date: 8 September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


