
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21826/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 May 2015                          |On 14 May 2015                      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         The Hon Mrs JUSTICE McGOWAN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MERCAN YILDIRIM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood of counsel instructed by Castle Park
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the reasons set out below we find that there was such an  error  of
    law in the making of the decision of the First tier  Tribunal  that  it
    should be set aside.

 2. Mrs Mercan Yildirim is a national of Turkey, born on 1  January  19944.
    Her appeal to the First tier  Tribunal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds and the Secretary of State now appeals that decision.



BACKGROUND

 3. Mercan Yildirim originally applied for a visa to enter the UK to  visit
    her son, Ruhi Yildirim, who is now her sponsor.  That  application  was
    refused on 24 October 2011 on the basis that  she  did  not  intend  to
    return to Turkey. Her appeal against that refusal was allowed  and  she
    entered the UK on 12 June 2012 with 6 months leave to remain.  She  has
    over stayed that leave and has been liable  to  administrative  removal
    since December 2012.

 4. On 31 January 2014 she applied for indefinite leave to remain,  outside
    the Immigration Rules, on compassionate grounds. On 25 April  2014  the
    SSHD refused that application in  a  detailed  letter  considering  the
    evidence in support of the application on compassionate grounds outside
    the rules. Much of that evidence set out the various medical conditions
    from which she suffers, in particular vascular dementia.

 5. Her appeal from that refusal was heard on 16  December  2014  and  that
    appeal was allowed by a decision given on 2 January  2015.  The  appeal
    was refused under the Immigration Rules  but  allowed  on  humanitarian
    grounds. The SSHD now appeals that decision on the  ground  that  there
    were material errors of law, in that the Judge failed;

          a. To give adequate consideration to the SSHD's policy  on  adult
             dependent relatives, even though the Appellant was in  the  UK
             at the time of her application,

          b. To provide adequate reasoning for the findings relating to the
             engagement of  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her
             sponsor,

          c. To provide adequate reasoning for the finding that family life
             was engaged between the Appellant and her grandchildren,

          d. To give  sufficient  weight  to  any  countervailing  factors,
             whether under s. 117B or not and

          e. By attaching too much weight to those findings upon which  the
             appeal was allowed.

SUBMISSIONS

 6. The SSHD submits that even though the First tier Tribunal went  outside
    the rules general consideration should have been given  to  the  policy
    and that the fact that such high standards are required to satisfy  the
    rules should influence consideration of those factors even outside  the
    rules.

 7. She further submits that inadequate weight  was  given  to  the  public
    interest factors in s. 117B Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002. In particular she argued;

          a. on the issue of immigration control that  the  Appellant  does
             not meet the rules and is in the UK as an overstayer,

          b. that in considering the question of  her  inability  to  speak
             English, finding that the fact she is aged  71  and  therefore
             the requirement did not bite meant  that  primary  legislation
             was  being  relied  upon  at  times  in  the   reasoning   and
             disregarded at others,

          c. that the financial burden upon  the  tax  payer,  through  her
             dependence on the NHS, was a  significant  factor  and  should
             have been given considerable weight.

 8. The SSHD further argued that there were errors in the reasoning on  the
    issue of family and private life because any relationship contracted on
    the basis of care provided had been contracted  during  the  period  in
    which the Appellant had been here as an overstayer and therefore  on  a
    very precarious basis.

 9. The SSHD argued that the  final  balancing  exercise  which  the  Judge
    carried out did not give any or sufficient weight to  the  findings  of
    fact made. In particular, having found that  the  appellant  did  still
    have close family in Turkey, that fact was not put into the balance  in
    deciding the difficulties facing the appellant if obliged to return  to
    Turkey.

10. The Response made under Rule 24 sets out the competing contentions.  It
    is said that the SSHD had never previously raised the  point  that  the
    policy in respect of adult dependent relatives should be considered for
    those outside the rules as well as those within. In any  event,  it  is
    argued, that it would be wrong to require such a consideration in  this
    case when the appellant could not have met the requirements even if she
    had applied from outside the UK under the rules.

11. In response on  the  family  life  point  it  was  submitted  that  the
    reasoning was more than adequate and that the Judge was right  to  find
    that the appellant was more then  unusually  dependent  upon  her  son.
    Further it was said that the reasoning given in relation to the  family
    ties  between  the  appellant  and  her  grandchildren  was  more  than
    sufficient.

12. It is further submitted that there was no error in that all the  points
    raised by the SSHD under s. 177 were addressed  and  given  appropriate
    weight. It is not for this tribunal to substitute its own assessment.

DISCUSSION

13. This elderly lady clearly does suffer from  a  number  of  degenerative
    complaints, most serious of which is  her  dementia.  Nobody  could  be
    anything other than sympathetic towards her situation and to admire her
    son and his family for the care they give her.  Those  factors  do  not
    determine the outcome of the application of the process in her case.

14. She is in the UK unlawfully and it is accepted that she came to the  UK
    in order to obtain free medical treatment, rather than to be  re-united
    with her son. The First tier Tribunal found that she still had ties  in
    Turkey and did not accept the sponsor's evidence that his brothers  had
    disappeared.

15. This lady cannot satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and
    the Tribunal found, "that there are such circumstances for me to assess
    the matter outside of the Immigration  Rules  because  of  the  medical
    condition of the Appellant  and  the  position  of  the  sponsor  as  a
    refugee". The case of Nagre v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  brings
    together the jurisprudence on the position of an individual  who  falls
    outside  the  rules,  "where  family  life  is  established  when   the
    immigration status of the  claimant  is  precarious,  removal  will  be
    disproportionate only in exceptional cases".

16. We find that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the  finding  that  the
    circumstances as described were exceptional within the meaning  of  the
    authority. Many elderly adult  dependent  relatives  will  suffer  from
    degenerative conditions;  a  substantial  number  of  those  will  have
    dementia. Sadly that can not be described as exceptional.  To  conflate
    the son's status  as  a  refugee  is  to  avoid  consideration  of  any
    insurmountable obstacle that might prevent his return,  as  her  family
    member, to Turkey. That is a separate consideration.

17. The Judge went on, to consider s.117B, in the event that that reasoning
    was wrong. Here, he also fell into error, he found,  "this  is  a  case
    where the rights of the appellant ought to be outweighed by the  strong
    public interest considerations in s.117B". He  then  went  on  only  to
    outline the problems that her medical  condition  would  cause  on  the
    journey if she were sent back to Turkey. That is flawed reasoning,  the
    undoubted difficulties of the journey could be met  in  many  practical
    ways, not least of which would be a family member travelling with her.

18. The Judge of the First tier Tribunal erred in law  and  accordingly  we
    allow the appeal by  setting  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

19. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Where  the  facts  or  ensuing
    conclusions are unclear on a crucial issue at the heart of  an  appeal,
    as they are in this case,  effectively  there  has  not  been  a  valid
    determination of those issues. The errors of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge vitiates all other findings of  fact  and  the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

20. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    we do so on the basis that this is a case which falls  squarely  within
    the Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect
    of the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair hearing and that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, we find that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

DECISION

    We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    We remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade afresh.




Signed        Date 7 May 2015

Mrs Justice McGowan



DIRECTIONS
   1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House;
   2. It has been listed for hearing on 2 July 2015;
   3. The estimated length of hearing is 2 hours;
   4. No findings of fact are preserved and the appeal is to be  decided  de
   novo;
   5. It is to be relisted before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  except  the
   Judge who heard the case previously;



Signed        Date 7 May 2015

Mrs Justice McGowan


