
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21780/2014
                                                               IA/21778/2014
                                                               IA/21777/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 2 July 2015                       |On 10 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                        MR MOHAMMAD REZA MASOUDIPOUR
                             MRS SOGHRA HEIDARI
                           MISS MOBINA MASOUDIPOUR
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hudson, In-House Counsel for Elder Rahimi,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants are citizens of Iran. The  first  appellant  is  the
         husband of the second and the first and second appellants  are  the
         parents of the third. The first appellant first entered the  United
         Kingdom on 21 June 2009 with  conferred  leave  as  a  Work  Permit
         Holder from 25 March 2009 until  25  March  2014.   On  2  May  the
         respondent made a decision to refuse to vary his  leave  to  remain
         and to remove  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
         Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act in  respect  of  all  three
         appellants. The second and the third appellants first  entered  the
         United Kingdom as the first appellant's dependents on 19 July  2011
         with entry clearance giving them leave to  remain  until  25  March
         2014. Reasons for her decision are given in the decision letter  of
         the same date. The first appellant's date of  birth  is  31  August
         1955 and the  second  appellant's  is  20  March  1969.  The  third
         appellant's date of birth is 9  July  1996.  At  the  date  of  the
         impugned decision the third appellant was a minor. Judge  Aujla,  a
         Judge of the First Tier Tribunal, heard their appeals  against  the
         respondent's decision. He dismissed the appeals for  reasons  given
         in his determination, which was promulgated on 28 January 2015.

      2. The appellants sought and were granted permission to appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal by Judge PJM Hollingworth, a Judge of the First Tier
         Tribunal. His decision is dated 1 April 2015.

      3. In granting permission Judge  Hollingworth  said,  "The  permission
         application refers to the Judge failing to  mention  or  take  into
         consideration the presence of two further children of the Appellant
         one of whom had been granted asylum and the other who had an asylum
         appeal pending in the Upper Tribunal.  An  arguable  error  of  law
         arises in relation to the scope of the issues pertaining to whether
         or not there would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8.  The  permission
         application was late. I am satisfied that good  reasons  exist  for
         granting the application having considered the merits."

      4. After hearing submissions from Mr Hudson and Mr Tufan I reserved my
         decision. Mr Hudson took me through the written grounds  of  appeal
         upon which permission had been granted  -  cross-referencing  these
         with the determination. Mr  Tufan  argued  that  whilst  there  are
         factual errors in the determination,  these  are  not  sufficiently
         material  to  the  decision,  as  evidence  had   not   established
         "compelling circumstances" for the Judge to have engaged himself on
         merits of the claim under Article 8.

      5. In my judgment the decision of Judge Aujla is unsustainable  as  it
         is based on incomplete facts, which are material to  the  decision.
         It s evident from the determination that  the  Judge  has  paid  no
         regard to the presence and status of  two  other  children  of  the
         first two appellants, one of whom has a  refugee  status.  Also  in
         stating that the third appellant had applied for asylum  which  had
         been refused, the Judge showed that he was confused in that it  was
         not the third appellant who had sought asylum in  the  UK  but  her
         sister Mona. The Judge also gave no consideration whatsoever to the
         third appellant being a minor at the date of decision and that  her
         best interests required to be taken account of. I am satisfied that
         the grounds upon which permission was  granted  establish  material
         error of law in the determination and therefore  the  determination
         is set aside. In the circumstances of this case it would be in  the
         interests of justice for the appeals to be heard afresh by a  Judge
         of the First tier Tribunal other than Judge Aujla and I so  direct.






    K Drabu CBE
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    Date: 7 September 2015
