

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 20 June 2017                               |On 21 June 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's minor children.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   He  entered  the  UK  on  8
    February 2011 as a student.  His leave was extended to 27 October 2014.
     The appellant married a dual British / Pakistani citizen when  he  had
    leave to remain as a student in an  Islamic  ceremony  on  18  February
    2012.  This marriage was registered on 5 November 2013.  They have  two
    British citizen children together and the appellant's wife is  pregnant
    with their third child.


 3. When applying for further leave as a student the appellant relied  upon
    an English language test.  In a decision dated 19  May  2015  the  SSHD
    refused the appellant's application for leave,  on  the  basis  of  his
    family life.  The appellant was unable to meet the suitability criteria
    because the SSHD concluded that he had employed  deception  in  relying
    upon an invalid English test.

 4. In a succinct decision dated 25 April  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made a clear finding of fact that the appellant failed  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation for the invalid English test and  found  that  the
    SSHD had displaced the burden upon her  that  the  appellant  had  used
    deception.  The First-tier Tribunal went on to dismiss the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 5. In a decision dated 31 March 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chapman
    did not find  the  grounds  addressing  the  deception  finding  to  be
    arguable.  She however  considered  it  to  be  arguable  applying  the
    'Robinson obvious' principle derived from R v SSHD ex p Robinson [1997]
    EWCA Civ 3090 that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law  in
    its consideration of Article 8 because no consideration  was  given  to
    the best interests of the children or section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Hearing

 6. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Harrison conceded  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal committed a material error of law in failing  to  address
    section 117B of the 2002  Act,  in  particular  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting the children to reside in Pakistan - see section 117B(6).  Mr
    Harrison was clearly correct to make  this  concession.   Although  the
    First-tier Tribunal touches upon the children and Article 8 at  3.8  of
    the decision, there is a complete failure to apply the factual findings
    to section 117B.  Both representatives agreed that I could  and  should
    remake the Article 8 decision, but the  First-tier  Tribunal's  factual
    findings are preserved.


 7. Mr Ahmed invited me to adjourn the hearing to  enable  the  appellant's
    solicitors to gather further evidence relevant to the best interests of
    the children and  the  reasonableness  question.   I  pointed  out  the
    presumption set out at (4) of the directions dated 3 May 2017 - in  the
    event that the First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside  as  erroneous
    in law, the decision will be remade at the same hearing.  This will  be
    based upon the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  and  any  fresh
    evidence submitted in accordance with direction (5).   The  appellant's
    solicitors clearly anticipated that the matter  would  proceed  to  the
    giving of evidence and requested an Urdu interpreter  for  the  hearing
    before me, who was duly provided.     Mr Ahmed did not  rely  upon  any
    specific matter, medical, educational or  otherwise  that  necessitated
    obtaining further  evidence.   Given  the  children's  young  ages  and
    apparent good health, this is unsurprising.  This is a  case  in  which
    all the relevant evidence could be set  out  in  the  form  of  witness
    statements. I refused the application to adjourn but permitted Mr Ahmed
    as much time as he needed to take witness statements from the appellant
    and his wife.  I stood the matter down to enable Mr Ahmed to do this.


 8. When the hearing recommenced Mr Ahmed called the appellant.  He  relied
    upon a joint witness statement signed by himself and his wife, prepared
    that morning with the assistance of Mr Ahmed.  The appellant was cross-
    examined briefly by Mr Harrison.  It was agreed that it was unnecessary
    to call his wife because  Mr  Harrison  did  not  have  any  additional
    questions for her.


 9. Mr Harrison invited me to dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out in
    the SSHD's decision letter


10. Mr Ahmed accepted that the appellant does not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  He also accepted that the only issue before  me
    in any event is Article 8 'outside of the Rules'.  Mr  Ahmed  contended
    that the best interests of the children are a very weighty factor,  and
    that they outweigh the appellant's use of deception in  the  past.   He
    invited me to find that it would be unreasonable to expect the children
    to leave the UK to reside in Pakistan.


11. After hearing submissions  from  both  representatives  I  reserved  my
    decision, which I now provide in writing.

Re-making the decision under Article 8

Best interests

12.  I  begin  the  Article  8  assessment  by   evaluating   the   primary
    consideration of the  interests  of  the  appellant's  British  citizen
    children.  I accept that citizenship is a weighty factor. I also accept
    that they are likely to be better educated in the  UK.   On  the  other
    hand, the appellant told me that the family are entirely  reliant  upon
    his father to financially support them.  He  said  they  do  not  claim
    benefits and  neither  parent  is  currently  employed.   I  accept  Mr
    Harrison's submission that given these  circumstances  the  family  may
    fare better economically in Pakistan, where the cost of living is  such
    that whatever is provided  by  the  appellant's  father  will  go  much
    further.  I note that the children are very young, having been born  in
    2012 and 2015.  The elder child  is  not  due  to  start  school  until
    September 2017.  The family function well as  a  self-contained  family
    unit.


13. On balance, I conclude that the best  interests  of  the  two  children
    would be best served by remaining in the  UK,  but  only  by  a  narrow
    margin.  I find however that they are sufficiently young to be able  to
    adapt to life in Pakistan, with the support of their parents,  both  of
    whom have substantial knowledge of and links to Pakistan.


Section 117B(6)


14. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -


                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child; and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

15. I accept that (a) is met.  It is agreed that the real question  for  me
    is the reasonableness of expecting the children  to  leave  the  UK  in
    accordance with (b).  I must take all the relevant factors into account
    when assessing reasonableness and not just the impact upon the children
    - see MA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  Relevant  countervailing
    factors are the appellant's immigration history and use of deception.


16. When considering reasonableness, it  is  also  relevant  to  take  into
    account the SSHD's policy.  Mr Ahmed did  not  pursue  any  submissions
    regarding this but the policy relevant to the reasonableness issue  has
    been addressed in MA (Pakistan).   Paragraph  11.2.3.  of  the  IDI  on
    Family Migration provides the SSHD's decision makers with  guidance  on
    cases involving British children. The August 2015 version states  that,
    save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take a
    decision in relation to the  parent  or  primary  carer  of  a  British
    Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force  that
    British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child. The
    decision would not force these children to leave the  EU  because  they
    can remain in the UK with their British citizen mother, for the reasons
    set out in detail in VM Jamaica v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 255.


17. However, the policy also states that:


           "where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer".


18. The SSHD's  decision  to  refuse  the  application  would  require  the
    appellant ('a parent') to return  to  a  country  outside  of  the  EU,
    Pakistan.  As such, the SSHD's own policy states that the case must  be
    assessed on the basis that it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    British citizen children to leave the EU with  that  parent.   In  such
    cases, the policy states it will usually be appropriate to grant leave,
    provided that there is evidence of a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship.  The policy then states:


          "It may be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct
          of the parent or primary carer gives rise  to  considerations  of
          such  weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
          otherwise stay with another parent or alternative carer in the UK
          or in the EU.  The circumstances envisaged  could  cover  amongst
          others:
          Criminality...
          A very poor immigration history, such as  where  the  person  has
          repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules"


19. The policy clearly envisages that countervailing circumstances may mean
    that it is appropriate to refuse leave.  The list provided  is  not  an
    exhaustive one.  The appellant has been found to have  used  deception.
    He did not admit to this when it was first alleged and took part  in  a
    Tribunal  hearing  maintaining  an  innocent  explanation   which   was
    ultimately  rejected.   In  my   judgment   this   is   a   significant
    countervailing circumstance.


20. When the appellant's use  of  deception  is  considered  in  the  round
    together  with  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  the  best
    interests of the children and their citizenship, I am satisfied that it
    would be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK  to  be  with  their
    father in Pakistan.  Their mother is a dual national.  Although she has
    had difficulties with her own family as a result of a divorce, with the
    support of the appellant's family in Pakistan, this family will be able
    to establish themselves adequately in Pakistan.


21. In all the circumstances, it would be reasonable to expect the children
    to leave the UK and section 117B(6)(b) is not met.

Private life

22. The appellant and his family members undoubtedly have private lives  in
    the UK.  However, Mr Ahmed did not place reliance upon  any  community,
    employment, family or religious links between the them and the UK.

Balancing exercise

23. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) thereof  I  am  obliged  to
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.   I  consider
    that section 117B applies to this appeal in the following way:


          (a)  The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
          immigration controls is clearly engaged.  Mr Ahmed  accepted  that
          the appellant has been unable to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
          Immigration Rules in order to remain as a spouse.  This  is  based
          upon his past use of deception as well as his  inability  to  meet
          the financial requirements.  I also regard  it  as  a  significant
          factor militating against the appellant that he has been found  to
          have used deception.


          (b) The appellant's solicitors requested  an  interpreter  at  the
          hearing before me but I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could
          speak in basic English and as such I do not find  an  infringement
          of the "English speaking" public interest.


          (c) The economic interest is engaged.  The appellant and his  wife
          are not employed.  There was very little evidence to  explain  why
          the appellant's wife is no longer  employed  -  she  is  only  two
          months  pregnant.   Reliance  upon  the  appellant's   father   is
          unlikely to be sustainable.


          (d) The private life  established  by  the  appellant  during  the
          entirety of his time in the UK qualifies for  the  attribution  of
          little weight only.


24. In my judgment, when all of the above matters  are  considered  in  the
    round, the appellant's removal does not constitute  a  disproportionate
    breach of Article 8.  Although the appellant's wife "does not wish"  to
    return to Pakistan, she has not said that she will not do so.  This  is
    not a case in which the appellant's wife and children will be  required
    to leave the UK.  She can choose to remain in the UK with her  children
    or return to Pakistan with her husband and  children.   The  choice  is
    hers.  In all the circumstances, it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    children to live in Pakistan with both their parents.


25. Having applied the facts to section 117B of the 2002 Act and considered
    the general principles applicable in a case raising family and  private
    life under Article 8 of the ECHR, I find that the  appellant's  removal
    from the UK would not constitute a disproportionate breach  of  Article
    8.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


27. I remake the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.






Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 21 June 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
