
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA /21748 /2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19th July 2016                             |On 3rd August 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOMe DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MISS NUSURAT JAHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MS J ISHERWOOD (Home officer presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    MR S KAMAL (Legal representative - Immigration
Solutions ltd)


                            DECISIONS AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Anstis ) ("FTT") on  15th
    January 2016 in which the appeal under Tier  1  was  allowed.  I  shall
    refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" who is  the  appellant
    in this matter and to "the Claimant."

Background

2.    The Claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh. On 10 December 2012 she  made
    an application as a Tier I entrepreneur which was  refused  on  general
    grounds by the Secretary of State on the 26th May 2015 on  the  grounds
    that she had used deception by  submitting  false  documents  (a  TOIEC
    certificate and bank statements from BRAC bank) under paragraph 320(7B)
    of the Immigration Rules.

3.     The Claimant entered the UK in 2009, with  leave  under  Tier  4  and
    thereafter was granted leave to remain under  Tier  4  until  7.2.2013.
    The  refusal  concluded  that  the  Claimant  used  deception  in   her
    application  made  in  December  2012  and  in  the  current   Tier   1
    application.

4.      The FTT [29-33] concluded that the Claimant had not  used  deception
    and allowed the appeal. It found that the evidence  relied  on  by  the
    Secretary of  State  was  inadequate  and  it  preferred  the  evidence
    produced by the Claimant as to the authenticity of the bank  statements
    relied on.  Further the FTT [34-42] found that the Secretary  of  State
    failed to discharge the burden of proof that the English language  test
    result was obtained by deception using a proxy taker.

5.     The grounds of application for permission argued that the FTT  failed
    to give adequate reasons for rejecting the  evidence  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State to verify  that  the  bank  statements  were  false.
    Further that the FTT applied an impermissibly high standard of proof in
    determining the deception issue as to the TOIEC.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by FTJ PJM Hollingworth on  10th  June
    2016 on the basis of the grounds put forward.

Submisssions

7.   Ms Isherwood expanded on the grounds  of  application  for  permission.
    She relied on the recent decisions regarding  ELTS  of  Qadir   v  SSHD
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) and followed by Shehzad [2016]EWCA CIV  615.  She
    submitted that it had now been held that the generic evidence relied on
    by the Secretary of State was capable of meeting the  first  evidential
    burden to show deception and that the  Claimant  thereafter  faced  the
    burden to give an innocent explanation.  The FTT erred  by  failing  to
    follow this approach.

8.   Mr Kamal submitted  that  the  FTT  properly  considered  the  evidence
    before it as to deception and found that the verification evidence  was
    insufficient  to  meet  the  standard  of  proof,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities. The FTT  had  given  full  reasons  for  preferring  the
    Claimant's evidence.  As to the ELTS it was open to the FTT to consider
    the evidence before it as each case was fact sensitive. The  FTT  heard
    evidence from the Claimant who was cross examined and she had  produced
    her  degree  certificate.   Mr  Kamal  further   submitted   that   the
    transitional arrangements applied tests taken prior to 1st July 2014.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   The  FTT  considered  the  appeal  specifically  focusing  on  the  two
    allegations of deception [3].   It  set  out  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof in  the  decision  and  reasons  at  [28,  33  &  41]
    including reference to the need to furnish cogent  or  strong  evidence
    which the Tribunal would subject to anxious scrutiny.  I find no  basis
    in the argument that the FTT applied an impermissibly high standard  of
    proof.

10.  The FTT engaged in a detailed assessment of the  evidence  produced  by
    both parties as to the authenticity of the bank statements  relied  on.
    The FTT preferred the evidence of the detailed letter from  the  branch
    Manager to the email relied on by the  Secretary  of  State,  which  it
    found to be brief in the extreme and  failed  to  answer  the  question
    raised in the verification process.  In short the email states that the
    documents "were not issued by our branches".  Having regard to  all  of
    the evidence and applying the civil standard I am  satisfied  that  the
    FTT's approach was properly open to it and that there is  no  error  of
    law established.  The FTT gave detailed reasons for why  it  relied  on
    the letter and  found  considerable  shortfalls  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's enquiries.  There was no proper  document  verification  report
    produced.

11.  Turning to the issue of the ELTS this appeal was decided prior  to  the
    cases relied on by Ms Isherwood. I accept that the law is  now  as  per
    Qadir and Shehzad to the extent that the generic evidence is capable of
    discharging the evidential burden on the Secretary of  State  and  that
    thereafter the burden falls onto the  applicant  to  show  an  innocent
    explanation in which case the Tribunal will engage in a  fact  specific
    analysis.  I am satisfied that there was an error on the  part  of  the
    FTT in finding that the evidential burden had not been  established  by
    the Secretary of State.   The  FTT  considered  the  evidence  from  Ms
    Collings and Mr Millington [34-36] referred to as "the generic evidence
    "  and  disregarded  it  because  it  concluded  that  it   failed   to
    specifically identify the Claimant. This was  an  error  as  there  was
    sufficient evidence to show that the  test  purportedly  taken  by  the
    Claimant had been identified  as  invalid.   However,  I  now  consider
    whether that error is material to the outcome of the  appeal.  The  FTT
    also took into account the Claimant's own evidence  [37-38].   The  FTT
    concluded that there was no significance in the Claimant  having  taken
    the test in Birmingham and it was open to the FTT to conclude that  any
    hesitancy could be ascribed to difficulty  in  recollection  of  events
    [38].  The FTT was clear in that  its  approach  was  to  look  at  the
    specific facts and evidence in the appeal and  to  reach  a  conclusion
    accordingly.  The Claimant gave oral evidence and relied on her witness
    statement together with her educational  qualifications  including  her
    degree certificate, which were not disputed, which the  FTT  took  into
    account in concluding that there had been no  deception.   The  FTT  in
    effect followed the second and third  stages set out in Qadir as to the
    burden and standard of proof and I am satisfied that  the  findings  of
    fact show an innocent explanation and thereafter the Secretary of State
    failed to show deception was used. Accordingly I find no material error
    of law.


Decision

12.   There is no material error of law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


                               No anonymity order made nor requested


                               Signed            Date 1.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               No fee award


                               Signed            Date 1.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
