
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/21575/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Delivered Orally at Field House               |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 March 2013                               |On 3 April 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                            samee ur rehman shah

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Hayes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  born  on  1
    January 1974 from a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on
    27 December 2012 dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 25 September 2012 to refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant, the relevant Immigration  Rule  being  paragraph  245FD.   The
    Appellant's human rights (Article 8 ECHR) appeal was also dismissed.

2.   It is right to point out that in all other respects under the Rule  the
    Appellant met the requisite heads of requirement except for the date of
    his award.

3.   In the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument  in  support  of  a  successful
    application for permission to appeal, that indeed appears to have  been
    prepared by the Appellant, he contended as follows:

         "The sole issue before the Upper Tribunal (was)  that  whether  'an
         application for further leave to remain  is  to  be  treated  as  a
         continuing application, starting with the date when  it  was  first
         submitted and ending on the date when it is  decided'  and  whether
         the appellant's qualification would be considered for the  purposes
         of awarding the requisite points for award of qualification.   This
         qualification was submitted after the date of application but prior
         to the date of decision.


         It is submitted that in (seeking) permission  to  appeal  that  the
         appellant had relied on the judgment in AQ (Pakistan)  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  833  where  at
         paragraph 22 it was accepted that:


             'for the Secretary of State, Mr Payne accepts that,  following
             AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD), the relevant date for the assessment
             of evidence is the date of the Secretary of  State's  decision
             and not, as may have appeared from earlier Tribunal decisions,
             the date of  the  application  to  her.   The  application  is
             treated as continuing until the date of decision'.


         It is submitted that the appellant intends to  fully  rely  on  the
         recent decision by the Upper Tribunal in  Khatel  &  Others  (s85A;
         effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) where  Mr
         Justice Blake established the  principle  for  the  Tribunal  about
         considering the documents which are submitted to the  Secretary  of
         State.  In paragraph 53 it was stated:


             'It appears that we are the first  judicial  body  to  grapple
             with the true scope of Section 85A.  We fully  recognise  that
             this provision was intended  to  restrict  the  material  that
             could be considered by the Tribunal, but in fact the  material
             informing what its stated purpose is, accords with the present
             decision where the Tribunal has only considered material  that
             was submitted to the Secretary of State and considered by  her
             before she made the decision'.


         Mr Justice Blake further stated in paragraph 55 that:


             'We recognise that a number of previous decisions of  the  AIT
             and the UT  relating  to  the  points-based  system  had  been
             overturned by the Court of Appeal  where  an  over-restrictive
             approach has been applied.  We are not endeavouring  to  apply
             an over-generous approach but simply to  give  effect  to  the
             meaning  of  the  words  according  to  normal  principles  of
             statutory construction and in the light of the conclusion that
             an application  of  this  sort  is  a  continuing  application
             starting with the date it was first submitted and  terminating
             with the date upon which it is decided'.


         The appellant further relies in the same judgment in  paragraph  56
         where Mr Justice Blake went on to say that:


             'In our judgment, there is no public policy  in  favour  of  a
             more restrictive approach.  After all, the Secretary of  State
             did  evaluate  the  material  subsequently  provided  in   the
             application and did award points to each of these claimants on
             the basis that they 'had been awarded' the qualification.   It
             would be inconsistent to then dispute that  the  qualification
             that had been awarded had not been awarded within  the  period
             of twelve months of the application'.


         Further reliance is placed upon the judgment in  Naved  (Student  -
         fairness - notice of points) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC)  wherein  it  was
         held:


             'Fairness requires the Secretary of State to give an appellant
             an opportunity to address grounds for refusal of which he  did
             not know and could not have known, failing which the resulting
             decision may be  set  aside  on  appeal  as  contrary  to  law
             (without  contravening  the  provisions   of   s85A   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


         It is submitted that the appellant had submitted his  qualification
         well before the decision made on  26  September  2012  and  it  was
         accepted by the Secretary of  State  in  her  notice  of  decision.
         Since it has been acknowledged by the Secretary  of  State  in  her
         notice of immigration  decision,  hence  the  appellant  should  be
         granted the requisite points for date of award.


     In light of the above submissions it is submitted that the  Appellant's
         appeal be   allowed".

4.   Thus the appeal has come before me on 7 March 2013 when my  first  task
    is to determine whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    disclosed an error on a point of law  such  that  may  have  materially
    affected the outcome of the appeal.

5.   It is regrettably apparent that the Appellant (who does  not  have  any
    legal representation) has not attended the hearing and there  has  been
    no application on his part for an adjournment or any prior  explanation
    to the Tribunal to explain his absence.

6.   As a matter of prudence, I earlier, asked the usher  to  call  out  the
    Appellant's name in the waiting room and upon her return  she  informed
    me that there was no response.

7.   I am satisfied as to service of the Notice of Hearing.

8.   Mr Hayes requests an adjournment on the basis  that  the  circumstances
    of this appeal ultimately turn on the decision of Blake J in the  Upper
    Tribunal in Khatel.  He makes the point that the Secretary of State has
    successfully obtained permission to appeal that decision to  the  Court
    of Appeal, such permission having been granted by the President.

9.   Mr Hayes submits that in those  circumstances,  it  is  appropriate  to
    adjourn the hearing of this appeal pending the outcome of the Court  of
    Appeal's substantive decision.

10.  Mr Hayes claims that  there  is  what  he  describes  as  "an  arguable
    chance" that an error of law within the  decision  in  Khatel  will  be
    found.

11.  I do not agree and see no reason to grant the adjournment request.

12.  It  is  apparent  to  me,  that  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant, it is appropriate that I proceed with the just  disposal  of
    the appeal in accordance with the provisions of Rule 38 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  wherein  if  a  party  fails  to
    attend the hearing, the Upper Tribunal mayproceed with the  hearing  if
    the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that the party has been notified of the
    hearing or that reasonable steps had been taken to notify  the  parties
    of the hearing and it is considered to be in the interests  of  justice
    to proceed with the hearing.

13.  I am satisfied that in deciding  to  proceed  with  the  hearing,  this
    criteria has indeed met.

14.  I have pointed out to Mr Hayes, that whilst I am not strictly bound  by
    the President's decision in Khatel, it is the present guidance  of  the
    Tribunal on the point in issue  and  one  that  I  consider  should  be
    properly followed unless and until it is overturned by a higher court.

15.  I have referred him to the guidance of Stanley Burnton LJ in SG  (Iraq)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940.  In that case, the issue was  whether  the  courts
    should grant a stay of proceedings in circumstances  where  a  relevant
    country guidance decision was the subject of a pending appeal.  It  was
    held that Judges were required to take country guidance  determinations
    into account and to follow them, unless very strong  grounds  supported
    by cogent evidence, was adduced  justifying  their  not  doing  so.   A
    country  guidance  determination  of  the   Upper   Tribunal   remained
    authoritative unless and until it was set aside on appeal  or  replaced
    by a subsequent country guidance determination.  Whether the  grant  by
    the Court  of  Appeal  of  permission  to  appeal  a  country  guidance
    determination justified a  stay  in  the  cases  of  those  seeking  to
    challenge removal directions, where the decision to remove them  relied
    upon or was justified by that determination, had to depend on the facts
    and the evidence relied on by the claimant.

16.  It seems to me that whilst the  decision  in  SG  relates  to  relevant
    country guidance decisions that are the subject of  a  pending  appeal,
    the criteria enunciated in that guidance, would equally apply to  cases
    generally, where decisions of the Upper Tribunal are the subject  of  a
    pending appeal to the Court of Appeal.

17.  I consider that the decision in Khatel  is  and  remains  authoritative
    unless and until it is set aside on appeal and that I shall  therefore,
    and in those circumstances, follow it.  There is nothing in my view, on
    the facts of the present case and  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant , that warrants the grant of Mr  Hayes'  adjournment  request
    and I therefore refuse it.

18.  In granting permission to appeal, Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker had this to say:

         "The [appellant's] application was  made  on  4  April  2012.   The
         appellant  was  awarded  his  degree  on  6  September  2012.   The
         appellant wrote to  the  respondent  on  12  September  2012.   The
         respondent decided to refuse the application on 1 October 2012.


         Whilst the eventual outcome may depend on  what  was  sent  to  the
         respondent by the appellant on 12 September 2012, it  is  arguable,
         as per the grounds, that the judge failed  to  appreciate  that  an
         application may be continuing until it is decided  that  the  judge
         arguably failed to have regard to the guidance in AQ  (Pakistan)  v
         SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833 and Naved (student - fairness - notice  of
         points) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC).  The Tribunal may also be assisted by
         consideration of the guidance in Ali (s.120 - PBS) Pakistan  [rev.]
         [2012] UKUT 368 (IAC)."

19.  I am informed by Mr Hayes that in those circumstances, it  is  apparent
    from the decision in Khatel, notwithstanding that he did not agree with
    it,  that  were  I  to  follow  the  guidance  in  that  decision,  the
    consequence would be, that I would also find that the First-tier  Judge
    erred on a point of law material to the outcome such that his  decision
    should be set aside and that for like reason, I should proceed to  make
    a fresh decision allowing the appeal.

20.  Most helpfully, Mr Hayes, mindful of the observation of the  Designated
    Judge as to the eventual outcome of this appeal depending on  what  was
    sent to the Respondent by the Appellant on 12 September 2012, was  able
    to inform me that it had in fact been confirmed to the Respondent by e-
    mail on 21 September 2012, that the Appellant had been awarded  an  LLM
    in International Business and Commercial Law and that a certificate  of
    that award was received by the Respondent before the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, was made.

21.  I have therefore informed Mr Hayes, that in such circumstances  and  in
    accord both with the reasons identified  by  the  Designated  Judge  in
    granting permission to appeal and the guidance in Khatel (above) that I
    am satisfied that the First-tier Judge has erred on a point of law such
    as to have materially affected the outcome of the appeal  and  that  in
    those circumstances I will set aside his decision.

Decision

22.  Given that Mr Hayes acknowledges that in the circumstances there is  no
    reason why I cannot proceed to make a fresh decision,  it  follows  for
    like reason that I will allow the appeal.

23.  As I have allowed the Appellant's immigration appeal, the dismissal  of
    the Appellant's appeal by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  terms  of  his
    Article 8 ECHR appeal falls away and has no further consequence.

Conclusions

24.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

25.  I set aside the decision.

26.  I re-make the immigration decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed                                  Date: 28 March 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
