
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21125/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd March, 2014                            |On 25th March 2014           |
|(Given extempore)                             |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  reny saji

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain of Syed Law Office, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this case the party who was  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is a citizen of India born 6th May, 1976.  It is convenient if
    I continue to refer  to  him  throughout  as  "the  appellant"  in  the
    remainder of this determination except where context requires otherwise
    and I refer to the respondent as the "Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department"

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom with valid leave to  enter  as
    a student.  On 2nd April, 2012, the appellant applied for further leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant within the currency  of
    his valid leave.  On 22nd  September,  2012,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused that application.  The  refusal  decision  pointed  out,  inter
    alia, that in order to score points under the  relevant  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules the appellant was required to show they had  been
    awarded a relevant eligible qualification within the  12  month  period
    directly prior to the application, whereas the position  was  that  the
    appellant had not been awarded his  qualification,  which  was  an  MBA
    awarded by University of Wales, until after  that  date  (on  2nd  May,
    2012).

3.   The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appellant's  appeal  applying  the
    guidance set out in Khatel and others  (s85A  -  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC).  Permission to  appeal  was  then
    granted to the Upper Tribunal.

4.   On 25th June, 2003 the Court  of  Appeal  gave  judgment  in  Raju  and
    others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    754.  In October 2013 the Upper Tribunal reported its decision in Nasim
    and others (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT  610  (IAC).   In
    January the Upper Tribunal reported its follow-up  case  of  Nasim  and
    others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC).  It will be  convenient  if  I
    refer to these below as "Nasim 1" and "Nasim 2" consecutively.

5.   In light of these developments the Upper Tribunal  sent  Directions  in
    this case.  These gave notice that  issues  to  be  considered  at  the
    hearing included: (i) whether the determination of the  Upper  Tribunal
    made by reference to the determination in Khatel should be set aside in
    the light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  Raju  and  others
    (reference was then made to Nasim 1) and (ii) if so, whether there  was
    an error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
    that the determination  should  be  set  aside.   The  Directions  also
    required the appellant to serve on the Tribunal and  the  Secretary  of
    State, not later than  7  days  before  the  forthcoming  hearing,  all
    written submissions and written evidence (including witness statements)
    on the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, upon which they seek to rely  at
    that hearing (where  necessary,  complying  with  rule  15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

6.   The head note to Nasim 1 states as follows:

         "1.  It is not legally possible for the First-tier Tribunal or  the
             Upper Tribunal to decline to follow the  judgment  in  Raju  &
             Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
             EWCA Civ 754 on the basis that the Secretary of State's Tier 1
             (Post-Study Work) policy of July 2010 concerning the  approach
             to be taken to 'late' submission of certain educational awards
             continued to apply  in  respect  of  decisions  taken  by  the
             Secretary of State on  or  after  6th  April,  2012  when  the
             Immigration Rules were changed by abolishing the Tier 1 (Post-
             Study Work) route.

         2.   The Secretary of State was under no duty  to  determine  Post-
             Study Work applications made before that date by reference  to
             that policy the rationale for which disappeared  on  6  April.
             In particular:

             (a)  a person making such an  application  had  no  vested  or
                  legitimate expectation  to  have  his/her  application  so
                  determined;

             (b)  it was not legally unfair of the Secretary  of  State  to
                  proceed as she did;

             (c)  the de minimis principle cannot be invoked to counter the
                  failure  of  applications  that  were   unaccompanied   by
                  requisite evidence regarding the granting of the award;

             (d)  the Secretary of State's May  2012  Casework  Instruction
                  did not gloss or modify the Immigration Rules  but  merely
                  told caseworkers how to apply those Rules;

             (e)  evidential flexibility has no bearing on the matter;

             (f)  an application  was  not  varied  by  the  submission  of
                  evidence of the conferring of  an  award  on  or  after  6
                  April, 2012; but even if it were,  the  application  would
                  fail on the basis that it would have  been  decided  under
                  the Rules in force at the date of variation; and

             (g)  an application under the Immigration Rules  falls  to  be
                  determined by reference to policies in force at  the  date
                  of  decision,  not  those  in  fore   at   the   date   of
                  application."

         (3)  The date of  obtaining  the  relevant  qualification  for  the
             purposes of Table 10 of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules as
             in force immediately before 6 April 2012 is the date on  which
             the university or other institution responsible for conferring
             the award (not the institution where the appellant  physically
             studied, if different) actually conferred that  award  whether
             in person or in absentia.

         (4)  As held in Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
             application)  [2013]  UKUT  44  (IAC),  section  85A  of   the
             Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  precludes  a
             tribunal, in a points-based appeal, from considering  evidence
             as to  compliance  with  the  points-based  Rules,  where  the
             evidence was not before the Secretary of State when  she  took
             her decision; but the section does not prevent a tribunal from
             considering evidence that was before the  Secretary  of  State
             when she took the  decision,  whether  or  not  that  evidence
             reached her  only  after  the  date  of  application  for  the
             purposes of paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules."

Submissions

7.   IMr Hussain for the appellant sought to argue that I should decline  to
    follow Nasim 1 and 2.  He suggested that the First Tier Tribunal  Judge
    had not erred because he had applied the law as it was at the  time  of
    the decision.  He suggested that that was  wrong  "to  apply  Raju  and
    others retrospectively" as he put it.  The decision in Raju and  others
    post dated the Tribunal's decision and, he suggested,  left  the  First
    Tier Tribunal's decision unaffected by it.

My Assessment

The Power to Set Aside

8.   As noted earlier, prior to this case  being  listed  for  hearing,  the
    Secretary of State had applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal.  However, the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  made  hereunder
    clearly contemplate that it is within the  jurisdiction  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside its decision in particular limited circumstances:
    see s.10(4)(c)) rules 45, 46.   Logically  a  decision  on  whether  to
    exercise such power must take place before any consideration of whether
    to grant permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal; and  indeed  Rule
    45(1) stipulates that on receiving an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal the Upper Tribunal may review the decision  in  accordance  with
    Rule 46.  If the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  then
    there is no longer any statutory basis for consideration of whether  to
    grant permission to appeal.  The decision sought  to  be  appealed  has
    been rendered null and void.

9.   Rule 45(1)(a) provides that the Upper Tribunal may  review  a  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal if "since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a  court
    has made a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal  and  which,
    had it been made before the Upper Tribunal's decision, could have had a
    material effect on the decision".  As noted  earlier  since  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Khatel there has been the judgment in  Raju  and
    others, which constitutes binding Court of Appeal authority overturning
    Khatel.

10.  Hence I am entirely satisfied that it is within my  powers  to  proceed
    to consider whether to set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal and
    I also consider that to do so furthers the overriding objective of  the
    Rules to deal with cases justly and  fairly  under  Rule  4.   In  this
    regard I note that the procedure adopted by the Tribunal  of  notifying
    the parties in advance of the hearing that it would consider whether to
    exercise  its  powers  to  set  aside  afforded  both   parties   ample
    opportunity to respond and address the point.

11.  I have been asked to take a different  view  from  that  taken  by  the
    Upper Tribunal panel in Nasim 1 and  2.   Whilst  it  is  true  in  the
    abstract that I am not bound to follow  a  reported  decision  of  this
    Chamber, I would only  consider  doing  so  if  there  were  compelling
    reasons.  Quite simply there are none here.  In any event, for the most
    part Nasim 1 gives effect to Court of Appeal authority, Raju and others
    in particular, by which I am bound.


The Immigration Rules

12.  The appellant was not able to meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules under Appendix A because they required that he had  been  awarded
    his eligible qualification within the 12 month period prior to the date
    of application.  At the date of application the appellant had  not  yet
    been awarded his eligible qualification.  It had been  awarded  by  the
    date of decision, but that does not assist.  Whilst Section 85A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  does  not  prevent  a
    Tribunal from considering evidence that was  before  the  Secretary  of
    State when she took the decision, even if post-application, the Rule in
    question in this context required such evidence to relate to  an  event
    that had happened prior to the date of application.

Fairness

13.  Mr Hussain for  the  appellant  has  submitted  that  even  though  the
    appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules,  there  was
    patent unfairness such as to make the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State not in accordance with the law.  That argument was fully explored
    in Nasim 1 and was rejected for cogent reasons.  There is no  merit  in
    his suggestion that Raju and others should not be applied.   Judges  do
    not make the law, Parliament does.  Judges  merely  interpret  the  law
    and, occasionally do so incorrectly.  The law has been clarified by the
    decision in Raju and others, but it has not been changed.  The  law  as
    explained by the judgements in that decision always was the law.

Article 8

14.  Upper Tribunal Judge Lane  in  the  Directions  mentioned  earlier  had
    directed that any further evidence or submissions relating to Article 8
    should be sent at least 7 days  before  the  hearing.   Notwithstanding
    that Direction the appellant's representatives  failed  to  submit  any
    further evidence in accordance with Directions.

15.  Mr Hussain told me that the appellant was not pursuing  his  Article  8
    claim.

16.  In any event satisfied that the  appellant's  Article  8  circumstances
    did not justify a conclusion that the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State amounted to a disproportionate interference with  his  Article  8
    rights.

Section 47

17.  In this case the Secretary  of  State  had  made  a  simultaneous  s.47
    decision.  Although neither the First-tier Tribunal Judge nor the Upper
    Tribunal Judge dealt with the s.47 issue, it is settled law that such a
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

Disposal

18.  It follows from what has been said  above  that  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal is contrary to binding Court  of  Appeal  authority  and
    cannot stand.  I hereby set it aside.  Applying the principles set  out
    in Raju and others and subsequently in Nasim 1 and 2, I  conclude  that
    the decision I should re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

19.  Accordingly:

     The decision of the Upper Tribunal is set aside.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal  except  in
    relation to the  Section  47  decision  which  I  hold  to  be  not  in
    accordance with the law.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
