
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/21954/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TARIQ JAVED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hopkins, Counsel instructed by Smart Law
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on 2 June  2015
    allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  her  decision  to  refuse  a
    residence card.  The claimant applied for a residence card on 12  March
    2014 on the basis that he was the unmarried partner of an EEA  national
    and was an extended family member.  The Secretary of State refused  the
    claimant's application for a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family
    member on the basis that it was not accepted that he was in  a  durable
    relationship with an  EEA  national.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    accepted that the claimant was in a durable relationship  with  an  EEA
    national and the Secretary of State does not challenge that finding.

2.   Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  14
    August 2015 on the basis that it was arguably in error of law that  the
    Judge allowed the appeal outright.  Having found that the appellant was
    in a relationship akin to marriage the Judge should have  remitted  the
    case to the Secretary of State for the Secretary of State  to  consider
    the exercise of discretion with regard to  the  issue  of  a  residence
    card.

3.   Regulation 17(4) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  provides
    that the Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
    family member not falling within Regulation 7(3)  who  is  not  an  EEA
    national on application if -

    (a)  The relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the  extended  family
         member is a qualified person or an EEA national  with  a  permanent
         right of residence under Regulation 15; and

    (b)  in all the circumstances it appears  to  the  Secretary  of  State
         appropriate to issue the residence card.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant was in a durable
    relationship and that he met the requirements of 8(5) of the
    Regulations.  Having regard to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    that the claimant is indeed in a durable relationship which is
    undisputed there was no error in finding that he met the requirements
    of Regulation 8(5).   It is clear both from Regulation 17(4) and from
    the cases of MR & Others (EEA extended family members) Bangladesh
    [2010] UKUT 449 and Ihemedu (OFMS - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340
    that Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
    extended family member a matter of discretion. Where the Secretary of
    State has not yet exercised that discretion the proper course is to set
    the decision aside and remake it, allowing the appeal to the extent
    that the claimant's application for a residence card as an extended
    family member remains outstanding before the Secretary of State for a
    lawful decision.

Notice of Decision

5.   I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  re-
    make the decision.  This appeal is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    question of whether a residence card should be issued to  the  claimant
    is outstanding before the Secretary of  State  for  a  lawful  decision
    thereon.

6.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

