
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2015                            |On 12 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                              mr Sanmi Ademola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grant-Hutchison sitting at North Shields  on
    1 July 2014) dismissing his appeal on the papers against  the  decision
    by the Secretary of State to refuse to grant the appellant ILR  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled here.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity direction, and I did not  consider  that  the
    appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Nigeria,  whose  date  of  birth  is  9
    September 1981.  He entered the United Kingdom on 14 October 2007  with
    valid entry clearance as a student.  Following a successful appeal,  he
    was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 19 January
    2011 with leave valid until 31 October 2011.  While the  student  leave
    was current, the appellant made a successful  application  for  limited
    leave to remain as a spouse  of  a  settled  person.   He  was  granted
    limited leave to remain in this capacity from 30 August 2011  until  30
    August 2013.

 3. On 16 August 2013 the appellant applied for ILR.  On 23  December  2013
    the appellant and his spouse were requested to attend an  interview  on
    21 January 2014 in  Liverpool.   In  the  invitation  letter  from  the
    permanent migration interview team he was told that if he was unable to
    attend the interview, this should be indicated on the  interview  reply
    form.  The interview would only be rearranged in the  most  serious  of
    circumstances (for example, certified sickness of  either  him  or  his
    spouse or serious transport disruption).  If he failed  to  attend  for
    any other reason other than  medical,  without  prior  agreement,  this
    might result in his  application  being  refused  as  provided  for  in
    paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules.  If he was unable to attend due
    to a medical reason, then he should inform the team prior to interview.
     A medical certificate stating the full nature of the illness had to be
    provided within five days of the interview date.

 4. On the day scheduled for  the  interview,  the  appellant's  solicitors
    apparently provided a psychological report in respect  of  the  sponsor
    dated 13 January 2014.  In an e-mail sent  just  before  midday  on  21
    January 2014 Chancery CS Solicitors said they were attaching a  medical
    report for  "Sinmi  Ademola".   They  said  they  were  also  attaching
    photographs and other documents as proof of their  client's  continuous
    relationship.  The team were invited to take a decision  based  on  the
    information provided "as our clients are unable to  attend  because  of
    this medical condition".

 5. The respondent did not proceed to take a decision on  the  application,
    but gave the appellant and his spouse another opportunity to  attend  a
    marriage interview.  A letter of invitation was sent on 19  March  2014
    requesting the appellant and his spouse to attend a marriage  interview
    in Liverpool on 2 April 2014.  On the day scheduled for the  interview,
    or the day  before,  the  appellant's  solicitors  apparently  sent  an
    updated report from Dr Tony Ogefere of  Lighthouse  Holistic  Community
    Services, a registered  charity.   He  described  himself  as  emeritus
    clinician-in-chief.  He referred to his earlier psychological report on
    the mental wellbeing of the sponsor.   He  said  that  her  mental  and
    physical  health  concerns  have  recently  become  very  fragile   and
    exacerbated by "your continued demand for  the  couple  to  attend  for
    interview".  Coincidentally, a follow up therapeutic session  had  been
    scheduled for Wednesday 2 April 2014.  So he  prayed  that  they  would
    kindly excuse the couple's attendance at the Liverpool offices tomorrow
    "in the hope of forestalling inpatient hospitalisation".

 6. On 11 April 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the appellant's application for ILR.  The application  was  refused  on
    two grounds.  Firstly, the  application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    322(10)  of  the  Rules  because  the  appellant  had  failed,  without
    providing a reasonable explanation, to comply with a  request  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State to attend for interview.  Secondly, as
    a result of failing to attend the marriage interview on 21 January 2014
    and 2 April 2014 to support the application, the appellant  had  failed
    to show that he was still in a subsisting relationship,  and  that  the
    parties intended to live together permanently as husband and wife.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant elected for his appeal to be determined  on  the  papers.
    His  solicitors  compiled  an  appellant's  bundle  which  included  an
    unsigned witness statement from the  sponsor,  and  the  communications
    from Dr Tony Ogefere to which I have referred earlier.

 8. In his subsequent decision, the judge  observed  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal did not specifically explain why the appellant had not  attended
    the interviews.  He referred to the  report  of  Dr  Ogefere  dated  13
    January 2014, and said the report did not explain why the appellant did
    not attend another interview  himself  without  his  spouse.   He  also
    observed that the report itself was an unusual document.  The  preamble
    referred to the author in the third person, and yet he appeared  to  be
    the originator of the report.  The report had many  unusual  usages  of
    syntax and grammar.  The judge further found that the  report  did  not
    specifically  state  why  the  sponsor  could  not  attend  a  marriage
    interview.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. The appellant's  solicitors  applied  on  the  appellant's  behalf  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    decision was vitiated by a material  error  of  law.   The  only  issue
    before the judge was whether or not the appellant attended the marriage
    interview; and if not, whether any reason was given for not  attending.
    Pages 28 to 32  of  the  appellant's  bundle  contained  correspondence
    between the appellant's representatives and the respondent in  relation
    to the reasons why the appellant could not attend the interview.   Page
    31 contained an e-mail in which the respondent confirmed receipt of the
    appellant's medical report as being the reason for  not  attending  the
    interview.  So the judge made an error of  law  in  not  accepting  the
    evidence provided by the appellant.

10. Further, the non-expert opinion given by the judge  for  not  accepting
    the letter and report from Dr Ogefere amounted to  making  perverse  or
    irrational findings.  The judge appeared not to have read  the  medical
    report before concluding the report did not specifically state why  the
    appellant could not attend the interview.





The Initial Refusal of Permission

11. On 14 August 2014 Judge P J M Hollingworth refused to grant permission.
     The judge had made findings of fact open to him.  No error of law  was
    disclosed which would lead to a different outcome.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

12. Following a renewed application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane granted permission to  appeal
    on 16 December 2014 for the following reasons:

         The appellant did not attend two interviews on  21  January  and  2
         April respectively.  The First-tier Tribunal at [8] considers  (and
         rejects) the reasons given for not attending  the  first  interview
         but is silent as to the second.  It is arguable that the judge  has
         overlooked the evidence at pages 28-32 of  the  appellant's  First-
         tier Tribunal bundle which includes an e-mail  from  the  permanent
         migration interview team noting  the  appellant's  reason  for  not
         attending the 2 April interview.  All grounds may be argued.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

13. The appeal was listed for an oral hearing, but on 30 January  2015  the
    appellant's solicitors wrote to  the  Upper  Tribunal  asking  for  the
    appeal to be determined on the papers.  Accordingly I proceeded to hear
    the appeal in the absence of  representation  from  the  appellant.   I
    reviewed with Mr Bramble the correspondence that had passed between the
    appellant's solicitors and the permanent migration interview team,  and
    the contents of Dr Ogefere's report dated 13 January 2014.

Discussion

14. Mr Bramble voiced concern that the refusal letter was problematic.  The
    problem as he saw it was  that  the  respondent  had  not  specifically
    engaged with the excuse given by the sponsor for not  attending  either
    marriage interview; or with  the  psychological  report  from  Dr  Tony
    Ogefere.  He drew my attention to the fact that  paragraph  322(10)  is
    not a mandatory ground of refusal, but a discretionary ground.

15. On the other hand, Mr Bramble submitted that it was not clear from  the
    disclosed e-mail  correspondence  that  the  psychological  report  had
    actually been received.  Moreover, even if it had been received,  there
    were legitimate concerns about its status and probative value.

16. Although I take Mr Bramble's concerns into account, it is necessary  to
    keep in mind that  the  issue  before  me  is  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in law in  his  disposal  of  the  appeal,  having
    regard to the evidence that was before him and the  way  in  which  the
    appeal was presented.

17. It was not part of the appellant's case before the First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appeal should be allowed on the limited  ground  the  decision
    appealed against was not in accordance  with  the  law,  and  that  the
    application should be remitted to the Secretary of State for  a  lawful
    decision.  The stance taken by way of appeal was the same as the stance
    taken when failing to attend for the marriage interviews; namely,  that
    the Secretary of State/judge should find that the marriage was  genuine
    and  subsisting  solely  on  the  basis  of  documentary  evidence   of
    continuing cohabitation, and that the appellant and the sponsor  had  a
    good excuse for not submitting themselves for questioning.

18. It is apparent from the contents of paragraph [8] of his decision  that
    the judge recognised that the issue  before  him  was  not  a  complete
    failure to give an explanation for the non-attendance at  the  marriage
    interviews, but whether the excuse proffered was a reasonable one.

19. It was not suggested that the appellant had any psychological problems.
    The report only related to the  sponsor's  mental  health.  So  it  was
    clearly open to the judge to find  that  the  psychological  report  in
    respect of the sponsor did  not  explain  why  the  appellant  had  not
    attended on his own.  While his attendance  without  his  spouse  would
    have been far from satisfactory, it would  have  not  been  futile.  It
    would have been an opportunity for the appellant to be questioned about
    his relationship with his wife and  about  the  alleged  mental  health
    problem which prevented her from attending with him. So the  fact  that
    the appellant had used the excuse of his wife's illness not  to  attend
    himself was a factor reasonably relied upon by the  judge  as  damaging
    his credibility.

20. With regard to the explanation for the non-attendance of  the  sponsor,
    the ultimate  issue  for  the  judge  was  whether  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of  proving  that  the  excuse  proffered  was  a
    reasonable one.  Although the judge's reasoning on this question  could
    have been better expressed, it is tolerably clear that  his  answer  to
    this question was in the negative.

21. It was open to the judge to find that Dr Ogefere did  not  specifically
    explain why the sponsor could not attend the marriage interview  on  21
    January 2013.  Apparently, the trigger for Dr Ogefere  being  asked  to
    prepare a report was the sponsor having a panic attack when the  letter
    inviting the  couple  to  attend  the  marriage  interview  arrived  in
    December. The family doctor prescribed her with citalopram at  ten  mg,
    and the doctor had increased the daily dosage to 25mg by the time  that
    the couple were seen by Dr Ogefere on 13 January 2014.  Dr Ogefere  did
    not attempt to  explain  why  the  medication  which  the  sponsor  had
    received, and would continue to receive, would not enable her to attend
    the marriage interview which was scheduled to take place  over  a  week
    later.

22. Moreover, Dr Ogefere described the sponsor as suffering from  a  number
    of life threatening traumas, of which the invitation  to  an  interview
    was the final straw.  But nowhere in his  report  is  any  other  "life
    threatening trauma" actually identified.  So, on the  face  of  it,  Dr
    Ogefere was purporting to diagnose the sponsor as suffering from severe
    PTSD simply on account of her receiving a letter asking her to attend a
    marriage interview with her husband.  Dr Ogefere did not include in his
    report an acknowledgement of his duty to the Tribunal to be impartial.

23. For all the above reasons, it was open to the judge  not  to  treat  Dr
    Ogefere's evidence as being probative of a serious medical condition on
    the part of the sponsor which genuinely prevented  her  from  attending
    either the marriage interview on 21 January  2014  or  the  rescheduled
    interview on 2 April 2014.

24. Although the judge does not address the  explanation  proffered  by  Dr
    Ogefere for the sponsor's non-attendance at the second interview,  this
    is not material as the underlying excuse remained  the  same;  and  the
    underlying excuse remained wholly unsatisfactory.

25. Furthermore, even if the judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that paragraph 322(10) applied, it is clear  from  the  judge's
    discussion of the alternative Article 8 claim that the judge also found
    that the appellant had not shown that his marriage to the  sponsor  was
    genuine and subsisting as at the date of the hearing before him.   This
    was clearly a finding that was open to him on the evidence, and in  the
    light of the fact that the appellant  had  elected  not  to  give  oral
    evidence in support of his  appeal.   So  any  error  of  law  was  not
    material to the outcome.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson













