
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21214/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 July 2013                                 |On 30 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                manzur Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adeolu
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1983.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State on 25  September  2012  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    under the points-based system.

 2. The application for variation of his leave was refused under  paragraph
    245FD(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent also made  a
    decision to remove under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 3. Following a hearing on 19 November 2012 at Hatton Cross, Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Kanagaratnam dismissed the appeal under  the  Rules
    and on human rights grounds (Article 8 of ECHR).

 4. The judge in  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  accepted  the
    Appellant's evidence that he had sat his exams  in  December  2011  and
    completed the course in January 2012.  The judge noted  the  contention
    that  the  degree  certificate  was  obtained  prior  to  the  date  of
    application on 4 April 2012.  However, while he accepted that there may
    have been administrative delays in providing the  award  the  Appellant
    needed to 'establish that he at  least  submitted  a  letter  from  his
    educational institution in accordance with  the  Rules'.  Yet,  on  the
    evidence before him 'despite the various explanations provided  by  the
    Appellant for the delay in award there has  been  no  letter  from  the
    educational  institution  in  the  prescribed  form  submitted  by  the
    Appellant in accordance with the Rules'.

 5. As for Article 8 the judge, in dismissing that claim,  found  that  the
    Appellant had obtained previous qualifications in Bangladesh  where  he
    had lived for the greater  part  of  his  life.   The  post-study  work
    experience that he intended to obtain in the UK was intended to aid him
    in his employment prospects in Bangladesh.  There was  little  evidence
    that he cannot obtain similar work experience in Bangladesh.

 6. He sought permission to appeal.  In summary, he  stated,  firstly:  'At
    the time of considering the application,  Appellant  had  obtained  and
    awarded his degree and the documents evidencing award  of  degree  were
    before the decision maker'.

 7. Further, 'The Respondent sent out an acknowledgement wherein it  stated
    that if there was a problem with the  application,  a  caseworker  will
    write to the applicant as soon as possible to  advise  on  what  action
    needs to be taken regarding the application.  Appellant never  received
    a telephone call, email or post regarding the application until refusal
    letter was received through the post'.

 8. Also, it was unlawful for the Respondent to make a decision  to  remove
    at the same time as making the refusal to vary leave decision.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on 19 December 2012, a judge stating:

         '....

         2.   The Appellant is a Bangladeshi national who on 21  March  2012
             [in fact, 4 April] made a combined application  for  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant under the points-based  system  and  for  a  biometric
             residence card.  The Respondent refused  the  application  and
             simultaneously made a decision to remove him from  the  United
             Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of   the
             Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   The  Appellant
             claimed points for Date of  Award  under  Appendix  A  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  However, the date of  his  award  was  not
             within the twelve month period directly prior to the  date  of
             application.  Amongst other things the grounds assert that the
             judge erred by not taking into account the authority of Ahmadi
             (s.47 decision: validity; Sapkota) [2012]  UKUT  00147  (IAC).
             This issue, which has now been  more  fully  explored  by  the
             Tribunal in Adamally and Jaferi (Section 47 removal decisions:
             Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC), appears  not  to
             have been considered at all by the judge.  That omission is in
             itself an arguable error of law.  Whilst the other grounds put
             forward have perhaps less merit for the avoidance of  doubt  I
             emphasise that I am not refusing permission in respect of  any
             of them.

           3. There is here an arguable error of law.'

10. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Adeolu submitted that the date
    of decision was a continuing decision.  Although  the  MBA  degree  was
    awarded  after  the  application,  because  it  was  notified  to   the
    Respondent in a response to a section 120 notice before  the  decision,
    such was acceptable under the Rules.  Also, the objective of the scheme
    was to give the opportunity to applicants to get work  experience.   It
    was a matter of fairness to allow the Appellant who had got his  degree
    to remain in the UK in line with the spirit of the scheme.  He asked me
    to allow the appeal.

11. In reply Mr Wilding, referring to the Rule  24  response  conceded  the
    error in respect of the section 47 aspect of  the  decision.   However,
    there was no other flaw in the determination.  The Court of  Appeal  in
    Raju, Khatel, Adhikari and Al Islam [2013] EWCA Civ 754 had made  clear
    it was not the case that an application continues until the decision is
    made.  It made no difference that there was a section 120 notice.   The
    instant case was on all fours with Raju and Others.   He  asked  me  to
    uphold the dismissal.

12. In considering this matter the facts as found by the  First-tier  Judge
    seem, in the main, not to be in dispute.  The Appellant sat  his  exams
    in December 2011; he made his application on 4 April 2012;  his  degree
    was obtained on 25 May 2012 (C9 of Respondent's bundle).  The  date  of
    decision was 25 September 2012. It is not clear to  me,  however,  that
    the judge's comment that there was administrative delay by the  college
    in providing the award following completion of the course  is  correct.
    The 'Expected Course Completion Date' given by the college in a  letter
    dated 13 March 2012 (C12) was stated as  'Friday  18  May  2012',  thus
    after the date of application.

13. Further, in Raju and Others the Court of Appeal made it clear  that  AQ
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ  833  was  'not  authority  for  the
    proposition ... that the applications were "made" throughout the period
    starting with the date of their submission and finishing with the  date
    of the decisions'  (at  paragraph  24).   An  applicant  relying  on  a
    qualification on the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant route had to have
    that at the date of the application for the purposes  of  the  relevant
    Rule.

14. Moreover, in Ali (s.120 - PBS) [2012] UKUT  00368  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    held that (i) in a points-based system case the exception  set  out  in
    s.85A(3) and (4) of the 2002 Act precludes reliance on  a  section  120
    statement from being used in order to advance  evidence  of  compliance
    with a different requirement of the points-based system; and (ii)  what
    is said in AQ about the relevant date being the date  of  decision  not
    the date of application has  to  be  seen  as  not  applying  to  cases
    governed by s.85A with which the Court  of  Appeal  was  not  concerned
    (paragraph 31 of its judgment).

15. As for the standard letter which was sent to the Appellant  on  receipt
    of the application and which stated that if there was any problem  with
    the validity of the application he would be informed and advised as  to
    the action he needed to take to make a valid application, the Court  of
    Appeal in Alam and Others [2012] EWCA Civ 960 accepted the Respondent's
    contention that the check as to the validity of applications was a very
    preliminary check to see whether there were obvious omissions: e.g.  no
    fee  paid,  no  photograph  supplied,  no  signature  on  the   student
    declaration at the end of the form.  The Court accepted the distinction
    between an invalid application, which would not  be  considered  unless
    the obvious defect was cured, and  an  application  that  was  a  valid
    application,  but  nevertheless  fell  to  be  rejected   because,   on
    examination, the applicant had failed to score the required  number  of
    points e.g. because he had failed to supply a specified document.

16. I see no merit in the Appellant's submission as his case clearly  falls
    within the latter category.  There  was  no  unfairness  procedural  or
    otherwise. I see no material error of law  in  the  determination.  The
    Appellant could not score the  required  points  because  he  made  his
    application before he obtained his qualification.  The  decision  under
    the Immigration Rules stands.

17. The Appellant did not seek to challenge the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under Article 8 and that decision also stands.

18. Both parties agreed that the decision to  remove  the  Appellant  under
    section 47 of the 2006 Act  could  not  lawfully  be  notified  to  the
    Appellant at the same time as the refusal to vary his leave  to  remain
    (per Adamally and Jaferi).  In failing to  deal  with  the  section  47
    issue the judge erred in law.

19. The decision is remade by allowing the appeal but only in that  regard.
    The decision dismissing the appeal against the refusal  to  vary  leave
    (under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of ECHR) stands.

Decision

The  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  vary  the
Appellant's leave to remain stands.

The appeal against the decision to remove the Appellant is  allowed  as  not
being in accordance with the law.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
