
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21892/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2014                  |On 14 November 2014                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     A H
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on the 9th  September
   1972. He appeals against the decision of Judge  Dickson,  promulgated  on
   the 21st August 2014, to dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   refusal of his application for leave to remain and her decision to remove
   him from the United Kingdom.

2. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction,  I
   consider it appropriate to do so in order to safeguard the best interests
   of the children to whom I shall make reference in this determination.

3. At the  hearing  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
   appellant was represented by Ms S Khan of Counsel, who was instructed  by
   'Maz Shah Legal'. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  were  also
   settled by Ms Khan. However, Maz Shah Legal  subsequently  wrote  to  the
   Tribunal, stating that  they  are  without  instructions  and  no  longer
   represent the appellant. The appellant did not attend the hearing  before
   me. I was nevertheless satisfied that he was served with notice,  on  the
   16th October 2014, of the time, date and place of hearing at the  address
   provided for service in the Notice of Appeal. In all the circumstances, I
   considered that the appeal could justly be determined in his absence.

Background

4. The background to the appeal may be summarised as follows.

5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, as a  family  visitor,  with
   six months' leave to remain until the 4th December 2007. Since that time,
   he has remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  His  wife  and  eldest
   three  children  remain  in  Pakistan,  where  they  live  with  and  are
   financially supported by the appellant's parents. The appellant does  not
   have contact with  them  and  has  never  provided  them  with  financial
   support.

6. The appellant met his current partner, I S, in 2008. They  were  married,
   in accordance with the customs and practices of Islam, in 2010. They have
   three children. At the date of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  the
   children were respectively aged 5 years 3 months, 3 years 11 months,  and
   5 months.

7. In November 2010, the appellant's partner  was  granted  humanitarian  in
   the UK for a period of 5 years. This appears to have been granted on  the
   basis that she was at  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  on  return  to
   Pakistan due to her status as a single woman with a child. At that  time,
   the appellant and his partner were separated and had  lost  contact  with
   one another. However, they resumed contact a few months after the  birth,
   in May 2009, of their eldest child. As a result, I S became pregnant with
   their  second  child.  There  then  followed  a  series  separations  and
   reconciliations  for  various  periods  of  time.  The  relationship  was
   characterised by domestic violence between the appellant and I S.,  which
   was sufficient to cause the local social services department to intervene
   in order to protect the interests of the children. In March 2014,  social
   workers decided that the children were not at risk  of  significant  harm
   from their parents, but that it  was  nevertheless  necessary  to  put  a
   'Child in Need Plan' in place for a period of three months.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

8. The reasons for Judge Dickson's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  can  be
   found at paragraphs 33 to 39 of his determination. The references to  the
   "sponsor" in the second sentence, and thereafter to the end of  paragraph
   33, were obviously intended to be references to the appellant. Subject to
   this amendment, his reasoning may be summarised as follows.

9. The judge found I S to be a credible witness, with the exception  of  her
   testimony relating to the issue of whether the appellant had been working
   whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  found  the  appellant  to  be   an
   unsatisfactory witness who had shown a total disregard for UK immigration
   laws and for his responsibilities to his wife and children  in  Pakistan.
   The appellant had admitted working in Pakistan as a  builder,  and  there
   was no reason to suppose he could not do  so  again.  The  appellant  had
   given an unsatisfactory explanation for how he had financially  supported
   himself and his claim that he had not been working whilst in the  UK  was
   not therefore credible.

10. The appellant and I S currently appeared to  have  a  good  relationship
   with each other, and their children were also happy living with them. The
   judge nevertheless took account of  the  "volatility  of  the  situation"
   [paragraph 36].

11. The appellant did not meet the eligibility criteria of  Appendix  FM  of
   the Immigration Rules because he was not lawfully  married  to  I  S  and
   because he remained lawfully married to his wife  in  Pakistan.  Although
   the appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his
   children, he did not meet the criterion in Section EX(a) because all  the
   children were under the age of  7  years.  Whilst  the  appellant  had  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship  with  I  S,  he  did  not  meet  the
   criteria of Section EX(b) because there were no insurmountable  obstacles
   to their relationship continuing outside the UK.

12. The judge accepted that I S and at least two of her children  had  leave
   to remain until November 2014. He nevertheless considered that  it  would
   be reasonable for them to follow the appellant to Pakistan  in  order  to
   continue family life there. He noted that I S would not be returning as a
   single woman, and that  they  could  relocate  to  a  different  area  of
   Pakistan from that in which her  family  (whom  she  fears)  reside.  The
   Pakistani authorities would provide her with  sufficient  protection  and
   the appellant would be able to support them from his work as a builder.

The grounds of appeal

13. There are two grounds of appeal. Firstly, the judge  erred  in  applying
   the definition of "insurmountable obstacles" that is contained in Section
   Ex. 2 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.  This  is  because  that
   provision was not in force at the date of the Immigration Decision. As  a
   result, the judge had erred by "applying a more  stringent  test  to  the
   Appellant's article 8 claim" [paragraph 9]. Secondly, the judge erred  in
   revisiting I S's asylum claim, and in doing so failed to take account  of
   the fact the appellant and I S have a history of  domestic  violence  and
   have only been able to "move on and re-establish their relationship" with
   the "supervision and support of social services" [paragraph 11].



Analysis

14. I do not accept either of the premises upon which the  first  ground  of
   appeal is predicated. Firstly,  the  judge  did  not  direct  himself  by
   reference to the definition of "insurmountable  obstacles"  that  is  now
   contained within Section Ex.2. Rather, he did  so  by  reference  to  the
   dicta in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT
   00640 (IAC) in which it  said  that  "insurmountable  obstacles"  is  not
   concerned  with  obstacles  that  are  impossible  to  surmount,  but  is
   concerned with the practical possibilities of relocation  [see  paragraph
   16 of the determination]. Secondly, and in any event,  I  do  not  accept
   that the 'very significant obstacles' test that is now  contained  within
   Section Ex.2 (and also in Section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002) is more "stringent" than that  referred  to  in  the
   jurisprudence, quoted at some length in the grounds of appeal. I am  thus
   satisfied that the judge did not err in this regard.

15. Neither do I accept the argument  that  it  was  inappropriate  to  "re-
   visit" the question of whether  I  S  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
   Pakistan,  in  the  very  different  circumstances  to  those  that  were
   contemplated  when  she  was  granted  humanitarian  protection.  As  Mrs
   Petterson rightly pointed out, I S was separated  and  had  lost  contact
   with the  appellant  at  the  time  when  she  was  granted  humanitarian
   protection. However, that relationship is now fully restored. Indeed,  it
   was the very existence of that relationship that in large measure  formed
   the basis of the appellant's Article 8 claim.  The  appellant  would  not
   therefore be returning to Pakistan as a single woman; rather,  she  would
   be returning with the full support of  her  partner  and  father  of  her
   children. The argument  that  the  existence  of  that  relationship  was
   somehow dependent upon  the  continued  support  of  social  services  is
   without any evidential basis and, thus, entirely speculative.  Therefore,
   in deciding whether family  life  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  be
   enjoyed outside the United Kingdom, the judge was entitled (and  arguably
   obliged) to take account of I S's current circumstances rather than those
   that appertained at the time when she was granted humanitarian protection
   [see section 85 of the 2002 Act].

Notice of Decision

16. The appeal is dismissed.


Notice: Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

David Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           13 November 2014
