
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Numbers:    IA/21416/2015
      IA/21420/2015
      IA/21423/2015
      IA/21426/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 September 2017                         |On 27 September 2017           |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between
                                    MS MH
                                  MISS OBDH
                                 MASTER EAH
                                  MISS ODZH
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Owens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appeals came before the Upper Tribunal for an error of law hearing
on 14 June 2017. In a decision and reasons dated 19 July 2017, I found an
error of law and adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing, with
directions. The error of law decision is appended. Prior to the hearing the
Appellant's solicitors lodged a bundle of additional documents in
accordance with the directions and rule 152A of the Procedure Rules, which
comprised evidence that the second Appellant, Miss OBDH, had been
registered as a British citizen on 8 August 2017. The Appellants also
sought to rely upon a skeleton argument from Mr Pipe dated 8 September
2017.

Hearing

2. The appeal proceeded on the basis of submissions only, the findings of
fact of the FtTJ at [15] and [16] having been preserved. In his
submissions,
Mr Melvin noted the finding at [15] that there was no contact with the
children's father. He further acknowledged that one of the children is now
a British Citizen and that in light of SF & others (Guidance, post 2014
Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) and given the absence of an alternative
carer,
there was little in the way of argument that the Respondent can put forward
and that the decision was a matter for the Upper Tribunal on the evidence.

3. In his submissions, Mr Pipe stated that, whilst the appeal of the second
Appellant has fallen away in light of her registration as a British
citizen,
it would be unreasonable to expect the other family members to leave the
United Kingdom and that the requirements of R-LTRPT of Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules were met in respect of the first Appellant and the
requirements of R-LTRC 1.6 were met in respect of the other two children.

Decision

4. I allowed the appeals and announced my decision at the hearing. I now
provide my reasons.

5. The second Appellant was registered as a British citizen based on the
fact that she was born in the United Kingdom and had lived here
continuously for 10 years. The Respondent's guidance "Family Migration -
Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and Private
Life, 10 year Routes" August 2015 at 11.2.3. provides:

      "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
take a      decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
British Citizen child  where the effect of that decision would be to force
that British child to leave the   EU, regardless of the age of that child.
This reflects the European Court of     Justice Judgment in Zambrano.

      Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
primary     carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
always be assessed     on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
a British Citizen child to   leave the EU with that parent or primary
carer.

      In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
parent or   primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
child, provided  that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
subsisting parental    relationship.

      It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
conduct of  the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
such weight as to      justify separation, if the child could otherwise
stay with another parent or  alternative primary carer in the UK or in the
EU.

      The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

      . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398
of the      Immigration Rules;

      . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
repeatedly  and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

      In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision maker
must  consider the impact on the child of any separation. If the decision
maker is    minded to refuse, in circumstances where separation would be
the result, this       decision should normally be discussed with a senior
caseworker and, where  appropriate, advice may be sought from the Office of
the Children's Champion      on the implications for the welfare of the
child, in order to inform the     decision."

6. It is clear from the decision of the Vice-President of the Upper
Tribunal in of SF & others (Guidance, post 2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT
120 (IAC) at [10]-[12] that this Guidance is:

       "10. ... an important source of the Secretary of State's view of
what is to be    regarded as reasonable in the circumstances, and it is
important in our       judgement for the Tribunal at both levels to make
decisions which are, as far as    possible, consistent with decisions made
in other areas of the process of  immigration control.

      11. It is only possible for Tribunals to make decisions on matters
such as     reasonableness consistently with those that are being made in
favour of   individuals by the Secretary of State if the Tribunal applies
similar or identical   processes to those employed by the Secretary of
State.

      12.  ... where there is clear guidance which covers a case where an
assessment  has to be made, and where the guidance clearly demonstrates
what the    outcome of the assessment would have been made by the Secretary
of State, it     would, we think, be the normal practice for the Tribunal
to take such guidance  into account and to apply it in assessing the same
consideration in a case that      came before it."

7. The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 22 July 2005.
Whilst she subsequently became an overstayer, it has never been the
Respondent's position that she has a "very poor" immigration history, so as
to justify refusal of the grant of leave on the basis of her conduct.
Consequently, I find that the grant of leave would be appropriate in light
of the Home Office guidance and the decision in SF (op cit) and the fact
that, in light of my finding that it would not be reasonable to expect her
British daughter to leave the United Kingdom, the first Appellant meets the
requirements of R-LTRPT 1.1.(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

8. The third Appellant will turn 7 years of age on 2 October 2010 and her
younger brother will turn 4 years of age on 11 October 2013. In light of my
finding that it would be unreasonable to expect their older sister to leave
the United Kingdom, I find it would be contrary to their best interests and
unreasonable for the family to be split as a consequence of requiring them
to leave the United Kingdom. I have carefully considered the requirements
of R-LTRC and I find that the requirements of R-LTRC 1.1.(d) are met, with
the effect that they should be granted leave in line with their mother.

Notice of decision

9. The appeals of the first, third and fourth Appellants are allowed. The
appeal of the second Appellant falls away in light of the fact that she has
been registered as a British citizen.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

In light of the fact that the appeal involves  three  children,  unless  and
until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellants  are  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

25 September 2017

