
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/21868/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                         |On 13th August 2015        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                             Mr SUKWINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Karim (counsel) instructed by Uzma Law Ltd.
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the appellant  against  a  decision  of  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Woolley promulgated on 20 January 2015  which  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3     The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 4 December  1981.  On  16
April  2014,  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's   application   for
variation of leave to remain on the basis of  10  years'  continuous  lawful
residence in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

4     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Woolley  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision. The judge found that  the  appellant  had  worked  in
breach of the terms of his conditions of leave to remain in the  UK  and  so
found that  Paragraphs  322(3)  and  276B  of  HC395  operated  against  the
appellant.

5     Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  17  March  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Levin gave permission to appeal, stating "...that  the  judge
erred by considering the case on the basis  that  Para.  322(3)  provided  a
mandatory ground of refusal and his decision under Para. 276B of  the  Rules
in Para. 22 of his decision was also affected by this error. It is  arguable
that the judge's decision as a whole is tainted by this error of law".


The Hearing


6     Mr Karim, Counsel for the appellant, noted that the respondent in  the
Rule 24  response  concedes  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by  regarding
Paragraph 322(3) as a "mandatory refusal" so that  this  appeal  focuses  on
whether or not that error is a material error. In addition, Mr Karim  argued
that consideration  of  the  respondent's  decision  demonstrates  that  the
decision maker did not exercise the discretion afforded by Paragraph  322(3)
so that the only correct course is to find that the decision  has  not  been
made in accordance with the law so  that  the  matter  will  rest  with  the
Secretary of State to make a lawful  decision  with  a  proper  exercise  of
discretion under Paragraph 322(3). Mr Karim argued that the judge  erred  in
considering Paragraph 276B of the Rules because  the  respondent's  decision
was not a  decision  made  by  reference  to  Paragraph  276B(iii)  and  the
appellant has not had fair notice of the case against him.


7     Mr Avery, for the respondent, conceded that Paragraph 322(3) is not  a
mandatory ground of refusal and to that extent, the judge has made an  error
but argued that it is not  a  material  error  of  law  and  that  the  same
decision would have been reached  had  the  judge  placed  emphasis  on  the
wording of Paragraph 322(3), "...would normally fall for refusal".


Analysis

8     It is a matter of concession that the decision contains  an  error  of
law. Paragraph 322 is in discretionary terms. At [3] of  the  decision,  the
judge incorrectly quotes Paragraph 322 and specifies that it forms  part  of
the grounds on which leave to remain in the UK  "...are  to  be  refused..."
That error is compounded when at  [22],  the  judge  states  that  Paragraph
322(3) "...entails a mandatory refusal of the application".


9     I find that the error is a material error in law because it  is  clear
when reading the judge's determination as  a  whole,  that  his  failure  to
appreciate that Paragraph  322(3)  calls  for  the  exercise  of  discretion
prevented the judge from reviewing whether or not that discretion  had  been
exercised appropriately.  The  error  in  law  has  therefore  infected  the
judge's decision as a whole.

10    I was invited by Mr Karim to look to the  terms  of  the  respondent's
decision. He referred specifically to the second page  of  the  reasons  for
refusal letter and argued that the fourth paragraph from the bottom of  that
page demonstrated that the respondent has not exercised discretion.


11    I cannot accept Mr Karim's  submission  in  this  regard  because  the
paragraph immediately above the paragraph that Mr Karim  drew  my  attention
to clearly and correctly narrates the terms of Paragraph 322(3)  and  is  an
acknowledgement by the respondent of the discretion  to  be  exercised.  The
paragraph that Mr Karim referred  me  to  was,  in  fact,  the  respondent's
summary of the exercise of discretion.


12    I therefore find that there is no merit in Mr Karim's submission  that
the  decision  is  manifestly  unlawful  because  discretion  has  not  been
exercised.

13    A material error of law has been made, so that the  decision  must  be
set aside.  I find that the facts in this case are  clearly  established  so
that I can remake the decision.


The Facts

14    The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK on  18  October  2003.
His leave to enter was extended by the respondent on a number  of  occasions
until 14 July 2008 when the application that he made on 26  March  2008  for
leave to remain as a student was refused with no right of appeal.


15    The appellant applied for a reconsideration of that  decision  and  on
29 August 2008, the respondent adhered to the decision of 14 July  2008  but
the appellant then had a right of appeal. The appellant exercised his  right
of appeal and, on 9 December 2008, his appeal was allowed.  On  25  February
2009, his application for leave to remain as a student was reconsidered  and
he was granted leave until 31 May 2009.

16    The appellant then made a number of further applications for leave  to
remain as a student and the respondent extended leave until 9 June 2010.  On
27 May 2010, the appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4  student.
His application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  22  June  2010.  The
appellant exercised his right of appeal and his appeal  was  allowed  on  24
September 2010.


17    On 1 December 2010, the appellant was granted leave  to  remain  as  a
Tier  4  student  until  1  March  2011.  The  appellant  was  then  granted
extensions of leave to remain as a Tier 4 student until 27  September  2011.
On 22 September 2011, the appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier  1
highly skilled migrant. Leave was granted until 8 December 2013.


18    On 16 October 2013, the appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
remain on the grounds of 10 years' long residence in the UK. The  respondent
refused that application on 2 May 2014. It is  against  that  decision  that
the appellant appeals.

19    Between 23 October 2009 and 17 June  2011,  the  appellant  worked  in
excess of 20 hours per  week.  He  was  employed  by  Whitbread  Group  plc.
Throughout that period, although the appellant had leave to remain,  he  did
not have the right to work  more  than  20  hours  each  week.  One  of  the
conditions attached to the grant of leave to remain as a  student  was  that
the appellant was not allowed to take employment of more than 20  hours  per
week during term time.


20    The appellant therefore failed to comply with the conditions  attached
to the grant of leave to remain as a student.


Analysis

21    Paragraph 276B(iii) requires that the appellant's  application  should
not fall for refusal under the general  grounds  for  refusal.  The  general
grounds for refusal relevant to this case are contained in Paragraph  322(3)
of the Immigration Rules which provide that an application for variation  of
leave to remain in the UK should normally be refused if  the  applicant  has
failed to comply with any conditions attached  to  the  grant  to  enter  or
remain.


22    The decision dated 2  May  2014  was  accompanied  by  a  reasons  for
refusal letter. The reasons for refusal  letter  sets  out  the  appellant's
immigration history and  the  reason  why  the  respondent  found  that  the
appellant had breached a condition attached to the grant of leave to  remain
in the UK. The respondent considered that there  is  nothing  unusual  about
the appellant's case so that he falls  into  the  category  of  those  cases
which should normally be refused.


23    In R(app Ali) 2004 EHC 3117 it was noted  that,  in  contrast  to  the
words in the Rule, there was a policy set out in the IDIs which stated  that
refusal under this paragraph should normally only  be  appropriate  where  a
person has shown by his conduct that he has  deliberately  and  consistently
breached his conditions of stay and it is not intended that  this  paragraph
should be used indiscriminately where, for example, a person has  overstayed
his leave unintentionally  or his applications  was  submitted  a  few  days
late.

24    In Ukus (discretion: when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) If a decision maker in the purported exercise  of  a
discretion vested in him noted his function and what  was  required  to  be
done when fulfilling it and then proceeded to  reach  a  decision  on  that
basis, the decision is a lawful one and the Tribunal  cannot  intervene  in
the absence of a statutory power to decide that the discretion should  have
been exercised differently (see s 86(3)(b) of the Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002); (ii) Where the decision maker has failed to  exercise
a discretion vested in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  is
limited to a decision  that  the  failure  renders  the  decision  'not  in
accordance with the law' (s 86(3)(a)). Because the discretion is vested  in
the Executive, the appropriate course will be for the Tribunal  to  require
the decision maker to complete his task by reaching a  lawful  decision  on
the outstanding application, along the lines set out in SSHD v Abdi  [1996]
Imm AR 148. In such a case, it makes no difference whether there is such  a
statutory power as is mentioned in paragraph  1  above;  and  (ii)  If  the
decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion and the  Tribunal  has
such a statutory power, the Tribunal must either (a)  uphold  the  decision
maker's decision (if the Tribunal is unpersuaded that the decision  maker's
discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently);  or  (b)  reach  a
different decision in the exercise of its own discretion.


25    The appellant's breach of his conditions of leave to remain in the  UK
is significant. The payslips produced by the appellant demonstrate  that  he
embarked on a course of conduct stretching over a number of years  in  which
he regularly worked in excess of the hours permitted by the grant  of  leave
to remain.  Paragraph  322(3)  provides  that  in  circumstances  where  the
appellant has failed to comply with a condition attached  to  the  grant  of
leave to remain, his application to vary leave to remain should normally  be
refused. The decision  indicates  that  the  respondent  was  aware  of  the
discretion contained in Paragraph 322(3) and exercised that discretion.  The
respondent's decision was  made  under  Paragraph  276D  with  reference  to
Paragraph 276B(iii) and Paragraph 322(3) of HC395. The decision was made  in
accordance with the law. It is a decision supported by the facts as  I  find
them to be.


26    No challenge is taken to the judge's decision in terms  of  Article  8
ECHR.


Decision


27    The decision promulgated on 20 January 2015 contains a material  error
of law. I therefore set it aside.


28    I remake the decision and substitute the following decision.


29    The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision dated  2  May
2014 is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date 7
August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

