


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21735/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 November 2016                    |On 26 January 2017             |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                              CAROL BRENDA DURRANT
                                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
       Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr K Ayileka, Solicitor, Gracefields Solicitors
For the Respondent:              Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is a resumed hearing which followed on from my earlier error of
    law decision setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal upon
    the basis that the judge therein applied a test for Article 8 which I
    subsequently found to be in error. In this judgment I refer to Mrs
    Durrant as the "Appellant" and to the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department as the "SSHD".

2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Trinidad & Tobago  born  on  9  December
    1950. She appealed against the decision of the SSHD dated 27  May  2015
    to refuse her application for leave to remain based on her  established
    family and private life in the UK. The  SSHD  refused  the  Appellant's
    application by reference to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules
    and on Article 8 grounds contrary to the ECHR.

3.    The Appellant appealed the decision and her appeal came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Doyle on 23 November 2015 and he allowed the appeal
    contrary to Article 8 outside of the Rules.

4.    The Respondent appealed that  decision  and  after  a  hearing  on  17
    August 2016, I set aside that decision. The matter was adjourned for me
    to rehear the appeal. There was no dispute that the Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The matter fell  to  be
    reconsidered in relation to Article 8 - the focus of the  appeal  being
    that of proportionality.

5.    Mr Ayileka indicated that he did not intend to call the  Appellant  to
    give evidence relying on the preserved  findings  and  the  documentary
    evidence before me. Mr Diwnycz indicated that he was content with  that
    as he had no questions for the Appellant.

Submissions

6.    At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Diwnycz on  behalf  of  the
    SSHD that :

    (a) He relied on the reasons for refusal letter.


    (b) It was for the Appellant to establish that the SSHD's decision  was
    not    proportionate.


7.       On behalf of the Appellant Mr Ayileka submitted that :

      (a) He relied on his skeleton argument.

         (b) Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002  (hereafter  "the  2002  Act")  was  not  determinative   of   the
    proportionality assessment.

    (c) The Appellant is financially independent and speaks English.
    (d) There are many factors that weigh in the Appellant's favour against
    the fact that she has no leave to remain in the UK.


    (e) The Appellant first entered the UK in 1970. She married in  the  UK
    and had three children who are all British citizens.  She  was  granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain in 1978.


    (f) The Appellant last arrived in the UK as a visitor on 6  June  2003.
    She then lived here as a work permit holder for five years until  2008.
    She became an overstayer in 2009.


    (g) The Appellant has since attempted to regularise her status but  her
    applications were rejected as invalid.

    (h) The Appellant has ten British grandchildren who she sees  regularly
    and she takes care of some of them weekly.


    (i) She has worked for the NHS and receives two UK pensions.


    (j) The Appellant is of good character.

    (k) The Appellant is 65 years old. She has strong  connections  to  the
    UK. All of her children save for one are in the  UK.  Her  daughter  in
    Trinidad intends to relocate to the UK. The Appellant's family members,
    in particular, her three minor grandchildren  she  cares  for  will  be
    affected by her absence.

Findings

8.    I am required to  look  at  all  the  evidence  in  the  round  before
    reaching any findings bearing in mind that the burden of proof is  upon
    the Appellant on a balance of probabilities. I have done so.  Although,
    for convenience, I have compartmentalised my findings in some  respects
    below, I must emphasise the findings have only been made  having  taken
    account of the evidence as a whole.

9.     The  First-tier  Tribunal's  preserved  findings  of  fact   can   be
    summarised as follows. The Appellant first came to the  UK  in  January
    1970 when she was 19 years old as a student nurse. In  March  1976  she
    married a British citizen and they had three children. In October  1978
    she was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK. In December  1983
    she left the UK and travelled to  Jamaica  to  look  after  her  ailing
    mother-in-law. She remained there until February 1985; from  there  she
    travelled to Trinidad to look after her ailing  father.  The  Appellant
    was joined by her two youngest daughters. Whilst the Appellant  was  in
    Trinidad  her  marriage  broke  down  and  she  entered  into   a   new
    relationship and they subsequently had two daughters.

10.   In December 2000 the Appellant and her two  daughters  from  her  last
    relationship entered the UK as visitors. In  June  2001  the  Appellant
    returned to Trinidad leaving her children in the care  of  her  British
    citizen daughter because her father's condition  had  deteriorated.  In
    2014 the two daughters were granted limited leave to remain in the UK.

11.   On 6 June 2003 the  Appellant  returned  to  the  UK.  She  has  since
    remained in the UK save for a brief trip to Trinidad in  2006  for  her
    father's funeral. In August 2003 the Appellant was issued with  a  work
    permit valid until 29 August 2008.  In  2004  and  2007  the  Appellant
    unsuccessfully made applications for leave to remain in the UK; each of
    her two applications was rejected by the Respondent as invalid.

12.   Four of the Appellant's five daughters live in the UK  and  the  other
    lives in Trinidad with her two children. The latter  are  also  British
    citizens and they intend to leave Trinidad and return to  the  UK.  The
    Appellant has nine minor grandchildren and one  adult  grandchild.  She
    cares for her  three  minor  grandchildren  twice  a  week  whilst  her
    daughter is at work. She has  less  frequent  contact  with  her  other
    grandchildren.

13.   The Appellant receives an NHS pension and a UK state pension. She  has
    a home and a brother in Trinidad, but she has had no contact  with  him
    for 2 years. The Appellant lives with her two youngest  daughters.  Her
    other daughter and her three children live close by. The  Appellant  is
    in contact with all of her children and grandchildren.

14.   It is common ground that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  conditions
    for being granted leave to remain under the Immigration Rules including
    those components of the Rules which were designed to make an assessment
    of the rights of the Appellant under Article 8. The  Immigration  Rules
    are said to reflect the SSHD's view of where a fair balance  should  be
    struck between the right to respect for private  and  family  life  and
    public interest  considerations  relating  to  the  maintenance  of  an
    effective system of immigration control. The Rules should be read in  a
    way that reflects a proper interpretation of Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    However, there may be  some  cases  where  the  rules  do  not  address
    relevant Article 8 issues.  In  such  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to
    consider whether there are compelling circumstances to justify granting
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules: SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  This should be assessed by reference to the  five  stage
    test outlined by the House of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]
    3 WLR 58.

15.   There is no dispute that this  is  one  of  those  cases.  The  appeal
    focuses on the Appellant's private life which includes a  consideration
    of the relationships that she has  established  here  with  her  family
    members. The question which arises  is  whether  the  particular  facts
    surrounding the Appellant and her  personal  and  family  circumstances
    give rise to some compelling or exceptional  circumstance  which,  when
    measured within the proportionality test, give rise  to  an  Article  8
    right which must be recognised.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  oral
    evidence and received detailed submissions upon the facts.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal's fact-finding accepted the  Appellant's  background  and
    circumstances in its entirety (summarised  above),  which  I  now  must
    apply to the applicable law.

16.   There is no dispute that the Appellant has established a private  life
    in the  UK.  The  Appellant's  private  life  consists  of  substantial
    elements and comprises of relationships that she has  established  with
    her adult children and grandchildren in the UK. I  bear  in  mind  that
    following the decisions in AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] INLR 407  and  VW
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5 that the  threshold  for  showing  an
    interference  with  an  Appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  is  not
    particularly high. For this reason I find that it is  likely  that  the
    Appellant has established a private life in the UK, and that in all the
    circumstances of this case removal would interfere with that life in  a
    sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of Article  8.  There
    is also no dispute that the SSHD's decision is in accordance  with  the
    law and pursues a legitimate aim namely one of immigration control. The
    matter thus boils down to the question of proportionality.

17.   On the merits of this appeal, whilst I acknowledge  and  take  account
    of the limited utility of Article 8 in private life cases, I have  come
    to the conclusion that I should not  disturb  the  ultimate  conclusion
    arrived at by the judge below. In this respect I would  emphasise  that
    this is a finding on specific facts, that it is in my view  a  marginal
    decision, and that I do not in any sense consider that this would be  a
    precedent for other cases of this kind. I have essentially come to this
    conclusion because when viewed in the context of the usual facts  which
    go into a proportionality balancing exercise I consider that the  facts
    of this case, in combination, are towards the extreme  -  "exceptional"
    or "compelling" end of the spectrum.

18.    The  First-tier  Tribunal   found   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances in view of the Appellant's contribution  to  UK  society;
    she was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in 1978, which  she  had  no
    intention of relinquishing, but which was lost through no fault of  her
    own when she left the UK to care  for  her  father;  her  children  and
    grandchildren were all British citizens; the family  history  indicated
    that even though she left the UK in the 1980's that  she  continued  to
    regard the UK as her home; the impact of the SSHD's  decision  is  that
    she would be separated from her daughters and grandchildren  and  would
    face the prospect of advancing years alone away from  her  family  with
    whom she has lived throughout her life. I  agree  that  these  are  all
    compelling features unique to a case of this kind.

19.   However, in assessing whether removal in consequence of  the  decision
    would be a proportionate response, I must and do  have  regard  to  the
    public interest considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.
    I take into account that it is in the public interest  to  maintain  an
    effective  system  of  immigration  control  (s.117B(1)).   While   the
    Appellant  speaks  English  and  is  financially  independent  and   is
    therefore better able to integrate, this is a neutral factor that  does
    not add to her case (s.117B(2)). It is merely a factor  that  does  not
    lend additional weight to the public interest  considerations:  see  AM
    (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260.

20.   I am also required to attach little weight to the  private  life  that
    has been established in the UK at a time when  a  person's  immigration
    status is precarious/unlawful (s.117B(4)  &  (5)).  The  Appellant  has
    continued to build upon the ties she has to the UK since her last entry
    in 2003. Whilst she entered lawfully and remained here as a work permit
    holder for five years, there is no dispute that since 2009 she has  had
    no leave to remain in the UK.

21.   The public interest considerations outlined in  section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act are, however, only one part of the proportionality  assessment
    and may still be outweighed if the Appellant can show  that  there  are
    particularly compelling circumstances that might justify granting leave
    to remain  even  though  she  doesn't  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Here I agree with the conclusion of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the facts of this case are unusual for the reasons that I
    have outlined above. This is not a case where to permit  the  Appellant
    to remain would set a dangerous precedent about private life or rights.
    This is in my view simply a case where  on  the  particular  facts  the
    private rights of the Appellant and her family have  unusually  reached
    the level where  they  may  properly  be  said  to  be  exceptional  or
    compelling and where the harm to the  important  policy  objectives  of
    maintaining an effective and fair immigration system  is  limited,  and
    hence, just outweighed.

22.   For the reasons given above I find that removal in consequence of  the
    decision would amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    Appellant's right to private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.


23.    The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed:                                            Date: 26 January 2017









Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD



It is appropriate to make a fee award as I have allowed the appeal.







Signed                                       Dated 26 January 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

