
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/21162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                        Herbert Ayoola Caxton-Martins
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Herbert Ayoola Caxton-Martins was born on 8 October  1986
    and is a male citizen of Nigeria.  In a decision promulgated 19 January
    2015, I find that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  such  that
    its determination had to be set aside.  My decision was as follows:

   2. The appellant, Herbert Caxton-Martins, is a citizen of Nigeria who was
      born on 8 October 1986.  He had applied for  a  residence  card  under
      Regulation 18A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
      2006  (hereafter  referred  to  as  "the  2006   Regulations").    His
      application was refused by the respondent by way of a notice dated  22
      April 2014.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
      Thorne) which, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  8  August  2014,
      dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to
      the Upper Tribunal.

   3. Granting permission, Judge Gibb wrote at [30]:

         As  the  appellant  is  not  represented  I  have  looked  at   the
         determination with care.  I can see little point in the  complaints
         as to the outcome under the derivative residence point,  but  there
         is an arguable legal error in relation to Article 8.  The judge did
         not consider this because there was no removal decision,  but  this
         was an arguable legal error in view of Ahmed [2013] UKUT  89  (IAC)
         and the fact that it was raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal  (even
         noting that the Secretary of State had not considered Article 8  in
         the refusal).

   4. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant claimed that he was  the
      primary carer of N (who is now aged 1 year).  The mother  of  N  is  a
      naturalised British citizen  who  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
      Zimbabwe in 2002.  The respondent considered that  the  appellant  was
      not entitled to a Derivative  Residence  Card  on  the  basis  of  the
      judgment in Zambrano (C-34/09).  The respondent  considered  that  the
      appellant was not the primary carer of N and, if the appellant had  to
      leave the United Kingdom, then the mother of N would be able  to  care
      for her and N would be able to remain in the United Kingdom.   In  his
      grounds of appeal, the appellant disputes the  findings  made  by  the
      judge, namely that the appellant had failed to establish that,  if  he
      had to leave the United Kingdom, N would be  unable  to  reside  here.
      The judge found [28] that the appellant had failed to  establish  that
      he was the primary carer of N; he found that the care of the child "is
      shared between the appellant and his wife."  The grounds of appeal  as
      drafted by the appellant and the representations he made to me at  the
      initial hearing amount to no more than a disagreement with conclusions
      which were open to the judge on the evidence before him.

   5. The only matter which remains before the Upper Tribunal is, therefore,
      that of Article 8 ECHR, as identified by Judge Gibb in  the  grant  of
      permission.  Judge Gibb dealt briefly with Article 8 at [32]:

         The  appellant  has  not  been  issued  with  removal   directions.
         Therefore the only decision under appeal relates to the refusal  to
         grant  him  a  Derivative  Residence  Card.   In  my  judgment  the
         respondent's decision to refuse the appellant a residence  card  to
         which (as I have found) he is not entitled does not interfere  with
         any right protected under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   6. Appeals to the First-tier Tribunal  under  the  2006  Regulations  are
      subject to the provisions of Regulation 26:


      26.-(1) Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation, a
      person may appeal under  these Regulations against an EEA decision.
      (2) If a person claims to be an EEA national, he may not appeal under
      these Regulations unless he produces a valid national identity card or
      passport issued by an EEA State.
      (3) If a person claims to be the family member or relative of an EEA
      national he may not appeal under these Regulations unless he produces-
      (a) an EEA family permit; or
      (b) other proof that he is related as claimed to an EEA national.
      (4) A person may not bring an appeal under these Regulations on a
 ground certified under
      paragraph (5) or rely on such a ground in an appeal brought under
 these Regulations.
      (5) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may certify a
      ground for the purposes of paragraph (4) if it has been considered in
      a previous appeal brought under these Regulations or under section
      82(1) of the 2002 Act.
      (6) Except where an appeal lies to the Commission, an appeal under
      these Regulations lies to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.
      (7) The provisions of or made under the 2002 Act referred to in
      Schedule 1 shall have effect for the purposes of an appeal under these
      Regulations to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in accordance with
      that Schedule.

   7. Schedule 1 of the 2006 Regulations provides as follows:


      The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act have effect
      in relation to an appeal
      under these Regulations to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal as if
      it were an appeal against an immigration decision under section 82(1)
      of that Act:
      section 84(1)(a), except paragraphs (a) and (f);
      sections 85 to 87;
      sections 103A to 103E;
      section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and section
      106 and any rules made under that section(b).

   8. Schedule 1 provides, therefore, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
      treat an appeal brought under the 2006 Regulations in the same way  as
      an appeal against an immigration decision under Section 82(1)  of  the
      2002 Act.  The provisions of Section 84(1) (except sub-paragraphs  (a)
      and (f)) shall have effect.  Section 84 (having removed sub-paragraphs
      (a) and (f)) provides as follows:

      84 Grounds of appealE+W+S+N.I.
      (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must
      be brought on one or more of the following grounds-

      (a)...

      (b) that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B of the Race
      Relations Act 1976 (c. 74) (discrimination by public authorities)

      (c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
      Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
      Convention) as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention
      rights;

      (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of the family of
      an EEA national and   the decision breaches the appellant's rights
      under the Community Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in
      the United Kingdom;

      (e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;

      (f).....

      (g) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom in
      consequence of the immigration decision would breach the United
      Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or would be
      unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being
      incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights.

      (2) In subsection (1)(d) "EEA national" means a national of a State
      which is a contracting party to the Agreement on the European Economic
      Area signed at Oporto on 2nd May 1992 (as it has effect from time to
      time).

      (3) An appeal under section 83 must be brought on the grounds that
      removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

      (4) An appeal under section 83A must be brought on the grounds that
      removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.


      It follows, therefore, that an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under
      the 2006 Regulations is capable, by the operation of Section 84(c)  of
      the 2002 Act, of engaging Article 8 ECHR.

   9. The Court of Appeal in JM [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 settled the question as
      to whether, in the absence  of  decision  to  remove,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (then in its previous manifestation as the AIT)  was  obliged
      to  determine  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  an  appeal  against   an
      immigration  decision  under  Section  82(1).   At  [14-15]  Laws   LJ
      observed;
       14. It is of course elementary that the AIT is a creature of statute
           and thus possesses only the jurisdiction which statute has
           conferred upon it. In this case, the most pertinent provisions
           are contained in sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act. First,
           section 82(1):
        "(1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person,
        he may appeal [to the Tribunal]. [I interpolate, the statute has
        been amended, it previously referred to an adjudicator].
        "(2): In this part 'immigration decision' means ...
        "(d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the
        United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person has
        no need to enter or remain ...
        "(g) a decision that a person is to be removed from the
        United Kingdom by way of directions under [section 10(1)(a), (b) or
        (c) of the Immigrations and Asylum Act 1999 (removal of person
        unlawfully in United Kingdom)."
       15. I may go to section 84(1):
        "An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must
        be brought on one or more of the following grounds ...
        "(c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human
        Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human
        Rights Convention) as being incompatible with the appellant's
        Convention rights ...
         "(g) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom in
         consequence of the immigration decision would breach the
         United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or would
         be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being
         incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."




        Laws LJ at [28] concluded:
         The short, but important, position is  that  once  a  human  rights
         point is properly before the AIT, they are obliged to deal with it.
         That is consonant with the general jurisprudence  relating  to  the
         obligations of public bodies under the Human Rights Act  and  seems
         to me to be the proper result of the construction of  the  relevant
         provisions. I should  add  that  the  AIT  referred  to  Strasbourg
         authority, they said at paragraph 33:
         "We are aware that it has sometimes been said that, in dealing with
         a  refusal  to  vary  leave  to  enter  or  remain,  the  appellant
         authorities should deal also with human rights on  removal  on  the
         basis that removal is imminent: but it is not imminent in any legal
         sense because of the need for a further decision. So much is  clear
         from the European Court of Human Rights  decision  in  Vijayanathan
         and Pusparajar v France (1992) 15 EHRR 62."

  10. The Upper Tribunal considered Article 8  in  appeals  under  the  2006
      Regulations in Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg  15A(3)(c)  2006  EEA  Regs)
      [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC).  Both parties agreed that Article  8  grounds
      could be raised:

      Mr Deller [the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer]  submitted  that
      although the decision at issue in this case - refusal of  a  permanent
      residence card - was not a removal decision, it would  appear,  on  JM
      (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 principles, that  the  Tribunal  should
      consider the case on the basis that  a  putative  consequence  of  the
      refusal decision is that the respondent would proceed  to  direct  her
      removal  to  Pakistan.   That  said,   the   appellant's   Article   8
      circumstances now were  stronger  than  they  were  when  the  refusal
      decision was made over two years ago.  Among the factors in her favour
      were that she had been accepted in the past as having an EU  right  of
      residence  as  a  family  member;  she  would  appear  to   meet   the
      requirements of Appendix FM of the new Immigration Rules, had she made
      her application on July 9 2012 or thereafter; her children  are  Union
      citizens; it has been accepted that she has been a victim of  domestic
      violence.  Whilst he would leave  the  matter  for  the  Tribunal,  he
      accepted the appellant's Article 8 case was a strong one.

      The Tribunal agreed [79]:

      Even if we are wrong in the conclusion to which we have  come  on  the
      application of  Zambrano  principles  and  Article  12  of  Regulation
      1612/68, we would still allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds. As
      regards jurisdiction, we have already noted we are  entitled  to  deal
      with Article 8 in this type of appeal: see JM  (Liberia).  As  regards
      merits, however, we must make it clear that we do not allow it because
      we think she satisfies all the requirements  of  the  new  Immigration
      Rules.  She does not quite.

  11. In the present appeal, Judge Thorne engaged with Article 8 but only in
      order to refuse to determine the appeal on that  ground.   It  follows
      that he was wrong in law to do so. I say that  because  (i)  the  2006
      Regulations make provision for appeals to be brought on  human  rights
      grounds and (ii) I cannot identify any reason  to  conclude  that  the
      reasoning of JM should not apply to appeals brought in respect of  the
      Regulations; the "human rights point was properly before"  the  First-
      tier Tribunal which was "obliged to deal with it." The  absence  of  a
      removal decision was of no greater relevance to the obligation of  the
      Tribunal to address Article 8 ECHR in  this  2006  Regulations  appeal
      than it was in the Immigration Rules appeal in JM.  I  set  aside  the
      determination accordingly.  The appeal is  dismissed  under  the  2006
      Regulations.  The Upper Tribunal will determine the appeal on  Article
      8 ECHR grounds following a resumed hearing before me at Bradford.




12. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 24 March 2015, the appellant  did
    not attend.  Mrs Pettersen,  for  the  respondent,  told  me  that  the
    appellant had made a subsequent application to remain under HC 395  (as
    amended) D-LTRP1.2 and had been granted leave to remain for  30  months
    expiring 13 September 2017.  Although it was not clear whether  an  EEA
    appeal should be treated as  an  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 104 of that Act (whereby a grant of leave to the appellant will
    lead to the appeal being treated as abandoned) I am satisfied,  in  any
    event, by reference the failure of  the  appellant  to  attend  today's
    hearing (he was duly served with a notice of  hearing  on  17  February
    2015) and the fact that he has now been granted leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom that he no longer wishes to proceed with the appeal.   I
    have therefore dismissed the appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 30 March 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
