
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21830/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2016                           |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR SAMI ULLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Ansari (Ansari Law, Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State,
    with permission, against a judgment of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Davies) promulgated on 15th December  2015  in  which  he  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain as a spouse.

 2. For the sake of clarity and continuity I shall refer to Mr Ullah as the
    Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  in  this
    judgment.

 3. The Appellant had  initially  sought  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  but  before  it  was  decided   amended   that
    application to one for leave to remain as a spouse.

 4. The application was refused as the Secretary of State asserted that the
    Appellant had used deception by submitting  an  English  language  test
    certificate when the test had been taken by a proxy.

 5. As in all such cases, the Secretary of State relied  on  statements  by
    Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter  Millington.   The  Judge  rejected  that
    evidence as inadequate.

 6. Originally the grounds challenged that finding but that issue has  been
    resolved, against the Secretary of  State,  by  SM  and  Qadir  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  229  (IAC).   That  ground  is
    therefore unarguable.

 7. The remaining ground upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  was
    the assertion by the Secretary  of  State  that  the  Judge  had  acted
    unfairly in curtailing  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  cross
    examination.  The Judge in granting permission to appeal  advised  that
    the parties may wish to adduce further evidence in support of the issue
    of unfairness.  There has been no further evidence.

 8. The Judge granting permission to appeal also stated that there  was  no
    Record of Proceedings in the file.  There was.   It  is  Judge  Davies'
    practice to type a contemporaneous Record  of  Proceedings  during  the
    hearing and place it on the file; as he has in this case.

 9. A reading of that document reveals  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer commenced cross-examining the Appellant and asked 12  questions
    before the Judge said to him: - "This is not  valid  cross-examination.
    It is simply a fishing expedition".

10. The Judge then records that "despite me making this  clear  HOPO  still
    trys (sic) to carry until I say that I will not permit him to do so"

11. The questions thus far asked related to where the  Appellant  took  the
    test, how he got there, where he lived at the time and at what time  he
    took the test.

12. The Appellant in this case had, by the time of the  hearing  taken  and
    passed another approved test, not challenged by the Secretary of State.
    The Home Office Presenting Officer asked the same questions  about  the
    taking of the second test.

13. It is apparent that this line of cross examination  was  not  assisting
    and it is a matter for the Judge to manage proceedings before  him  and
    to curtail unnecessary and inappropriate questioning.  This is what  he
    did in his case and there was no unfairness.

14. The questions that the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  says  in  his
    statement that he wished to ask, but was prevented from asking were  of
    a similar vein and indeed one was  whether  the  Appellant  saw  anyone
    cheating.  That was itself an inappropriate question and irrelevant  to
    the issues at hand.

15. I do not find that the Judge acted in an unfair manner towards the Home
    Office Presenting Officer.

16. The Judge, correctly rejected the evidence relied upon by the Secretary
    of State; noted that the Appellant had been studying in the UK  in  the
    English language, had taken a second test to the Secretary  of  State's
    satisfaction and conducted the hearing in English.

17. On the facts and evidence of this case the result was almost inevitable
    and I find the Judge entitled to curtail  inappropriate  and  unhelpful
    cross-examination.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and is upheld.

 Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.


Signed                              Date 5th October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
