
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21063/2014
                                                               IA/22416/2014
                                                               IA/22422/2014
                                                               IA/22427/2014
                                                               IA/21064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2015                       |On 29 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ZB (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           HB (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            FB (THIRD APPELLANT)
                           YB (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                            AB (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Mr A Pretzell of Counsel instructed by Makka
Solicitors Limited


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Respondents  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Respondents and to the  Appellant.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondents

 1. The Respondents to whom I shall refer to as the Applicants are wife and
    husband and their three children who at the date of  the  hearing  were
    respectively aged about 12, 10 and 5.  They are all citizens  of  South
    Africa.

 2. On 19 March 2005 the Applicants, other than AB who  had  not  yet  been
    born, arrived in the United Kingdom with  leave  as  visitors.   On  16
    September 2005 the wife submitted an application for leave to remain as
    a student.  That application was refused without right of  appeal.   On
    14 October 2005 she submitted a further  application  for  leave  as  a
    student which was refused.  Her appeal against that was  dismissed  and
    she lodged a further application on 4 October 2006  which  was  refused
    without  right  of  appeal.   On  2  July  2013  she  submitted  a  new
    application for further leave on the basis of her  private  and  family
    life.  This was refused without right of appeal.  She issued  two  pre-
    action letters to the Appellant (the SSHD) who  agreed  to  review  the
    applications.  This resulted in fresh refusal decisions being made with
    the wife and AB, the youngest child being given a right  of  in-country
    appeal.  Another pre-action letter was served with a view to  obtaining
    an in-country right of  appeal  for  the  husband  and  the  two  older
    children in respect of whom the SSHD then issued fresh  decisions  with
    an in-country right of appeal.

 3. Since September 2005 the Applicants have been without  any  substantive
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

The Decision and Original Appeal

 4. By decisions of 22 April 2014 in relation to the wife and AB and of  14
    May 2014 in relation to the other Applicants the SSHD refused  all  the
    applications and proposed to make directions for  the  removal  of  the
    Applicants to South Africa.  The reasons are contained in a  letter  of
    22 April 2014.   The  SSHD  addressed  the  position  of  each  of  the
    Applicants and found that they  met  the  suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and that they  had  established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom. The parents did not meet the length
    of residence requirements at para. 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and
    could reasonably be expected to return to  South  Africa.   The  eldest
    child had been in the United Kingdom for more than seven years  but  at
    the date of decision was still in the junior years of her schooling and
    could return to South Africa with the parents.  The  middle  child  had
    not been in the United Kingdom for more than seven years and  also  was
    still in the junior years of schooling.  The  youngest  child  had  not
    been in the United Kingdom for seven years.  Additionally,  the  return
    of all the Applicants to South Africa would not be  in  breach  of  the
    United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   European
    Convention.

 5. On 21 May the Applicants lodged  notice  of  appeal.   Essentially  the
    grounds assert the wife met the requirements  of  paragraph  EX1(a)  of
    Appendix FM and that the SSHD had failed to consider  the  position  of
    the children with regard to her obligations under  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and to consider the  best
    interests of the children.  The Applicants also  asserted  their  claim
    under Article 8 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. On 12 January 2015 the appeals were heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Behan.  She heard oral testimony from the parents and the  two
    older children.  By a decision promulgated  on  12  February  2015  she
    allowed the appeals of the two older  children  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and the appeals of all the Applicants on human rights grounds.

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge  had
    made a material mis-direction of law  in  respect  of  the  meaning  of
    "reasonableness" under para.276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules and
    her  findings  under  Article  8  were  consequently  infected  by  her
    erroneous decision under the Immigration Rules.

 8. By a decision of 9 April 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett
    granted the SSHD permission  to  appeal  on  the  ground  that  it  was
    arguable the Judge had erred in failing fully to  have  regard  to  the
    judgments in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines)  v SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. All the Applicants attended the hearing.  At the start  both  advocates
    agreed that just as in the First-tier Tribunal there had been no bundle
    filed by the SSHD.

10. Ms Kenny for the SSHD argued the springboard  for  the  Judge  to  have
    allowed all the appeals was the finding that the  appeals  of  the  two
    older children should be allowed.   The  SSHD  challenged  the  Judge's
    finding that it would not be reasonable for the Applicants to return as
    a family unit to South Africa.

11. It was only the eldest child who had been in education for seven  years
    or more.  She referred to para.13(iii) of the determination  in  Azimi-
    Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC).  The overall  balancing  exercise  conducted  by  the
    Judge at paras.23 following of her decision was mis-conceived.  It  was
    acknowledged the husband had good prospects of employment on return  to
    South Africa and on balance it would be reasonable for  the  Applicants
    to return as a family unit.  The Judge's conclusion at para.35 that the
    public interest did not require the removal of the parents  was  simply
    incorrect.

12. The parents were not British citizens and have never had any  right  of
    access to free healthcare or education for their children in the United
    Kingdom.  The decision should be set aside.

13. For the Applicants Mr Pretzell  submitted  that  at  the  date  of  the
    application the two older children had been in the United  Kingdom  for
    more than seven years.  The issue was whether it  was  practicable  for
    the family and in particular the two  older  children  to  re-integrate
    into a life in South Africa.  Following the judgments in Zoumbas v SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines and others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 the SSHD had formed  the  view  that  the  starting  point  of  any
    decision was that it was always reasonable to return family members  as
    a family unit.  He referred to the response under  Procedure  Rule  24.
    Referring to the foot of page 3  he  submitted  that  the  comments  of
    Lewison LJ at para.60 of the judgment in EV (Philippines)  were  obiter
    dicta. Lewison LJ had said that the desirability of being  educated  at
    public expense in the UK cannot outweigh the benefit to the children of
    remaining with their parents. He also noted at para.59 that  the  facts
    in the case before the Court of Appeal were a long way from  the  facts
    of the case before the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4 and that in EV none of the family was a British citizen and none
    had a right to remain.

14. The Judge had listed the points which were  to  the  advantage  of  the
    Applicants at paras.23-25 of the decision and  balanced  those  against
    the factors adverse to the Applicants at paras.27-29.  At  the  end  of
    para.28 she had also taken into account the consequences of  the  delay
    in dealing with the case.

15. The appeal in EV was settled on the basis of findings of fact  and  the
    appeal before the Tribunal was not dissimilar only  in  that  like  all
    cases both were fact sensitive.  The Judge's decision was both reasoned
    and reasonable and the SSHD's appeal should be dismissed.

16. Ms Kenny responded that the Judge's decision contained no reference  to
    EV (Philippines) (other than its citation at para.21) that  removal  of
    the Applicants was in the public interest, especially  because  of  the
    cost of educating the three children.  The  Judge  had  been  clear  at
    para.30 that if the appeal had concerned only  the  parents  she  would
    have  had  little  hesitation  in  finding   their   removal   entirely
    reasonable.  The children could be adequately educated in South  Africa
    and the evidence was that their father would be able to find employment
    on return.

17.  I  enquired  which  point  identified  in  EV  (Philippines)  as   one
    necessarily to be taken into account the Judge had failed to address in
    her decision.  Ms Kenny responded she had not referred  to  the  public
    interest.  I noted that in  fact  there  was  no  reference  to  public
    interest or any  of  the  legitimate  public  objectives  contained  in
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  The Judge had expressly referred to the public interest of the
    economic well-being of the state at para.33  of  her  decision  and  to
    ss.117A-117D of the 2002 Act and the public interest at para.35.  There
    were no further submissions.

18. Following a short adjournment into chambers for  a  discussion  between
    the advocates and myself in which I indicated that  if  the  Judge  had
    dealt with all relevant aspects of the appeal, particularly by  way  of
    reference to EV (Philippines) then it would be difficult to  show  that
    she had made an error of law.  If  she  had  dealt  with  all  relevant
    factors then it would be necessary to show that the Judge had reached a
    conclusion which was perverse or  irrational.   On  resumption  of  the
    hearing, neither advocate wished to make any  further  submissions.   I
    announced my decision that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  did  not
    contain any material error of law such that it should be set aside  and
    now give my reasons.

Findings and Consideration

19. The SSHD has not shown the  Judge  failed  sufficiently  to  take  into
    account the relevant matters required to be considered as  outlined  in
    the judgments in Zoumbas and EV (Philippines).   She  adequately  dealt
    with the relevant facts and made reasoned findings.  There was no error
    of law by reason of a  failure  to  consider  any  relevant  matter  or
    jurisprudence.  The SSHD simply disagreed with the Judge's conclusions.
     I would add that it is a conclusion which many Judges would  not  have
    reached on the facts but here the Judge has  dealt  with  all  relevant
    facts and jurisprudence and the SSHD has not  shown  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion is irrational or perverse.  Consequently there is  no  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and so it  cannot  be  set
    aside.

20. By making repeated applications of various  descriptions,  the  parents
    have been permitted or able to extend the time in which they and  their
    family have been  able  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  has
    continued for so long that the eldest child is now able to satisfy  the
    requirements of para.276ADE(1)(iv). In the light of  the  jurisprudence
    enunciated in Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197,  which  still  has  some
    application, notwithstanding the addition to para.276ADE(1)(iv) of  the
    requirement that it should not be reasonable to expect an Applicant  to
    leave the United Kingdom made wef 13 December 2012 and which  amendment
    has application to this appeal.  Consequently, the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision does not contain a material error of law such that  it  should
    be set aside.



Anonymity

21. No submissions were made in relation to anonymity but I note the First-
    tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and in the circumstances this
    is continued.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error such that it should be set aside.  Accordingly, it shall stand.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 28. v. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
