
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21684/2015
                                                               IA/21681/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 11 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     R S
                                     and
                                C P (A CHILD)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because  the  case  involves  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellants  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the
respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr O. Nguocha of Carl Martin Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant is a Brazilian citizen; the second is her 15-year-
    old daughter. RS entered the UK in  2003  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor. She overstayed the visa. CP was born in the UK on 05  February
    2004. Her father is an Iraqi national who has no leave to remain in the
    UK. It is accepted that  CP  has  an  ongoing  relationship  with  both
    parents although they are not in a relationship with one  another.  Her
    mother is her primary carer. It is accepted that she also has a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with her father.

2.    RS returned to Brazil with her daughter in September  2004  where  she
    remained for nearly four years. RS returned to the UK on 28  July  2008
    with entry clearance as a visitor. Again, she knowingly  remained  with
    her daughter in the full knowledge that she did not have permission  to
    do so. She did not seek to regularise her status in  the  UK  until  19
    March 2015, when she made an application for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds. At the date of the application CP had been continuously
    resident in the UK for nearly seven years.

3.    The respondent refused the application in  a  decision  dated  26  May
    2015. The respondent found that RS did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix  FM  as  a  parent.  She  did  not  meet  the  long  residence
    requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  immigration
    rules. There was  no  evidence  to  show  that  she  would  face  'very
    significant obstacles' to integration in Brazil for the purpose of  the
    private life  requirement  contained  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  In
    respect of CP, she did not meet the private life requirement  contained
    in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules because she had not
    been resident in the UK for a continuous period of seven years  at  the
    date  of  the  application.  In  any  event,  it  was  not   considered
    unreasonable to expect her to return to Brazil  with  her  mother,  who
    would be able to help her to reintegrate.

4.    The parties will be aware of the procedural history.  It  can  briefly
    be summarised as follows. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Woolley  dismissed
    their appeal in a decision promulgated on 19 July  2016.  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanbury found that the decision involved the  making  of
    an error on a point of  law  and  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. In a decision promulgated on 03 March  2017  he  went  on  to
    remake the decision and dismissed the appeal.  The  appellants  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington set aside Judge Hanbury's decision in  an  order  made  under
    rule 45 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  on  11
    April 2017. Judge Hanbury's findings on the error of law were preserved
    but the case was listed for a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal  to
    remake the decision. Upper Tribunal Judge Southern dismissed the appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 01 June 2017. The appellants  applied  for
    permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  which  was  initially
    refused by the Upper Tribunal. Permission  was  granted  on  a  renewed
    application to the Court of Appeal. The  appeal  was  remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal by consent in an order dated 27  December  2018  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.      On 24 October 208 the Supreme Court handed  down  judgment
             in the cases of KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

         3. In light of the Supreme Court's  judgment,  the  respondent  has
             reviewed this case and concluded that the  tribunal  erred  in
             its consideration under section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, by taking  into  account  the
             conduct  of  the  parents  when  considering  whether  it  was
             reasonable for the Appellant's child to leave the UK. Such  an
             approach was rejected by the Supreme Court in KO.

         4. In the circumstances the parties agree that the matter should be
             remitted   to   the   Upper   Tribunal   for   a   substantive
             determination, having regard to the approach set  out  by  the
             Supreme Court in KO."

Decision and reasons

5.    Despite the importance of the  issues  involved  for  the  appellants,
    those representing her had done little to assist them  to  prepare  for
    the appeal. The only evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal  is  a  brief
    witness statement made by RS for the First-tier Tribunal appeal in 2016
    and nine pages of general documents relating to CP's schooling from the
    same period. Although I note that CP's  father  gave  evidence  at  the
    hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  no  witness  statement  was
    prepared. Although he attended the hearing before the Upper Tribunal to
    support his daughter; no witness statement had been prepared to explain
    the impact of his daughter's potential removal. Although CP is now  old
    enough to give her own views about the situation; no witness  statement
    was prepared. In short, the preparation of the appeal was inadequate.

6.    However, as in many cases of this kind there is little  dispute  about
    the factual circumstances.  The  appellants'  immigration  history  and
    length of residence is accepted. The fact  that  both  parents  have  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the  child   is
    accepted. It is accepted that the child has now been resident in the UK
    for a continuous period of over ten years and that it  is  likely  that
    she has established strong ties to the UK during that time.

Best interests of the child

7.    In assessing the best interests of the child, I  have  considered  the
    principles outlined in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC4,  Zoumbas  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874. The best interests of a child are a primary consideration, but
    not the only consideration.

8.    The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are in the United Kingdom.  I  take  into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009. In the guidance, the respondent acknowledges  the  importance
    of international human rights instruments including the  UN  Convention
    on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on  to  confirm:
    "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these instruments
    in relation to children whilst exercising its functions as expressed in
    UK domestic legislation  and  policies."  The  UNCRC  sets  out  rights
    including a child's right to survival and  development,  the  right  to
    know and be cared for by his or  her  parents,  the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

9.    CP has lived in the UK for most of her life albeit she spent a  period
    of nearly four years in Brazil with her mother at  a  young  age  (pre-
    school). She is now 15 years old and is studying for  her  GCSE  exams,
    which she will  take  next  year.  CP  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with both parents; one is a Brazilian citizen;  the  other
    an Iraqi citizen. It is in the best interests of the child to  maintain
    her relationship with both parents.

10.   Neither CP, nor her mother nor her father have leave to remain in  the
    UK. Her parents are not in a relationship. It is difficult to  see  how
    her father would have any right to reside in Brazil if he is not  in  a
    relationship with her mother. Given that he is a failed  asylum  seeker
    with no leave to remain in the UK the possibility of him being able  to
    make regular visits to see  his  daughter  in  Brazil  is  remote.  The
    removal of CP with her mother is likely to result in  the  child  being
    separated from her father for an uncertain and prolonged period.

11.   There is no evidence to indicate that  CP  suffers  from  any  serious
    health problems or any other evidence that might raise  concerns  about
    her welfare. It is accepted that she is likely to be well  settled  and
    has established close ties  to  the  UK.  Her  most  recent  period  of
    residence has taken place during an important developmental period.  CP
    returned to the UK with her mother in  2008  just  before  she  started
    school and has spent an important 10-year period of her life here. As a
    teenager it is likely that she is  increasingly  developing  a  private
    life away from  her  nuclear  family  through  friends  at  school  and
    associated activities.

12.   For the reasons given above the best interests of  the  child  clearly
    point to her remaining in the UK where she  can  continue  to  enjoy  a
    relationship with both parents. Removal to Brazil clearly would not  be
    in her interests because she would lose the  regular  contact  she  has
    with her father and her removal would sever the close ties she has  now
    established in the UK albeit she would continue  to  benefit  from  the
    relationship with her mother.

Whether it is 'reasonable' for the child to leave the UK

13.   Since I indicated my decision at the hearing the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    published the decision in JG (s  117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 72. I considered whether it might  be  necessary  to
    ask for further submissions but have concluded  that  it  is  not.  The
    Upper Tribunal's conclusions  relating  to  the  interpretation  of  KO
    (Nigeria) are broadly consistent with the  respondent's  position  when
    this case was remitted by consent from the Court of  Appeal.  The  only
    place in which JG (Turkey) might depart from the  respondent's  current
    stated policy is whether the child would in fact be required  to  leave
    the UK. The point is not applicable in this case because neither parent
    has leave to remain.

14.   Following the decisions in KO (Nigeria) and JG (Turkey) the  focus  is
    on whether it is reasonable for CP to leave the UK. Significant  weight
    should be given to the best interests of a child who has been  resident
    in the UK for over seven years. I have found that  her  best  interests
    point strongly to her remaining in the UK so that she can continue  her
    family life with both parents  and  is  not  uprooted  from  the  long-
    standing ties that she has now established in this country.  For  these
    reasons I conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect the  child
    to leave the UK even though she and her mother do  not  have  leave  to
    remain.

15.   If CP were to make an application for leave to remain at the  date  of
    the hearing she would meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    of the immigration rules.

16.   RS does not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  to  remain  as  a
    parent and there is no evidence to suggest that she would meet  any  of
    the private life requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the
    immigration rules. She has not been resident in the UK for the required
    period of 20 years and there is no evidence to suggest that  she  would
    face 'very significant obstacles' to integration in her home country of
    Brazil where she was born and brought up.

17.   Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 says that the  public  interest  does
    not require the removal of a parent  if  they  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  it  is   not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. In light of my findings
    it follows that RS  satisfies  the  requirements  of  section  117B(6).
    However, she should be aware that her position  in  the  UK  is  wholly
    reliant on her relationship with her minor daughter. In time,  CP  will
    become an adult and begin to lead an independent life. Given  the  poor
    immigration history of her mother, it would be open to  the  respondent
    to review RS's position at some point in the future if he considered it
    appropriate to do so.

18.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 07 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

