
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgation      |
|On 5 October 2016                    |On 20 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           MR SAJID SHABIR KAYANI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon hereinafter "the Judge") to dismiss
his appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  18 May 2015
refusing to grant him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.    By way of brief background, the appellant is a  national  of  Pakistan
and he was born in that country on 1 January 1971.  He came to the  UK  on
2 May 2001 on the basis of his marriage to his then wife Mrs Sofia Faraz
who it appears was, at that time, either  a  British  citizen  or  a  person
having indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  That marriage  did  not  stand
the test of time and the two divorced in 2003.   At  some  point  thereafter
the appellant applied for asylum.  It is said in the Judge's  determination
in the instant appeal that that asylum claim was refused on 6 July 2005 and
that a further claim for asylum was refused on 7 December 2012.   Ms Mair
suggested that, in fact, her understanding was that the claim  was  made  in
2005 but not determined until 2012 so that there was only  one  claim.   The
position about that is not entirely clear.  In any  event,  it  is  apparent
that the appellant has subsequently gone on  to  make  further  unsuccessful
human  rights  claims  relying  upon  private  and/or   family   life.    In
particular, it is to be noted that an application based on his  relationship
with one Sannah Khan,  whom  he  married  and  subsequently  divorced,  was
refused on 15 May 2014.

3.    The appellant's claim  which  has  led,  ultimately,  to  this  appeal
before the Upper Tribunal was made on 31 March 2015.  It was based largely,
if not exclusively, upon claimed family life  with  another  female  British
citizen one Bina Bi.  It was said in support of the  application  that  the
two had married (an Islamic marriage), that they  were  living  together  as
husband and wife and that he had what amounted to  a  parental  relationship
with her two minor female children being Sofia Ali and  Sobia Ali.   Sofia
has now, however, attained the age of 18.  As noted above,  the  application
was refused and  the  appellant  subsequently  appealed.   In  refusing  the
application the respondent  had  stated  that  she  was  not  satisfied  the
appellant met the requirements of any Immigration Rules or that there  were
any exceptional circumstances such as to give  rise  to  a  grant  of  leave
outside the Rules.

4.    At the hearing no attempt was made to  persuade  the Judge  that  the
appellant did meet any of what might be described as the Article 8  related
Immigration Rules.   The  focus  was  solely  upon  the  applicability  of
Article 8 outside  of  the  rules.   The Judge  heard  evidence  from  the
appellant and from Bina Bi  regarding  the  claimed  relationship  and,  in
particular, noted a contention by him that the  relationship  had  commenced
some eight years ago and had, thus,  spanned  the  relatively  brief  period
when he had been married to Sannah Khan.  He found,  in  effect,  that  the
claimed relationship was not a genuine one and, as to that, he said this:

      "      15.   I  did  not  find  the  evidence  before  me  as  to  the
      genuineness of the relationship between  the  appellant  and  Bina Bi
      convincing.  Although I accept that they had a  relationship  of  some
      sort going back over eight years, I found the fact that the  appellant
      had within that period of  time,  married  and  subsequently  divorced
      another person cast doubt upon the genuineness and  closeness  of  the
      relationship between the appellant and Bina Bi."

5.    The Judge then went on to explain why  he  did  not  think  the  best
interests of the children meant that the appellant should be able to  remain
in reliance upon Article 8 and he dismissed the appeal.

6.    The appellant applied, through his representatives, for permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal  contending  that  the Judge  had  failed  to
adequately consider or adequately reason his conclusion as to the nature  or
strength of the relationship with Bina Bi.  It was also contended that  the
consideration as to what was in the best interest of the children  had  been
inadequate.  The granting judge said this:

      "It is arguable that the Judge did not give  sufficient  reasons  for
      finding that there was no genuine relationship between  the  appellant
      and his partner in the light of  the  evidence  before  the  tribunal.
      Although the second ground, in relation to the partner's children,  is
      not cogent, permission to appeal is granted on both grounds  to  avoid
      multiplicity of application."

7.    There then followed a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)
so that consideration could be given to  the  question  of  whether  or  not
the Judge had erred in  law  and,  if  so,  what  should  flow  from  that.
Directions would, I think, have provided for any necessary remaking  of  the
decision to be undertaken at the same hearing but there does not  appear  to
be any copy of the directions on file.

8.    Ms Mair agreed that, in all  probability,  her  argument  could  only
succeed if the first ground of appeal was made  out.   She  argued,  though,
that it was made out because of a failure to properly consider the  evidence
regarding the substance of the relationship.  Mr Diwnycz, for the Secretary
of State, contended that the Judge had dealt with the matter in  sufficient
detail.

9.    I have, as I indicated to the parties at the hearing, decided  to  set
aside the Judge's decision.  I found myself  somewhat  hesitant  to  do  so
because the determination is, in general terms, careful and thorough and  it
does contain a good summary of, amongst  other  things,  the  oral  evidence
given by the appellant and Bina Bi concerning the substance of the  claimed
relationship.  It is apparent that the appellant  did  claim  to  the Judge
that the relationship had spanned some eight years despite his, during  that
time, having married  and  then  divorced  someone  else.   It  is  entirely
understandable that the Judge had significant concerns  about  that  as  he
indicated he had in the passage from the determination which I have set  out
above.

10.   Having said all of that, as Ms Mair points out, and as was  commented
upon at the hearing, the determination does not contain any real  assessment
as to the oral evidence which was given by either the appellant or  Bina Bi
about the  substance  of  the  relationship.   There  was  some  documentary
evidence of cohabitation which was not referred to.  There  was  no  finding
as to whether the two were cohabiting and  no  assessment  as  to,  if  they
were, what it pointed to about the substance of the  relationship  from  the
time of the inception of the cohabitation (which was said to  be  after  the
divorce) notwithstanding the earlier marriage and  divorce.   In  truth,  it
seems to me that the Judge's  assessment  as  to  the  relationship  rested
solely upon the appellant's conduct in marrying and then  divorcing  another
during the period of the claimed relationship.  I can  appreciate  that,  on
one  view,  that  was  certainly  a  factor  of   potentially   very   great
significance but, nevertheless, it seems to me that the evidence called  for
a more holistic assessment as to the nature of the  relationship  after  the
divorce from Sannah Khan.

11.   In light of the above I have concluded, whilst it is  quite  marginal,
that the Judge did err in law in failing to give adequate reasons as to his
finding  concerning  the  lack  of  genuineness  of  the  relationship  with
Bina Bi.  So, I have decided that I must set the Judge's decision aside.

12.   After I had indicated to the parties that  I  was  setting  aside  the
decision there was then some discussion as to how to proceed.  Ms Mair said
that she was not in a position to move on to  remaking  immediately  because
of a need to obtain further evidence  regarding  the  relationship  and  the
interests of the children (albeit that one is now an adult).   It  was  also
the position that, if I were to hear further evidence, an interpreter  would
needed and none had been requested or  booked.   This  does  seem  to  raise
something  of  an  issue.    Standard   directions   now   issued   by   the
Upper Tribunal usually  place  the  parties  on  notice  that  there  is  a
presumption that, in the event of an error of law being found, matters  will
proceed to remaking straightaway.  It is perhaps the case  that  some  firms
of solicitors who practice in this field have not appreciated that  such  is
now the case and have tended to prepare for Upper Tribunal hearings on  the
basis that, even if an error is found, it is  most  unlikely  that  remaking
will be undertaken straightaway.  However, if that  was  once  the  case  it
does seem to me it no longer is.

13.   In the circumstances in which  Ms Mair  found  herself,  though,  and
bearing in mind that there was no interpreter, I did conclude that  remaking
could not be undertaken immediately.  I then  had  to  consider  whether  or
not, in those circumstances, to keep the appeal before  the  Upper Tribunal
or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.   I  decided  to  take  the  latter
course of action.  That is because that was the course of action urged  upon
me by the parties, because it seemed to me that there would be  a  need  for
further evidence and fact-finding regarding  the  relationship  and  because
the First-tier Tribunal is an expert fact-finding body.  I have, therefore,
set out some directions which will, hopefully, assist  when  the  matter  is
considered, once again, by the First-tier Tribunal by way of  remittal.   I
would also add, as  I  commented  at  the  hearing,  there  is  very  little
information  currently  on   file   regarding   the   appellant's   previous
immigration history.  In particular, I am not entirely clear as  to  whether
there has been one or two unsuccessful asylum claims, whether there was  any
appeal in relation to that claim or claims and whether, if  there  was,  any
positive or adverse view was reached on appeal  concerning  the  appellant's
credibility.  Such will not at all be decisive but may be  relevant  to  any
future assessment as to general credibility which might be  undertaken  when
the decision is remade. The parties may wish  to  bear  that  in  mind  when
preparing for the remitted hearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      A     This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier Tribunal  for  a
           complete rehearing.  That rehearing shall  taken  place  at  the
           Bradford Hearing Centre (subject to any subsequent variation  of
           these directions) with a two hour time estimate.

      B      The  appellant  shall  be  provided  with  a  Punjabi  speaking
           interpreter at the remitted hearing and  it  is  preferred  that
           that interpreter speaks the Mirpuri dialect of that language.

      C     The remitted appeal shall not be listed before  Judge O'Hanlon.



      D     The appellant's representatives shall,  at  least  five  working
           days prior to the date which will  be  fixed  for  the  remitted
           hearing, provide to the First-tier Tribunal (with a copy for the
           respondent) a consolidated bundle of all documentation which  is
           to be relied upon at that hearing even if previously lodged with
           the First tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.   That  bundle
           shall  be  indexed  and  paginated  and  shall  contain  witness
           statements of all witnesses who are to give evidence  and  which
           shall be drawn in sufficient detail  to  stand  as  evidence  in
           chief.

      E     If the respondent wishes to rely upon  any  documentation  other
           than that contained in the bundle already provided, that  should
           also be served upon the First-tier Tribunal and the appellant's
           solicitors within the  above  time  frame  and  should  also  be
           indexed and paginated.

      F     The parties should not assume that any documentation  not  filed
           in accordance with the above directions will  be  considered  by
           the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  Accordingly, that decision is set aside.  The case is remitted to  the
First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


