
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA217682015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2016                                |On 15 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                           mr uche ifeanyi etuonu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ike (Solicitor), Moorhouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 9  January  1982.   In  a
    decision, on the papers, promulgated on  29  October  2015,  Judge  AMS
    Green, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006,  which  had  been
    made on the basis of the  appellant's  marriage  to  Jessica  Sofia  Do
    Rosario Martins, a Portuguese citizen  said  to  be  exercising  treaty
    rights  in  the  UK.   The  respondent  had  refused  the   appellant's
    application for a residence card (made on 19 October 2014)  on  28  May
    2015.

 2. Acting Resident Immigration Judge Zucker granted permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on 10 May 2016 and the appeal came before me.

Error of Law

 3. The issue before me was a narrow one.  The grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal submit that the  appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by letter dated 27 July 2015  requesting  that  the
    "paper" hearing be converted to an oral hearing and it was argued  that
    this letter was not acted upon by the Tribunal.

 4. I had before me a copy of the letter dated 27 July 2015, which  appears
    in the form of a fax confirmation sheet.  I was satisfied that the  fax
    number shown at the top of the fax confirmation sheet matched  the  fax
    number shown  on  the  Immigration  Directions  Notice  issued  to  the
    appellant on 6 July 2015, namely fax number 08707394164, which was  the
    given fax number for the Tribunal.  I am satisfied on balance therefore
    that the appellant properly notified the Tribunal of the request for an
    oral hearing.  Mr Duffy did not dispute this.

 5. The fact that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Green was not  aware  of
    that application through no fault of his  own  does  not  mitigate  the
    unfairness to the appellant who I am satisfied had clearly requested an
    oral hearing.  Although Mr Duffy initially  submitted,  with  no  great
    force, that  there  was  a  gap  of  some  three  months  between  that
    application and the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Green at
    the end of October 2015 when it might be expected that the  appellant's
    representatives  would  have  contacted  the  Tribunal   (and/or   have
    attempted to pay the fee for the oral hearing) that argument has little
    weight.  I accept that the appellant's representatives  may  have  been
    waiting to be contacted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  given  the
    vagaries of listing and the potential delays in such listing, that  the
    appellant's solicitors may have believed there was nothing untoward  in
    the fact that they were not contacted for some three months  after  the
    request for an oral hearing.

 6. In reaching my decision that there was a material error of law  I  have
    considered in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418  (IAC).
    Although this concerned  the  issue  of  adjournments,  the  applicable
    principle is that the crucial question is not one of fault  or  whether
    the First-tier Judge was reasonable  in  proceeding,  but  whether  the
    affected party has been deprived of his right to a fair hearing.

 7. I am therefore satisfied that there is a material  error  of  law  such
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set  aside.   The
    appellant has not had an opportunity to give oral  evidence  and  given
    the issues in this appeal which include questions in  relation  to  the
    genuineness of the appellant's marriage and as to whether  or  not  the
    EEA national was exercising her treaty rights, I am satisfied that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  heard  by
    any judge other than Judge Green.  No findings are preserved.

No anonymity direction is made as  there  were  no  issues  identified  that
might require such an order.


Signed                                  Date: 13 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There was no fee application made before me and I make no fee award.





Signed                                  Date: 13 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

