
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21360/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 May 2014                                  |On 20 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |




                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                             Jan Michael Debrah
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ward, James & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Jan Michael Debrah, was born on 11 September  1980  and
    is a male citizen of Ghana.  I shall hereafter refer to the  respondent
    as "the appellant" and to the Secretary of State  as  the  "respondent"
    (as they were respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had appealed against the decision of the respondent dated
    13 June 2013 to refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the
    spouse of a person present and settled  (Dr  Claire  Elizabeth  Bailey,
    hereafter  referred  to  as  the  sponsor).   The  application  of  the
    appellant had been refused on the single ground  that  the  appellant's
    marriage to the sponsor was not subsisting and that the parties did not
    intend to live together permanently.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Khawar)   which,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 17 March 2014, allowed the appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the  respondent  submits  that
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  (both  oral  and  written)
    strongly indicated that the marriage was not subsisting.  Mr  Saunders,
    in his oral submissions, did not seek to persuade me that the  evidence
    was such that  any  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  would  have  been
    perverse; rather, he submitted that the judge's reasons were inadequate
    in the light of the strong evidence  in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's position.

 4. Judge Khawar in his determination  gives  a  thorough  account  of  the
    evidence.  On 28 August 2012, the Immigration Officer had  attended  an
    address in Southampton in order to locate the appellant.  The appellant
    was found at the property with a woman who was not  his  wife  (Sherren
    Emily Eleagli).  Following this meeting, and as the  judge  noted  [11]
    "the  respondent  concluded  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that   the
    appellant's marriage is subsisting ...".

 5. The Immigration Officer (Mr Harrison) did not attend before the  First-
    tier Tribunal to give oral evidence but the judge  did  hear  from  the
    appellant and sponsor.  At [17], the judge concluded that  he  did  not
    "accept the evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor  as  it  is  highly
    unlikely that IO Harrison but has simply made up his account as to what
    the appellant and sponsor said [when interviewed by  him]."   Elsewhere
    [19] the judge describes the evidence of the appellant and  sponsor  as
    "unsatisfactory."   At   [20]   he   noted   a   "further   significant
    inconsistency" between the evidence of the appellant and  the  sponsor.
    He found that the appellant had fabricated an account of attending  his
    wife's birthday celebrations.  However, the judge also  noted  that  IO
    Harrison had given a  description  in  his  written  statement  of  his
    attendance at the appellant's home address where he had  "noted  family
    photos of a Ghanaian family and a European family.  There  were  female
    belongings mixed with male belongings throughout  the  flat,  including
    the bed and bathrooms."  By contrast, Mr Harrison had  found  "no  male
    effects (sic)" at Sherren's property.  The judge also noted  [22]  that
    the appellant  had  "submitted  a  substantial  volume  of  documentary
    evidence which clearly shows that he resides with his wife."  The judge
    was led to conclude that, whilst there were unsatisfactory features  in
    the evidence of the appellant and sponsor, he  was  satisfied  "on  the
    balance of probabilities [that] the appellant's marriage is  subsisting
    and that both he and his spouse intend to live together permanently  as
    husband and wife."

 6. I do not find that the first ground of appeal has merit.   Mr  Saunders
    submitted that, whilst it was open on the circumstances in this  appeal
    for the judge to find that the marriage was subsisting, he  had  failed
    to give sufficient reasons for his decision. I disagree.  Judge  Khawar
    has conducted a detailed analysis of the evidence but he has  certainly
    been well-aware (as he repeatedly states  in  the  determination)  that
    much of the evidence given by the appellant and sponsor was  discrepant
    and unsatisfactory.  Ground 1 is, in effect, a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's finding that the evidence of cohabitation of the appellant  and
    sponsor (as adduced by both parties in the appeal) should lead  him  to
    conclude, by reference to the correct standard of proof of the  balance
    of probabilities that the marriage was subsisting.  I consider that  to
    be a clear and cogent reason; indeed, it is difficult to see what other
    reasons the judge might have given for that  finding.   Another  judge,
    faced with the same evidence, may have come to a different  conclusion.
    However, that is not the point.  Judge Khawar's task was to assess  the
    evidence and make findings on the balance  of  probabilities.   I  find
    that he has not erred in law in completing that task.

 7. I should at this point refer to an  error  in  the  grounds  (which  is
    repeated also in the determination) as regards the Immigration Rules to
    which this application was subject.  The grounds  refer  to  the  "new"
    Rules, in particular E-LTRP.1.7.  This application for a variation  was
    made on 1 July 2012, that is eight days before the new Rules came  into
    force (9 July 2012).  The relevant Rule was, therefore,  paragraph  284
    of HC 395, in particular (vi):

    (vi) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other  as
    his  or  her  spouse  or  civil  partner  and  the  marriage  or  civil
    partnership is subsisting;

 8. As the respondent observes  in  Ground  (2),  the  requirement  that  a
    marriage must be "genuine and subsisting" appears in  a  separate  sub-
    paragraph from the requirement that the parties  must  intend  to  live
    together permanently with each other as his or her spouse.  Ground  (2)
    asserts that the judge conflated these two requirements but effectively
    only made findings in respect of the subsistence of  the  marriage  and
    took no account of the "parties going forward."

 9. Any misunderstanding as to the applicable Rules is not material because
    (see above) paragraph 284(vi) contains an almost identical  requirement
    as to the subsistence of the marriage and the intention of the parties,
    albeit contained within the same sub-paragraph.  Mr Saunders  submitted
    that the  judge's  findings  concerned  only  the  subsistence  of  the
    marriage at the date of the hearing  and  not  the  intentions  of  the
    appellant and sponsor.  I do  not  agree  with  that  submission.   Not
    surprisingly, in the light  of  the  evidence  before  the  judge,  his
    primary focus has been  on  the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and sponsor.  The  written  evidence
    of both appellant and sponsor indicates that each intends to live  with
    the other as his or her spouse.  Whilst I  acknowledge  there  are  two
    separate  requirements  in  the  Rule,  it  is  difficult  to   imagine
    circumstances in which a marriage is found to be subsisting and genuine
    but where the intention of the parties to the marriage to continue  the
    relationship is not found to exist.  Obviously, a husband and wife  may
    intend to separate at a time when they are both cohabiting in the  same
    property.   However,  the  subsistence  of  a  marriage   goes   beyond
    cohabitation and indicates the existence of a relationship  which  both
    parties are happy to see continue.  Had the judge only been required to
    make a finding in respect of cohabitation, then that would have been  a
    relatively easy matter in the light of the evidence of IO Harrison  and
    the large  volume  of  written  evidence  produced  by  the  appellant.
    However, it is clear from the determination (see [10], [12], [23]) that
    the judge was satisfied that the parties were not only  cohabiting  but
    that their relationship was subsisting  and  that  they  intended  that
    relationship to continue.  I find that the judge has not conflated  the
    two requirements but has made his findings fully aware of  all  of  the
    provisions of the Rules and of the difference between the existence  of
    a relationship and mere physical cohabitation in the same  property.  I
    find that he has not erred in  law  and  that  this  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 12 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
