
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21916/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th February 2014                         |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD RAMZAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background and Procedural History

1.   On 25th September 2012, the Secretary of State  decided  to  refuse  to
    vary the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   She  also
    decided, on the same occasion, to remove him by way of directions under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006  ("the
    section 47 removal decision").

2.   Earlier that year, on 3rd  April  2012,  during  the  currency  of  his
    student leave, the appellant applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant under the points-based system.   In  refusing
    that application, and in making the two adverse immigration  decisions,
    the Secretary of State found that the date of the  academic  award  the
    appellant relied upon as showing that the  requirements  of  the  rules
    were met was 6th July 2012,  a  little  over  three  months  after  his
    application for leave.   She  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  not
    entitled to the points claimed under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the rules") as his  application  was  not  made  within  twelve
    months of obtaining the relevant qualification and so  the  application
    fell to be refused under paragraph 245FD of the rules.

3.   The appellant's appeal against the adverse decisions was  dismissed  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  M  K  Lawrence  ("the  judge")   in   a
    determination promulgated on 3rd December 2012.  The judge  found  that
    the requirements of the rules were not met.   So far as  Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention is concerned,  he  took  into  account  the
    appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  with  student  leave  since
    2007 but dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 7th March 2013,  in  the  light  of
    the decision in Khatel [2013] UKUT  00044.   The  Upper  Tribunal  then
    allowed the appeal in a determination promulgated  on  3rd  June  2013,
    having first  found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained an error of law such that  it  fell  to  be  set  aside.   In
    allowing the appeal, the Upper Tribunal did not distinguish between the
    immigration decisions made by the Secretary of State and there  was  no
    separate consideration of the section 47 removal decision.

5.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court
    of Appeal.  Shortly afterwards, and following the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in  Raju  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754,  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave
    directions to the parties.   In  the  light  of  that  judgment,  which
    overturned Khatel, the Upper Tribunal, acting pursuant to rule 45(1)(b)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 proposed

    (a)  to set aside the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
         present case; and


    (b)  to substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
         against the variation decision, but allow the  appeal  against  the
         section 47 removal decision; and


    (c)  to do so without an oral hearing.


    The parties were advised that if they wished to object to any  part  of
    the proposal, they were required to do so, setting out reasons.

6.   Following an  objection,  a  hearing  was  listed  before  me  on  26th
    February 2014.  Four days beforehand, the appellant  provided  "amended
    grounds" in support of his  case.   Mr  Chohan,  who  appeared  on  his
    behalf, adopted those grounds and Mr Duffy was given an opportunity  to
    read and assimilate them.

The Submissions Made by the Parties in Response to the Directions

7.   At the outset, Mr Duffy indicated that the  Secretary  of  State  would
    not oppose the appeal being allowed  against  the  section  47  removal
    decision.  That decision was made on the same occasion as the  decision
    to refuse to vary leave, on 25th September 2012, long  before  8th  May
    2013 (when section 51 of the  Courts  and  Crime  Act  2013  came  into
    effect).

8.   Mr Chohan adopted the amended grounds although he was  not  the  author
    of them.

9.   In the grounds, the issue was isolated as whether or not the  appellant
    was entitled to 15 points under the fourth  section  of  Table  10,  in
    Appendix A.  It was stated that he relied upon arguments not  discussed
    in either Khatel or Raju.  I observed at this point that many  (if  not
    all) of the arguments were, however, considered by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Nasim and Others [2013] UKUT 610 and Nasim and  Others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT 00025.

10.  In summary, it was contended in the grounds that the  Court  of  Appeal
    in Raju focused on Table 10,

         "without  any  consideration  of  relevant  Home  Office  guidance,
         policy, the application  form  and  the  award  of  20  points  for
         qualification on post-application evidence as well as jurisprudence
         which permits  post-application  to  be  considered  that  predates
         decision as discussed in below paragraphs (sic)."

11.   In  the  subsequent  paragraphs,  mention  was  made  of  the  Tier  1
    application forms in use before 5th April 2012 and to part  G5  of  the
    form, which invited an applicant to tick a box to show  that  a  letter
    had been sent from his teaching institution.  The grounds also included
    claims that the appellant  in  the  present  appeal  had  a  legitimate
    expectation that his application would succeed, not  least  because  of
    the past practice of the Secretary  of  State  of  awarding  points  in
    other, similar cases and in the light of policy guidance  published  in
    April 2012.  This suggested that the "date of  award"  requirement  was
    satisfied even where there was no certificate from  the  awarding  body
    and so the appellant  could  succeed  where  his  teaching  institution
    confirmed that an award "will be issued".  Moreover, as some  claimants
    had been  awarded  points  and  received  post-study  work  leave,  the
    Secretary of State had not decided the cases consistently.

12.  Mention was also made of evidential  flexibility  and  the  de  minimus
    rule, described as enabling a "defendant" to  obtain  material  showing
    that the requirements of the rules were met even  after  submitting  an
    application.  Finally,  the  amended  grounds  assert,  for  Article  8
    purposes,  that  the  appellant  invested  substantial  funds  in   the
    expectation of gaining post-study work experience.  The amended grounds
    include this conclusion, at paragraph 29:  "It  is  not  accepted  that
    Nasim and Others is  a  complete  answer  to  the  appellant's  grounds
    above".

13.  Mr Chohan said that so far as  he  was  aware,  there  was  no  further
    appeal  from  Raju  yet  listed  in  the  Supreme  Court,  although  an
    application may have been made.  The Secretary of State had a  duty  to
    make rules that were not ambiguous and policy guidance had been  issued
    in the post-study work category to supplement the rules.  These invited
    claimants to make an application.  Guidance was sent out  to  colleges.
    When the appellant and others entered the  United  Kingdom,  post-study
    work was part of the student package.  The appellant and others in  his
    position chose the United Kingdom because of a particular  career  path
    which included this element.  The application form  at  G5  invited  an
    applicant for leave to indicate that a letter from the provider of  his
    course had been sent.  The Secretary of State granted  post-study  work
    leave initially in many cases.   There  was  a  second  category  where
    applicants were refused leave but the Secretary of State then  withdrew
    her decisions and granted leave subsequently.   In  a  third  category,
    successful appeals led to the grant of post-study work  leave  and  the
    appellant was in a fourth category, where leave had been  refused.   Mr
    Chohan said that the Secretary of State had not looked properly at  the
    appellant's case in the light of the closure of the scheme.  He applied
    before April 2012.  The Secretary of State had not stated  clearly  why
    she had discriminated against him in refusing his case.

14.  The appellant relied on the application  form,  the  guidance  and  the
    material sent to the course providers.  Overall, the Upper Tribunal had
    come to the correct decision in allowing his appeal in the light of the
    case law at the time.  The Secretary of State  granted  leave  to  some
    applicants but not others and so  this  was  evidence  of  inconsistent
    decision making and amounted to unfairness.  The appellant was entitled
    to be treated in the same way as those  granted  leave  and  he  had  a
    legitimate expectation that this would be so.

15.  Mr Chohan said that the appellant relied on private life  ties  in  the
    Article 8 context.  He enjoyed no family life in the United Kingdom.

16.  Mr Duffy said that the Secretary of State relied  on  the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Raju, the two decisions in Nasim and Others and,
    in the Article 8 context, on the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Patel.  Arguments based on fairness and legitimate expectation, and the
    other aspects raised by the appellant in this case, were dealt with  in
    the two Nasim cases.  Mr Duffy submitted that the Upper Tribunal should
    follow that guidance.  So far as the grants of  leave  in  other  cases
    were concerned, without knowing the particulars  or  details  of  those
    cases, and knowing so little about their  circumstances  and  why  they
    were allowed, it was apparent that the appellant could not  succeed  in
    showing unfairness.  In some cases, for example, the grant of leave may
    have been a consequence merely of the missing of a deadline  to  appeal
    by the Secretary of State.

17.   Mr  Chohan  made  a  brief  response.   The  Secretary  of  State  had
    approached the Upper Tribunal after judgment was given in the Court  of
    Appeal in Raju, even though it may have been the case that  she  missed
    the deadline for doing so.

Findings and Conclusions

18.  Having heard from the parties,  I  conclude  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should, in the exercise of  its  powers  under  rule  45(1)(b)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008   set   aside   the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in the present case and  substitute
    a fresh decision.  That this is the proper course is apparent from  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Raju, overturning the  determination
    in Khatel.

19.  The  decision  substituted  in  relation  to  the  section  47  removal
    decision is simply to allow the appellant's appeal against it.  On  the
    date it was made, on 25th September 2012, the Secretary of State had no
    power to make such a  removal  decision  on  the  same  occasion  as  a
    decision to refuse to vary leave.

20.  So far as the appeal against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave  is
    concerned, the decision to be substituted is one  which  dismisses  the
    appellant's  appeal.   Mr  Chohan  made  careful  submissions  on   the
    appellant's  behalf  and  adopted  the  "amended  grounds"  which   the
    appellant also relied upon.  I find that the judgment in Raju  and  the
    guidance given in the two decisions in Nasim and  Others  ought  to  be
    applied.  There is no sensible reason to do otherwise.  The fundamental
    difficulty the appellant faces is that his application was made on  3rd
    April 2012 but the qualification he relied upon, required to have  been
    obtained within the period of twelve months prior to that  application,
    was awarded only on 6th July 2012.  As explained in the first  decision
    in Nasim and Others, neither the guidance issued by  the  Secretary  of
    State in July 2010 and, subsequently, in April 2012, nor  the  casework
    instruction of 23rd May 2012 (which was not expressly  relied  upon  in
    the present appeal) make  any  substantial  difference.   As  noted  at
    paragraph 41 of the first decision in Nasim and Others, Moses  LJ  held
    in Raju that there is no ambiguity or lack  of  clarity  regarding  the
    "temporal" requirement in the fourth section of Table 10.   That  clear
    requirement was not met by the appellant.

21.  Arguments based on fairness and legitimate expectation, and indeed  the
    proportionality  of  refusing  the  application  for  leave,  were  all
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in the  two  decisions  in  Nasim  and
    Others.  So too was the claim  that  the  Secretary  of  State  decided
    applications inconsistently.  Those arguments do not have merit in  the
    present appeal.  The appellant is not remotely in a  position  akin  to
    those  within  the  category  of  Highly  Skilled  Migrants,  who  were
    encouraged  to  come  to  the  United   Kingdom   on   the   basis   of
    representations contained in  the  rules  and  elsewhere.   He  had  no
    legitimate  expectation  that  he  would  given  leave  notwithstanding
    failure to meet the requirements of the rules.   Again,  there  was  no
    ambiguity in the rules themselves.  It may very well be the  case  that
    others known to the appellant, perhaps including some that  he  studied
    with, have been given post-study work leave but there  is  no  evidence
    before me remotely close  to  showing  any  systemic  inconsistency  in
    decision making by the  Secretary  of  State.   There  is  no  evidence
    setting out the details in those successful cases  and  it  is  readily
    apparent, in contrast, that the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    to vary the appellant's leave was accompanied by cogent  reasons  which
    related to the requirements of the rules.  The fact  that  applications
    made  by  others  succeeded,  some  following  application  and  others
    following an initial refusal, simply has no substantial impact  on  the
    lawfulness of the decision made in the appellant's own case.

22.  In summary, so  far  as  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is
    concerned, the decision to be  substituted  is  the  dismissal  of  the
    appellant's appeal, as he has not shown that the  requirements  of  the
    rules have been met.

23.  I turn, finally, to Article 8, and take into  account  my  findings  in
    paragraphs 20 and 21 above.   The appellant has established  no  family
    life ties in the United Kingdom.  He first arrived here in October 2007
    with leave as a student.  That leave was extended twice, on the  second
    occasion until 31st May 2012.  He made his  application  on  3rd  April
    that year, for post-study work leave, in anticipation of the closure of
    that category.

24.  The grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  very  brief
    mention of Article 8 in paragraph 12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    noted the appellant's presence here since 2007 and found  that  he  had
    completed his studies.  He observed that the appellant could return  to
    Pakistan to secure employment there.  There is no mention of Article  8
    in the determination promulgated in the Upper Tribunal  in  early  June
    2013.

  25. Mr Duffy drew attention to the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in
      Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72, and guidance  which  was  taken  into
      account by the Upper Tribunal in the  second  decision  in  Nasim  and
      Others.  The Upper Tribunal found that those who  have  a  desire,  as
      former students, to undertake a  period  of  post-study  work  in  the
      United Kingdom, lie  at  the  outer  reaches  of  cases  requiring  an
      affirmative answer to the second of the five "Razgar" questions.  Even
      if an affirmative answer needs to be  given,  so  that  Article  8  is
      engaged, the issue of proportionality  should  generally  be  resolved
      decisively in favour of the respondent, by reference to her  functions
      as the guardian of the system of immigration control, entrusted to her
      by Parliament (see paragraph 21 of the decision in  Nasim  and  Others
      [2014] UKUT 00025).  There is no  reason  to  doubt,  in  the  present
      appeal, that the appellant may very well have formed friendships since
      his arrival here as a student in 2007.  He has,  however,  always  had
      limited leave and I have no doubt that he has been well aware of  that
      fact.  There  is  little  detail  of  any  particular  friendships  or
      associations and nothing to show that those ties he has established as
      a student, and following his post-study work  application,  cannot  be
      maintained from abroad.  The  appellant  has  succeeded  in  obtaining
      academic qualifications, has failed in his  attempt  to  secure  post-
      study work leave and there is, as yet, no lawful removal decision made
      by the Secretary of State.  Overall, I find that Article 8 is  engaged
      in the private life context, particularly in the light  of  the  years
      the appellant has spent here.  The adverse decision which  remains  to
      be considered was  made  in  accordance  with  the  law.   So  far  as
      proportionality is concerned, in weighing the competing  interests,  I
      find that there is rather little  to  place  in  the  balance  on  the
      appellant's side, taking into account the paucity of evidence and,  on
      the other side of the balance, little of substance to set against  the
      Secretary of State's case.  I conclude that the decision to refuse  to
      vary leave,  and  the  appellant's  removal  in  consequence  of  that
      decision, would be proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  being
      pursued, the operation of a coherent and fair  system  of  immigration
      control, in the interests of the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
      Kingdom.  The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.


  26. On 27th March 2014, the appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, enclosing their client's authority to withdraw  his  appeal.
      Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides
      that a party may give notice of  withdrawal  "at  any  time  before  a
      hearing to consider the disposal of the proceedings ... or ...  orally
      at a hearing."    The appellant may not now withdraw his appeal as the
      hearing has taken place.

Decision

27.  The determination of the Upper Tribunal in  the  present  case  is  set
    aside.  A fresh decision is substituted as follows:

    (i)  The appeal against the section 47 removal decision is allowed.


    (ii) The appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is
         dismissed.


    (iii)    The appeal on human rights grounds, in reliance upon Article 8
         of the Human Rights Convention, is dismissed.

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



FEE AWARD

I have considered whether a  fee  award  should  be  made.   As  the  appeal
against the decision to refuse to vary leave and  on  human  rights  grounds
has been dismissed, I make no fee award even though the appeal  against  the
section 47 removal decision has been allowed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



