
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2014                         |On 11th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                           Mr Adeel Shahid Sheikh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel, instructed by Denning
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Anonymity has not previously been directed. No order is requested and I
    see no reason to make one.

 2. The Appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge C  M
    Phillips) concluding that the Appellant  did  not  have  an  in-country
    right of appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  vary
    leave to remain and to remove him under Section 10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  Permission was granted on the basis that  it  was
    arguable that the judge was wrong to conclude that  the  Appellant  did
    not have leave at the time of the refusal decision because his leave to
    remain had been extended by virtue  of  Section  3C(2)(b)  and  Section
    3D(2)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  statutory  extension  arose
    because he had applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant before the curtailment date of  his  existing
    leave on 28th April 2013.

 3. The matter proceeded before me on the basis of submissions.   Mr  Iqbal
    made a spirited effort to enlarge the grounds.  The first  point  taken
    was that although the Respondent had raised jurisdiction in the reasons
    for  refusal,  the  Respondent's  representative  at  the  hearing  had
    conceded jurisdiction, and the judge was bound by that concession.

 4. I find no merit in that  submission.   Paragraph  14  of  the  decision
    clearly sets out that the issue of jurisdiction  was  live  before  the
    judge as it records that submissions were made on the point.   At  [15]
    there is reference  to  the  Respondent's  representative  specifically
    taking instructions in respect of the issue, and confirming reliance on
    the jurisdictional point.  As the judge's decision at [15] makes clear,
    the Respondent's representative acknowledged that there was a  lack  of
    detail in the nature of the deception in the decision letter but it was
    clear that when the judge tested out with  the  representative  whether
    that meant that the jurisdictional point was  not  being  pursued,  the
    Respondent quite clearly confirmed that the  jurisdictional  point  was
    not conceded.  The judge was not acting unfairly  in  testing  out  the
    issue of the concession with the representative.  For a  concession  to
    operate it must be unambiguous and intended to operate as a concession.



 5. Mr Iqbal next sought to argue that  the  legality  of  the  Section  10
    removal decision was vitiated by  the  failure  of  the  Respondent  to
    follow  their  Immigration   Directorate   Instruction   requiring   an
    evidential basis for the immigration decision, but in the event, having
    taken me to the case of Anwar v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1275, he took  the
    point no further because of  the  comments  therein  at  paragraph  24,
    namely that it is a public law point justiciable  by  way  of  judicial
    review so that, and even allowing for the fact that it was not a  point
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and so incapable of  giving
    rise to an error of law, it is a matter in any event unavailable absent
    an in-country right of appeal.

 6. Mr Iqbal then moved to the construction point upon which leave had been
    granted.  In this regard he sought to argue that  the  statutory  leave
    operated to extend leave granted under the Immigration  Rules  so  that
    the result of the curtailment was not that the Appellant  was,  at  the
    time of the removal decision, a person who "has no leave  to  enter  or
    remain", section 10 (8) of the Immigration and Asylum 1999 Act did  not
    operate to invalidate section 3C leave.   On  the  same  reasoning  the
    Respondent was unable to make a decision to remove under Section 47  of
    the 2007 Act.

 7. I find no merit in this point either.  Section 10(8) of  the  1999  Act
    operates to invalidate any leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom previously "given".   The  fact  that  the  leave  arises  from
    statutory extension does not mean that it is not leave which  has  been
    "given" to an Appellant because it operates not as  a  new  species  of
    leave but as an extension  of  leave  previously  granted.   In  short,
    Section 10(8) has application to  Section  3C  leave.   (QI  (Pakistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 614 refers).  With regard to Section  47,  the  Section
    simply has no  operation  because  here  the  allegation  is  that  the
    applicant attempted to  obtain  further  leave  by  deception  so  that
    Section 10 applies on its own terms.

 8. In the context of this case an out of country right  of  appeal  is  an
    adequate remedy for this Appellant to  argue  any  substantive  dispute
    arising from the Respondent's decision (R (Lim) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ
    773).

Decision


 9. The  Appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction stands.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


