

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21205/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 October 2017                         |On 5 December 2017             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                            MUDASSAR ABDUL-REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Usman, Solicitor, of Harvard Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Background

1.    This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N. Amin (hereafter "the  FtTJ")  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse him leave to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He has remained in the  United
    Kingdom (UK) since his entry in 2007 as a student. His last  period  of
    leave in that capacity expired on 3 May 2014. On 23 December  2014,  he
    lodged a further application for leave to remain on family and  private
    life grounds on the basis of his  relationship  with  his  partner  and
    child. The Respondent refused the  application  on  2  June  2015.  The
    Appellant appealed.

The Decision of the FtTJ

3.    The appeal came before the FtTJ on 21  June  2017.  The  parties  were
    represented before the FtTJ who heard oral evidence from the  Appellant
    and received submissions from both representatives. The FtTJ's decision
    is brief comprising of three pages. Her findings are set out  at  [10]-
    [19]. By the time of the  hearing  before  the  FtTJ,  the  Appellant's
    relationship  had  broken  down  and  it  was  thus  conceded  by   his
    representative  that  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules on account of that relationship. The Appellant's  ex-
    partner had however since given birth to their  child,  and  while  the
    Appellant had not seen that child, the appeal was pursued on the  basis
    that there were ongoing family court proceedings in  relation  to  that
    child. The FtTJ accepted that on 24  February  2017  the  Family  Court
    issued a parental responsibility order to the Appellant, but noted that
    he had not been able to exercise his rights under that order and  hence
    a further hearing had been scheduled for 14 July 2017.

4.    The  FtTJ's  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal  at  [17]-[19]  are
    expressed in the following terms:

      "However, the Appellant has not seen this child since  her  birth  and
    there  is  nothing  before  me  to  show  that  he  has  sole  parental
    responsibility. The child lives with her mother and the Appellant's ex-
    partner."

      In the circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    fails because the decision of the Respondent at the time  it  was  made
    was in accordance with the law.

       The  refusal  is  therefore  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the
    Respondent  has  shown  that  the  interference  is  justified  and  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of controlling immigration."

5.    The FtTJ thus dismissed the appeal "under Article 8 of the ECHR."

6.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly on 29 August 2017 on  all
    grounds. A rule 24 response was filed by the  Respondent  opposing  the
    appeal.







Error of Law

7.    This decision is brief due  to  the  concession  rightly  made  by  Mr
    Walker on behalf of the Respondent at the hearing, who agreed with  the
    Tribunal's observation that it was plain the FtTJ materially  erred  in
    law.

8.    The appeal concerned the  welfare  of  the  Appellant's  child  -  the
    subject of contact proceedings. The grounds argue, and  the  Presenting
    Officer's minutes  of  the  hearing  helpfully  adduced  by  Mr  Walker
    confirm, that the FtTJ heard an adjournment application  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant on the basis that the Family Court were to  consider  the
    parental responsibility order and the Appellant's inability to exercise
    that order at a hearing scheduled for 14 July 2017, approximately three
    weeks' after the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The FtTJ makes
    no reference to the adjournment application. The  Presenting  Officer's
    minutes  indicate  that  the  FtTJ  refused  the  application  for   an
    adjournment on  the  basis  that  the  family  court  proceedings  were
    irrelevant and that the FtTJ referred to the fact that the  appeal  had
    been adjourned on two previous occasions.

9.    It is a troubling feature of this case that  the  FtTJ's  Decision  is
    entirely silent in respect of these circumstances.

10.   The applicable law in respect of adjournments  is  helpfully  explored
    in the decision of Nwaigwe (adjournment - fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418
    (IAC). I have considered what is set out at paragraphs [7]-[9]:

         "7.      If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally. In practice, in most cases the question will  be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness:  was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law.  In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.

         8. The cardinal rule rehearsed above is expressed in uncompromising
             language in  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SH
             (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:

                  'First, when considering  whether  the  immigration  Judge
                  ought to have granted an adjournment,  the  test  was  not
                  irrationality.  The test was not whether his decision  was
                  properly open to him or  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
                  perverse.  The test and  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
                  unfair'.


             Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve
             to prevent  judicial  error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and
             imperfect world of contemporary litigation,  the  question  of
             adjourning a case not  infrequently  arises  on  the  date  of
             hearing, at the doors of the court. I am conscious, of course,
             that in the typical case the Judge  will  have  invested  much
             time and effort in preparation, is understandably  anxious  to
             complete the day's list of cases for hearing and may well feel
             frustrated  by  the  (usually)   unexpected   advent   of   an
             adjournment request. Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  have
             demanding   workloads.   Parties   and    stakeholders    have
             expectations, typically elevated  and  sometimes  unrealistic,
             relating to the throughput and output of cases in the  system.
             In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is  more
             acute than ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must  consistently
             give effect  to  the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,
             sensations of frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how
             legitimate, must always yield to the parties' right to a  fair
             hearing.  In determining applications for adjournments, Judges
             will also be guided by focussing on the overarching  criterion
             enshrined in  the  overriding  objective,  which  is  that  of
             fairness.

         9. In passing, I am conscious that the  FtT  procedural  rules  are
             scheduled to be replaced by a new code which  is  expected  to
             come into  operation  on  20  October  2014.   The  provisions
             relating to adjournments, previously enshrined in rules 19 and
             21 have been substantially simplified.  Within the  new  code,
             the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)   Rules  2014,
             Rule 4(3)(h),  under  the  rubric  'Case  Management  Powers',
             provides that the FtT -

                       'may ...  adjourn or postpone a hearing'.

             This substantially less prescriptive  formula  reinforces  the
             necessity of giving full effect, in every case, to the  common
             law right  and  principles  discussed  above.  The  overriding
             objective remains unchanged: see Rule 2.  FtT  Judges  dealing
             with  adjournment  issues  should  continue   to   apply   the
             principles rehearsed above and the decision of  the  Court  of
             Appeal in SH (Afghanistan), giving primacy to the criterion of
             fairness."

11.   In my judgement it is apparent that  the  FtTJ  singularly  failed  to
    demonstrate that she  gave  consideration  and/or  had  regard  to  the
    Appellant's common law right to a fair hearing, in circumstances  where
    her decision did not  address  any  of  the  events  that  is  accepted
    occurred at that hearing. The  FtTJ  has  not  given  reasons  for  her
    decision to proceed with the hearing and thus has not demonstrated  why
    in her view she considered it fair  to  proceed.  The  absence  of  any
    consideration of an adjournment or an explanation for the  decision  to
    proceed, constitutes an error of law, which in this case is  compounded
    by the FtTJ's findings that the Appellant had not  seen  his  child,  a
    situation  which  was  resolved  shortly  after  the  hearing  by   the
    commencement of supervised contact.

12.   It is further plain that the FtTJ erred as contended  in  the  grounds
    in failing to consider the best interests  of  the  child.  The  FtTJ's
    consideration of the position  of  the  child  at  [17]  was  evidently
    inadequate  and  no  consideration  was   given   to   the   Tribunal's
    jurisprudence in respect of a child subject  to  ongoing  family  court
    proceedings.

13.   In those circumstances, I  find  the  FtTJ  erred  in  law.  The  only
    outcome must be that the decision of FtTJ is set aside. The  appeal  by
    consent of the parties is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that the decision is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing to be  heard  by  a  judge  other
than FtTJ N. Amin.




Signed                                             Dated: 25 November 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral











