
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/21722/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2016                         | On 27th July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  UMER BUTT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Timson (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State, brought with  permission,
    against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gurung-Thapa
    hereinafter "the judge") promulgated on 23rd July  2015,  allowing  the
    Claimant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  of  2nd
    May 2014 refusing to grant indefinite leave to remain as the victim  of
    domestic violence and deciding to remove the Claimant from  the  UK  by
    way of directions.

 2. The judge found, after an oral  hearing  at  which  both  parties  were
    represented and at which the Claimant gave evidence, that he had  given
    a truthful account of relevant events, that his marriage to his British
    citizen Sponsor had permanently broken down prior  to  the  end  of  an
    initial probationary period of leave which had been granted to him as a
    spouse, that the cause of the marital breakdown was  domestic  violence
    in respect of which he had  been  the  victim  and  that  all  relevant
    requirements contained within paragraph 289A of the  Immigration  Rules
    were met.

 3. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and such was granted, upon renewal, by a Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge might have  erred  in  failing  to
    give adequate reasons for her decision.  Accordingly,  the  matter  was
    listed for a hearing before me so that it could be decided  whether  or
    not the judge had actually erred in law and, if so,  what  should  flow
    from that.  Representation at that hearing was as indicated above.

 4. Mr Mills realistically and helpfully indicated that he was not able  to
    contend that the grounds offered by the Secretary of State  represented
    anything more than a mere disagreement with the outcome.  I am entirely
    sure that Mr Mills was right to make that important concession.   Given
    that he has made it, it is not necessary for me to undertake a detailed
    evaluation of the grounds but suffice it to say it does seem  clear  to
    me that they contain nothing which goes beyond  disagreement  and  mere
    assertion. Further,  it  is  apparent  from  a  plain  reading  of  the
    determination that the judge did, indeed give her reasons, in  fact  in
    some detail, as to why she was accepting what  the  Claimant  had  told
    her.

 5. In these circumstances there is really nothing more to say.  I conclude
    that the judge did not  err  in  law  and  that,  in  consequence,  her
    determination shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of law.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not order anonymity.  I was not invited  to  and
do not do so either.

Signed   Date 27th July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not disturb the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed   Date 27th July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
