
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21794/2012
     ia/21802/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th February 2014                           |On 27th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                anitha moras
                            johnson praveen paula

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders (Senior Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:   No appearance and no representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Mrs Anitha Moras and Mr Johnson Praveen  Paula,  who  are  husband  and
    wife, are nationals of India  born  on  the  7th  July  1982  and  16th
    September 1981 respectively.  The First Respondent was granted leave to
    enter the UK as a Tier 4 (General) student on 8th  October  2009  until
    the 20th February 2012 and her application for leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 2 Student was refused on the 1st September 2011.  Her husband, the
    Second Respondent, was granted leave to enter as her dependant.

 2. On the 20th February 2012 they applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant and her  dependant  but
    their applications were refused by the Secretary of State on  the  21st
    September 2012 under Paragraph 245FD and a decision to remove was  made
    under Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The relevant rule , paragraph 245FD reads as follows:-

         "To qualify for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
         Migrant, an Applicant must  meet  the  requirements  listed  below.
         Subject to paragraph 245FE(a)(i),  if  the  Applicant  meets  these
         requirements, leave to remain will be granted.   If  the  Applicant
         does not meet these requirements, the application will be refused.


         Requirements:


         (a)  The Applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
             grounds of refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.


         (b)  The Applicant must not  previously  have  been  granted  entry
             clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant.


         (c)  The Applicant must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraph
             66-72 of Appendix A."


 4. Paragraphs 66 to 72 of Appendix A were as follows:-

         "ATTRIBUTES FOR TIER 1 (POST-STUDY WORK) MIGRANTS


         66.  An Applicant for entry clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier
             1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  must  score  75   points   for
             attributes.


         67.  Available points are shown in Table 10.


         68.  Notes to accompany the table appear below the table.


         Table 10


         |Qualifications                                      |Points      |
|The Applicant has been awarded:                     |20          |
|                                                    |            |
|(a) a UK recognised bachelor or postgraduate degree,|            |
|or                                                  |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(b) a UK postgraduate certificate in education or   |            |
|Professional Graduate Diploma of Education, or      |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(c) a Higher National Diploma ('HND') from a        |            |
|Scottish institution                                |            |
|(a) The Applicant studied for his award at a UK     |20          |
|institution that is a UK recognised or listed body, |            |
|or which holds a sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the|            |
|Points Based System, or                             |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(b) If the Applicant is claiming points for having  |            |
|been awarded a Higher National diploma from a       |            |
|Scottish Institution, he studied for that diploma at|            |
|a Scottish publicly funded institution of further or|            |
|higher education, or a Scottish bona fide private   |            |
|education institution which maintains satisfactory  |            |
|records of enrolment and attendance.                |            |
|                                                    |            |
|The Scottish institution must:                      |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(i) be on the list of Education and Training        |            |
|Providers list on the Department of Business,       |            |
|Innovation and Skills website, or                   |            |
|(ii) hold a Sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the     |            |
|Points Based System.                                |            |
|The Applicant's period of UK study and/or research  |20          |
|towards his eligible award were undertaken whilst he|            |
|had entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to     |            |
|remain in the UK that was not subject to a          |            |
|restriction preventing him from undertaking a course|            |
|of study and/or research.                           |            |
|The Applicant made the application for entry        |15          |
|clearance or leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study|            |
|Work) Migrant within 12 months of obtaining the     |            |
|relevant qualification or within 12 months of       |            |
|completing a United Kingdom Foundation Programme    |            |
|Office affiliated Foundation Programme as a         |            |
|postgraduate doctor or dentist.                     |            |
|The Applicant is applying for leave to remain and   |75          |
|has, or was last granted, leave as a Participant in |            |
|the International Graduates Scheme (or its          |            |
|predecessor, the Science and engineering Graduates  |            |
|Scheme) or as a Participant in the Fresh Talent:    |            |
|Working in Scotland Scheme.                         |            |




         QUALIFICATION: NOTES


         69.  Specified documents  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of  the
             qualification and, where relevant, completion  of  the  United
             Kingdom  Foundation  Programme  Office  affiliated  Foundation
             Programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist.


         70.      A  qualification  will  have  been  deemed  to  have  been
             'obtained' on the  date  on  which  the  Applicant  was  first
             notified in writing, by the  awarding  institution,  that  the
             qualification had been awarded."



 5. The Secretary of State refused the appeals in a decision dated the 27th
    September 2013.  The basis for refusal for  the  first  respondent  was
    that  the  15  points  claimed  under  Appendix  A  for  the   eligible
    qualification had not been provided  when  the  application  was  first
    submitted on the 20th February 2012.  Evidence  of  the  award  of  the
    eligible qualification  from  the  Anglia  Ruskin  University  was  not
    stated.  The date of the award was subsequently confirmed  as  the  6th
    July 2012.  The decision cited the Upper Tribunal decision of NO (post-
    study work-award needed by date of application)  Nigeria  [2008]  UKIAT
    0054 that the applicant must have been awarded the qualification at the
    date of the application and that the Immigration Rules state  that  the
    date of the award must be within the 12 months directly  prior  to  the
    date of the application and the date of the award is after  that  date.
    The claimed points under Appendix B English Language were  refused  due
    to the failure to meet the requirement for  the  eligible  award.   The
    second respondent was refused on the basis of  the  First  Respondent's
    claim having failed.

 6. They exercised their rights to appeal the decisions and  their  appeals
    were  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Oliver)   in   a
    determination promulgated on the 5th December 2012.   He  set  out  his
    findings at paragraph 5  applying  the  decision  of  AQ  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 833 that she had obtained her  award
    on the 6th July 2012  and  the  date  of  the  decision  was  the  27th
    September 2012 so she had her qualification at the date of the decision
    and that she was entitled to succeed in her appeal.  He  did  not  deal
    with their appeals against removal decisions made in respect  of  them,
    in purported pursuance of Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the decision on  the
    11th December 2012 and  permission  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge
    French on the 21st December 2012.  The appeals came  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal ( Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Mailer),  and  the  Respondents
    secured decisions in their favour in the Upper Tribunal  in respect  of
    their appeals against decisions of the Secretary of State to refuse  to
    vary leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  because  that  Tribunal
    followed the approach adopted by Blake J, President and Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Coker  in  Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;  effect   of   continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC).

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal against the determinations of the Upper Tribunal.  At  the  time
    she did so, permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been
    granted by the Upper Tribunal in respect of Khatel.   The  Respondents'
    grounds of application reiterated the critique of Khatel  contained  in
    the grounds of application submitted in that case.

 9. As set out in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim  and  Others
    (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610(IAC) at paragraphs 3 -
    5, 200 applications for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    were made by the Secretary of State  in respect  of  determinations  of
    the Upper Tribunal, allowing appeals (or  dismissing  the  Respondents'
    appeals) on the basis of Khatel.  It appears that a significant  number
    of applications for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    made by the Secretary of State  against  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, applying Khatel.

10. Since it was known that permission to appeal in Khatel had been granted
    (with arrangements made for the Court of Appeal to expedite the hearing
    in that court), it was considered appropriate to consider the Secretary
    of State 's permission applications once the judgments of the Court  of
    Appeal became known.

11. On 25 June 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    Upper Tribunal's determinations in Khatel and the cases of three  other
    immigrants: Raju and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754.

12. As a result, the Tribunal gave directions in the cases before it  where
    the Respondent had applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The Tribunal did so pursuant to Rule 45(1)(b) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "45.-(1)      On receiving an application for permission to appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-



                                            ...

                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the Upper Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a material effect on the
                      decision."

13. The Upper Tribunal's directions indicated  that  it  proposed,  in  the
    light of Raju, to review the determinations of the Upper Tribunal,  set
    them aside and remake the decisions in the appeals by dismissing  them.
    The directions made plain that the Appellants would be (or continue  to
    be) successful in their  appeals  against  removal  decisions  made  in
    respect  of  them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  This was  because  those
    decisions were unlawful (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512).

14. Further direction were sent out by the Upper Tribunal as follows: On 21
    January 2014, the Tribunal issued directions in the following terms:

         1.   Any directions previously given by the Upper Tribunal in these
             proceedings are hereby revoked.

         2.   The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing  in  the
             Upper Tribunal on the basis that the issues to  be  considered
             at that hearing will be as follows:

             (a)  whether the determination of the Upper Tribunal, made  by
                  reference to the determination in Khatel and others (s85A;
                  effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC),
                  should be set aside in light of the judgment of the  Court
                  of Appeal in Raju and others v Secretary of State for  the
                  Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  754  (as  to  which,  see
                  Nasim and others (Raju: reasons  not  to  follow?)  [2013]
                  UKUT 00610 (IAC);

             (b)   if  so,  whether  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
                  determination of the First-tier Tribunal,  such  that  the
                  determination should be set aside; and

             (c)  if so,  how  the  decision  in  the  appeal  against  the
                  immigration decisions should be  re-made  (see  Nasim  and
                  others).

         3.   The party who was the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal  is
             directed to serve on the Upper Tribunal and the respondent, no
             later than 7 days before the forthcoming hearing, all  written
             submissions   and   written   evidence   (including    witness
             statements) on the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, upon  which
             they will seek to  rely  at  that  hearing  (where  necessary,
             complying with rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
             Tribunal) Rules 2008).

15. No further evidence or submissions were received by the Tribunal.

16. Thus the appeals were listed before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  was
    neither appearance nor representation on  behalf  of  the  Respondents.
    The court clerk provided a note for the file that stated that the First
    Respondent had contacted the customer services team to state  that  she
    is unwell and would not be able to  attend  the  hearing.   No  medical
    evidence was provided in this respect.  I considered the case file.  An
    application had been made to adjourn the appeal on  the  24th  February
    2014.  Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor had  considered  that  application
    but refused it noting that:

         "The application indicates that the appellant needs to 'see' her GP
         because she had 'health issues'.  She attaches a letter from her GP
         dated 24 February.  This letter makes no  mention  of  any  medical
         appointment on the 25th February; indeed it refers  to  antibiotics
         having been recently prescribed.  It is further relevant  that  the
         GP's letter does not indicate that the appellant is unfit to attend
         before the Tribunal."

17. Notice of hearing was sent with the directions on the 27th January 2014
    to the address notified to the Tribunal and the  address  held  by  the
    Secretary of State.  I am satisfied that there was good  service  under
    the Rules and pursuant to Rule 38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008(as amended) I considered that I  should  hear  the
    appeals in the absence of the Respondents.  As noted above, the medical
    evidence provided with the application for an adjournment did not state
    that she was unfit to attend before the Tribunal and there has been  no
    further medical evidence supplied.   Furthermore,  there  has  been  no
    compliance with the directions sent to the Respondents.

18. Mr Saunders on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the grounds
    submitted to the Upper Tribunal in which it contended that the decision
    of the Upper Tribunal was wrong in law.  He  further  relied  upon  the
    decision of Raju (as cited) and as  upheld  in  Nasim  and  Others  (as
    cited).  In those circumstances he submitted the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal which relied upon Khatel disclosed an error of law and  should
    be set aside.

19.   In respect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, he  submitted  that
    the judge had similarly made an error of law in reaching the conclusion
    on the facts  of  the  appeal  that  the  Respondents  could  meet  the
    Immigration Rules by applying AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  830
    and that by  applying  Raju  to  the  facts  of  this  case  the  First
    Respondent could not demonstrate that  she  was  awarded  the  eligible
    qualification at the date of the application nor could she  demonstrate
    that the date of the eligible award was within twelve months  prior  to
    the date of the application and thus she could not  succeed  under  the
    Rules.  He therefore  invited  the  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision
    dismissing the appeals under the Immigration  Rules.    The  First-tier
    Tribunal had not dealt with the decision to remove under Section 47  of
    the 2006 Act in that respect he submitted it should be allowed only  as
    that removal decision was unlawful.

20.   As to Article 8, the Grounds of Appeal dated 8th October 2013  stated
    that the decision was incompatible with the ECHR but  no  evidence  had
    been  given.   Furthermore  there  had  been  no  compliance  with  the
    directions of the Tribunal that had been sent in  January  2014  as  to
    further evidence relating to Article  8.   In  those  circumstances  he
    submitted they could not succeed under Article 8 not only because there
    was a lack of evidence but also for the  reasons  given  in  Nasim  and
    Others.  Thus he invited the Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds also.

21. I reserved my determination.

Conclusions:

22. I am satisfied that the determination of 4th April 2013 of Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Mailer should be set aside for the reasons  advanced  by
    Mr Saunders and supported by the Court of Appeal decision in  Raju  (as
    cited) also that of the Tribunal in Nasim and Others (as cited).  There
    is no dispute as to the factual circumstances (see paragraph 17 of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision).  The applications under Tier 1 were made on
    20th February 2012.  The evidence before  the  Tribunal  was  that  the
    principal Respondent had submitted  a  confirmation  letter  dated  2nd
    April 2012 from the London Business School validated by  Anglia  Ruskin
    University stating that she had passed her modules and that  the  final
    transcript will be made available by Anglia Ruskin University  on  20th
    July 2012.  However there was also an email dated 20th  September  2012
    from Anglia Ruskin University confirming that the principal  Respondent
    was awarded a Master of Arts in Marketing and Innovation  on  6th  July
    2012.  The Upper Tribunal therefore found  at  paragraph  17  that  the
    notification was made to the Secretary of State after the date  of  the
    application but before the date of decision applying  the  decision  in
    Khatel and thus the  principal  Respondent  was  entitled  to  succeed.
    However, the decision in Raju makes it clear that Khatel  is  wrong  in
    law.  The point in Khatel was  that  it  was  thought  that  making  an
    application was a continuing process  and  as  long  as  the  necessary
    documents were put before the Secretary of State before  she  made  her
    decision the requirement of the Rules were met.  However as set out  in
    Raju and confirmed in the decision of Nasim and Others at paragraphs 20
    to 21 the Immigration Rules require the  applicant  to  have  made  the
    application for leave to remain "within twelve months of obtaining  the
    relevant qualification" (Appendix A, Table  10,  fourth  section);  and
    that paragraph 34G of the Rules when read with the  fourth  section  at
    Table 10 created a substantive requirement with which the Appellants in
    Khatel could not comply  and  that  the  fact  that  they  had  adduced
    evidence, prior to the date of decision that they had been notified  of
    their awards, was of no avail.  The date  of  "obtaining  the  relevant
    qualification" for the purposes of  Table  10  of  Appendix  A  to  the
    Immigration Rules as in force immediately before 6th April 2012 is  the
    date on which the  university  or  other  institution  responsible  for
    conferring  the  award  (not  the  institution  where   the   applicant
    physically studied if different) actually conferred that award, whether
    in person or in absentia.  In this case the confirmation of  the  award
    was 6th July 2012.  For those reasons, I set aside the decision of  the
    Upper Tribunal.

23. I am further satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made on 5th December 2012 should similarly  be  set  aside  because  it
    demonstrates an error of law for the same reasons as the Upper Tribunal
    erred in law.  I have set out earlier the reference to the facts  which
    are not in dispute.  The submissions that are set out  in  the  witness
    statement relate to the confirmation letter of 2nd April 2012 and  also
    paragraph 84 of the guidance.  However, as noted previously, the  email
    from Anglia Ruskin University confirmed that the First  Respondent  was
    awarded the eligible qualification on 6th  July  2012  irrespective  of
    having passed the course as set out in the letter of 4th April 2012 and
    therefore applying the decisions of Raju  and  Nasim  and  Others,  the
    principal Respondent cannot meet the Immigration Rules for the  reasons
    outlined earlier.  Her  husband's  appeal  similarly  fails  as  he  is
    dependent upon hers.

24. The other grounds advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  rely  on
    matters of fairness (paragraphs 10 to 14) of the witness statement  and
    evidential flexibility.  Those arguments were similarly  considered  in
    the decision of Nasim and Others  at  paragraphs  38  to  41  and  were
    rejected.  The grounds advanced by the Respondent now are made  on  the
    basis of general fairness grounds  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    required to act fairly and that "that he must set up a fair  system  to
    enable the decision to be made and that  he  must  operate  the  system
    fairly".  However as the Upper Tribunal stated in  Nasim,  it  was  not
    legally unfair for the Secretary of State to proceed in  the  way  that
    she did.  The grounds advanced do not demonstrated that there  was  any
    unfairness on the Secretary of State's part in the way that the  system
    was operated.  As to evidential flexibility,  the  Tribunal  for  sound
    reasons  rejected  arguments  concerning  evidential   flexibility   at
    paragraphs 50 to 52 of their decision in Nasim and Others.   As  stated
    in Raju at (paragraph 24) "These applicants could not score  75  points
    because they had made their applications before they had obtained their
    qualifications".   Therefore   no   application   of   the   evidential
    flexibility policy could assist the Respondent  on  the  facts  of  the
    appeal.

25. I am  further  satisfied  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside as  it  does  not  make  a  finding  on  a
    relevant issue, namely Article 8.  The Grounds of Appeal did raise  the
    issue of Article 8 although only in the barest of terms.   However  the
    witness statement of the First Respondent did make reference to Article
    8 at paragraphs 13 to 15.  It set out that she had entered  the  UK  on
    20th September 2007 and had been a student living in the UK since then.
     At paragraph 15 it cites the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  CDS
    (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 305.  The First Respondent  further  submits  that
    during her  part-time  employment  and  studies  she  had  gained  many
    friendships and therefore had established a private life.

26. With regard to that claim relying on their private life as protected by
    Article 8 of the ECHR, I am satisfied that the Respondents have  failed
    to provide adequate evidence to demonstrate Article  8(1)  is  engaged.
    The evidence relied on merely indicates the time the Respondents  spent
    in the United Kingdom as students or  obtaining  part-time  work.   The
    Respondents make references to friendships but  there  is  no  evidence
    from those people as to the significance of them.  There is  no  reason
    why such friendships could not be re-established  outside  of  the  UK.
    Consequently I do not find that the removal of the Respondents pursuant
    to the decision potentially engages the operation of Article 8.  In any
    event, even if  it  were  engaged,  I  would  find  that  such  removal
    proportionate to the legitimate end, namely the operation of a coherent
    and fair system of immigration control.  As noted in  the  decision  of
    Nasim and Others, whilst the Respondents rely on the obiter remarks  of
    the Upper Tribunal in CDS (Brazil), it was noted  at  paragraph  40  of
    Nasim and Others that CDS has no material bearing as that case involved
    the interpretation of Immigration  Rules  rather  than  the  effect  of
    changes in such Rules.  Furthermore, the Appellant  in  CDS  was  faced
    with a hypothetical  removal,  which  would  have  prevented  her  from
    completing the course of study for which she had been given leave.   In
    the case of the Respondent, she has finished her course for which leave
    to remain as a student related.  In  the  present  case  the  principal
    Respondent having finished her course seeks  to  undertake  two  years'
    post study work and is therefore different from the Appellants  in  CDS
    (Brazil).  Furthermore the Tribunal did expressly acknowledge  that  it
    was unlikely that a person would be able to show an Article 8 right  by
    coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  temporary  purposes,  as   these
    Respondents have.  The chances of such a right carrying  the  day  have
    further diminished in the light of the judgment in  Khatel  and  Others
    (see paragraph 41 of Nasim and Others).  Accordingly, for those reasons
    I do not find that there is any disproportionate interference with  the
    Respondents' Article 8 rights  adopting  the  reasoning  in  Nasim  and
    Others and therefore the appeals are to be dismissed  on  human  rights
    grounds also.

Decision

The determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer of  4th  April  2013
is set aside.

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Oliver)  involves  the
making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.

I remake the appeals against the  immigration  decision  of  27th  September
2012 and dismiss them on all  grounds  save  that  the  appeal  against  the
Section 47 decision under the 2006 Act is allowed on the basis  that  it  is
not in accordance with the law.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
