
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/21422/2014

                                                       IA/21451/2014

                                                       IA/21424/2014

                                                       IA/21423/2014

                                                       IA/21452/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2014                            |On 9 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           AZADUL ISLAM CHOWDHURY
                              AFRINA CHOWDHURY
                            ANAMI AZAD CHOWDHURY
                            ANMOL AZAD CHOWDHURY
                            FARIHA AZAD CHOWDHURY
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Mr M Hassan, M Q Hassan Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Whilst this is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties   in   the
  determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The first appellant, a national of Germany, appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his
  application  for  permanent  residence  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with
  regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
  Regulations). The Secretary of State was not  satisfied  that  the  first
  appellant was exercising treaty rights  continuously  for  the  requisite
  five year period. The second, third, fourth and fifth appellants are  the
  wife and children of the first  appellant  and  their  applications  were
  refused based on the decision in relation to the first appellant and  the
  Secretary of State was further not satisfied that they were  continuously
  resident in the UK for the requisite five  year  period.  Tribunal  Judge
  Griffith allowed the appeals and the Secretary of State now appeals  with
  permission to this Tribunal.

3. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge erred in accepting that self-assessment tax  returns  were
  evidence of the first appellant's continuous  employment  given  that  he
  identified two periods of ill health in  2010  and  2011.  Permission  to
  appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the  first
  appellant failed to discharge the burden of proof upon him  by  providing
  the further documents identified in the Reasons for Refusal letter  dated
  30 April 2014 as being required to show that he met the  requirements  of
  the EEA Regulations.

4. Ms Kenny submitted that the Reasons for Refusal letter gave  examples  of
  the evidence the appellant would be expected to show to demonstrate  that
  he satisfied the  EEA  Regulations.   She  submitted  that  the  evidence
  produced by the appellant was not sufficient and the  Judge  applied  too
  low a standard of proof.

5. Mr Hassan submitted that the evidence before the  Judge  was  sufficient.
  He referred to the evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  including  the
  medical  evidence,  the  first  appellant's  witness  statement  and  the
  evidence in relation to Working Tax  Credit.  Mr  Hassan  submitted  that
  there was sufficient evidence before the Judge and decision was  open  to
  the Judge on the basis of that evidence.

Error of Law

6.  The  appellant's  applied  for  permanent  residence   under   the   EEA
  Regulations. The relevant  provisions  of  the  EEA  Regulations  are  as
  follows;


      15. (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
      United Kingdom permanently-
           (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
           accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
           five years;
           (b)a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA
           national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA
           national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
           period of five years;

      ...

7. Regulation 15 does not require that the EEA national  show  that  he  has
  been in continuous employment or self-employment but that he has  resided
  in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period  of
  five years.

8. The respondent set out  evidence  which  could  have  been  submitted  in
  connection with the application for permanent residence  in  the  Reasons
  for Refusal  letter.  This  is  not  mandatory  evidence  under  the  EEA
  Regulations. As set out above the Regulations require  the  demonstration
  of five years continuous residence in accordance with the Regulations.

9. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination  that  she
  considered oral evidence from the first, second and third appellants. The
  evidence from the first appellant dealt with his two periods  of  illness
  and his two short periods out of the UK. The first appellant said that he
  was exempt from paying national insurance  contributions  from  mid  2008
  until mid 2011. He also  said  that  he  does  not  deposit  all  of  his
  earnings, which are  mostly  cash,  into  his  bank  account.  The  first
  appellant's evidence was corroborated by the second and third appellants.
  The Judge also considered the documentary evidence before  her  including
  tax  returns,  letters  from  HMRC,   national   insurance   contribution
  documentation, council tax  documentation,  tenancy  agreements,  medical
  evidence, utility bills, mini cab driver licences and a letter  from  the
  mini cab firm through which the first appellant operates.  The Judge took
  all of this evidence  into  account  and  concluded  on  the  balance  of
  probabilities that the first appellant had been continuously residence in
  the UK for at least five years and exercising treaty rights  as  a  self-
  employed person during that period.

10. The Judge therefore took all of the  evidence  into  account  and  I  am
  satisfied that the Judge was entitled to reach that conclusion  based  on
  the evidence before her. The respondent has not  challenged  the  Judge's
  findings that the second, third, fourth and fifth appellants  resided  in
  the UK for a continuous period of five years  as  the  first  appellant's
  family members.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

Signed
                       Date: 9 January 2015

A  Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal














