
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21700/2013
     ia/21627/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 May 2014                                  |On 29 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                       Sheryl Martin (First Appellant)
                      Marlon MARTIN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sowerby of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of the Philippines.  The first appellant is
    the wife of the second appellant and she was born on 8 September  1979.
    The second appellant was born on 19 June 1980.  The appellants had been
    granted entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  students  from  6
    September 2009 until 28 February 2013.   They  applied  to  vary  their
    leave to remain on 5 February 2013.  The applications were made on  the
    form FLR (O) and, at section 3 of that  form  ("which  category?")  the
    applicants  have  put   a   cross   and   marked   the   form,   "other
    purposes/reasons not covered by other application forms."  Reference is
    then made on the form to "attached letters".  A letter attached to  the
    application is dated 5 February 2013 and has been written apparently by
    the first  appellant.   This  letter  states  that  the  appellant  was
    applying,

         for an extension of my leave as a student as I am  scouting  for  a
         new university for my proposed course.  I am applying  to  Kingston
         University for my  master  in  biomedical  science  as  I  recently
         qualified with the Health Professional Council.  I am asking for an
         extension of my stay so I could attend the interview  and  I  could
         personally  handle  the  rigorous  application  procedure  for   my
         proposed course  of  study.   ...   The  start  of  the  master  in
         biomedical science will be on September this year.  I want  to  ask
         permission from you to grant me a few  months'  leave  so  I  could
         organise my entry to the said programe.  I would be grateful if you
         grant  me  this  request.   ...   I  am  hoping   for   your   kind
         consideration with regards to this request for a further  extension
         of my Tier 4 visa.

 2. The application was treated by the respondent as an application  for  a
    variation of leave to remain on the basis of exceptional  circumstances
    and for a purpose not covered by the Immigration  Rules.   The  refusal
    reads:

         Your application  has  been  considered  on  an  exceptional  basis
         outside the Immigration Rules.  You requested a couple  of  months'
         extension of leave on 5 February 2013 to allow  you  some  time  to
         apply to a university to do your masters  in  biomedical  sciences.
         You have now had more than three months  since  the  date  of  your
         request.  Your circumstances are not  covered  by  the  Immigration
         Rules and therefore you have been refused under paragraph 332(1).

 3. The letter went on to  consider  the  application  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds but refused it on that basis also.  Decisions  were  also  made
    under Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  to
    remove the appellants.  Those decisions were also dated 17 June 2013.

 4. The appellants appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Thanki)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 20  November  2013,  dismissed
    the appeals.  The appellants now appeal, with permission, to the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. Granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey, wrote:

         The grounds fail to substantiate  the  allegation  that  the  judge
         refused to allow the appellants to produce written evidence and cut
         short the oral evidence.

         However, it is arguable that the judge failed to take into  account
         relevant evidence,  in  particular  the  appellant's  letter  of  5
         February 2013.  I note  that  before  July  2013  (when  the  judge
         thought the  first  appellant  had  taken  no  steps  to  secure  a
         masters), she had been offered a place on an MSc biomedical  course
         (on 13 June 2013).  Given that the respondent made  a  decision  to
         curtail, that may possibly make a difference.

 6. It is not accurate to say that the respondent had taken a  decision  to
    curtail leave  of  these  appellants.   They  had  applied  within  the
    validity of their existing visas (expiring 28 February 2013) but  their
    variations had been refused.  Their leave  was  not  curtailed  by  the
    immigration decisions.

 7. It is not disputed that the judge had no  option  but  to  dismiss  the
    appeal in respect of the Immigration  Rules;  the  extension  of  leave
    which was sought was for a  purpose  not  covered  by  the  Rules.   In
    dealing with the appeal under Article 8  ECHR,  the  judge  found  "the
    appellant's evidence is wholly lacking in credibility" [20].  He  found
    that, "the claim that the first appellant was seeking  to  undertake  a
    masters degree is in view of her  pregnancy  probably  not  practicable
    although no evidence had  been  submitted.   In  any  case,  the  first
    appellant can return to the Philippines and make her  application  from
    there."

 8. The grounds of appeal [ground 1] take issue with the judge's finding at
    [16] that there was "no evidence before me that [the  first  appellant]
    ever did apply or was  successful  or  unsuccessful  to  undertake  the
    masters  course  as  claimed."   The  grounds  draw  attention  to  the
    enclosure B1 which is the letter of 5 February 2013  which  accompanied
    the application by the first appellant to the UKBA.  I refer  again  to
    that letter.  There is nothing in that letter which is at odds with the
    observation of the judge which I have  quoted  above.   Certainly,  the
    appellant refers to the masters degree course but the letter  does  not
    say that she had applied in any formal way, only that she wanted "a few
    months' leave" so she could "organise my entry to the said  programme."
    I was told that, in June  2013,  the  appellant  was  accepted  on  the
    masters degree course but it  is  entirely  unclear  whether  any  such
    evidence was before the  judge  (I  pause  to  note  again  that  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey did  not  grant  permission  in  respect  of  the
    allegation by the appellants that the judge had refused to  allow  them
    to adduce written evidence or had cut short the oral evidence).  To use
    the language of the grant of permission, the appellant  had  not  taken
    steps to secure the masters course; she  had  merely  sought  an  extra
    period of leave during which she intended to take  steps  to  secure  a
    place.  I find that the judge has not misunderstood and misinterepreted
    the evidence as alleged in the grounds or at all.

 9. Even if the judge did fail to take account of all relevant evidence,  I
    have to say that the appeals of these  appellants  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds  were  doomed  to  failure  in  any  event.   The   appellants'
    application to the  respondent  was,  in  effect,  an  application  for
    further leave to remain (in the case  of  the  first  appellant)  as  a
    student which was not made on the proper form  which  made  no  attempt
    whatever to comply with the formal requirements of  an  application  in
    that capacity.  Even assuming that the judge had  been  told  that  the
    first appellant had been awarded a place as from September 2013 on  the
    masters course, I can see no basis whatsoever on  which  the  appellant
    might be granted a period of Article 8 leave in  order  to  start  that
    course  and  thereby  completely  bypass  the   respondent's   detailed
    requirements for students as set out in the Immigration  Rules.   There
    are plainly no circumstances in this case in favour of  the  appellants
    in any Article 8 proportionality assessment which would outweigh public
    interest concerning their removal in pursuit of the legitimate  aim  of
    the regulation of immigration control.   I  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law such that its determination falls to be set
    aside.

DECISION

These appeals are dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

