
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21550/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 2 November 2016                   |On 4 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     I S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr B Criggie, of Hamilton Burns, WS, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DETERMINATION AND REASONS)

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clough, promulgated on 25 May 2016, on these grounds:

      i) The judge concluded (paragraph 23) that the appellant did not  make
         an application for leave to remain as a parent, but was  now  in  a
         position to apply under the rules both as a parent and as a partner
         (paragraph 25). The appellant made such an application  in  January
         2015 and at that time and on the evidence at his appeal hearing met
         the requirements of the rules - E-LTRPT.2.2 and EX.1 in relation to
         his son. The judge erred by failing to  make  any  finding  on  the
         application of appendix FM.

     ii) The judge failed to consider the best interests of the child of the
         appellant, which at  no  point  in  the  decision  are  taken  into
         account.

    iii) The judge gave no consideration to the impact a decision would have
         on contact proceedings ongoing at Kilmarnock Sheriff Court. She was
         referred to the relevant case law,  but  made  no  finding  on  the
         question of whether the appellant should have  discretionary  leave
         while his contact action was ongoing.

     iv) The  decision  lacked  sufficient  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
         application of appendix FM and article 8  ECHR.  No  findings  were
         made regarding the appellant's relationships with his  son  or  the
         sun, his partner.  This overlooked the 360 pages of evidence  filed
         by  the  appellant  including  a  detailed  bar   report   on   the
         relationship between the appellant and his  son.  "To  dismiss  the
         appeal in the space of 5  [short]  paragraphs  containing  no  real
         reasoning or concrete findings (beyond an incorrect finding that no
         valid application for leave as a parent had been  made)  means  the
         determination is flawed".

 2. The respondent conceded that the grounds show errors of law, such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

 3. The respondent  indicated  that  further  evidence  was  likely  to  be
    tendered at a fresh hearing.  The appellant did not seek to submit that
    a fresh decision could be reached without  a  fresh  hearing.   Parties
    agreed that should be in the FtT.

 4. While I do not make any directions or restrict the scope of  the  fresh
    hearing, it may be useful to record that although the decision appealed
    against is based on there being no evidence that the appellant's son is
    a British citizen, the respondent accepts that there  is  now,  on  the
    evidence produced in the FtT, no reason to doubt  that  the  child  has
    that status.

 5. The case seems likely to  focus  on  the  provisions  of  EX.1  (a)  of
    Appendix FM (reflected in  section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act);  most
    particularly, on whether the appellant is in a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship.

 6. The decision of the first-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  its
    findings are to stand. The nature of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for
    an entirely fresh hearing.

 7. The member(s) of the first-tier Tribunal chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Judge Clough.

 8. The FtT made an anonymity direction, not on application but because the
    case involved a child.  The matter was not addressed in the UT, so that
    order is preserved.  Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


         [pic]


         2 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
