
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th January 2015                          |On 4th February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            david george lee shue
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, David George Lee Shue, was born on 31 December 1972  and
    is a citizen of Jamaica.  By  a  decision  dated  25  April  2014,  the
    appellant was refused leave to remain on the basis of his  relationship
    with Delsena Walrond (hereafter Ms Walrond).  He was served with a form
    IS151A on 2 December 2013 informing him of his liability  to  detention
    and removal.  He appealed  against  that  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Grimshaw) which, in a determination promulgated  on  12
    August 2014, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are several  grounds  of  appeal  but  it  is  clear  that  Judge
    Omotosho, who granted permission on 1  September  2014,  was  concerned
    that the appellant had not  received  an  earlier  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination (Judge Dickson) arising from a previous  refusal  by  the
    respondent of leave to remain.  That ground of appeal has no merit.  As
    was pointed out at the initial  hearing,  the  determination  of  Judge
    Dickson, which the appellant claimed not to have seen,  was,  in  fact,
    included in his own bundle of documents before Judge Grimshaw.

 3. Ground 2 takes issue with the judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    relationship  with  Ms  Walrond.   Judge  Grimshaw  accepted  that  the
    appellant and Ms Walrond are in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    [16].  However, the judge found that  they  had  not  been  in  such  a
    relationship for at least two years prior to the application which  was
    the subject of the appeal.  As a consequence, the appellant  could  not
    satisfy Appendix FM of HC 395.  The judge considered that there  was  a
    discrepancy in the evidence of Ms Walrond and the appellant as to  when
    the relationship had begun; Ms Walrond stated  that  it  had  begun  in
    March/April 2012 whilst the appellant claimed that it  had  started  in
    May 2012.  I do not consider that discrepancy to  be  other  than  very
    minor, a view which it appears that Judge Grimshaw shared as  she  went
    on to consider further evidence  on  the  basis  that  the  discrepancy
    should be overlooked.  However, the judge was not satisfied there was a
    "sensible explanation" as to why there had been  no  reference  to  the
    relationship by Ms Walrond in a letter which she had sent ("To Whom  it
    May Concern") regarding the "appellant's occupancy of her household  as
    a tenant in May  2012."   Likewise,  there  was  no  reference  to  the
    relationship in a further supporting letter from the social worker. The
    judge found as a fact  that  the  relationship,  although  genuine  and
    subsisting, had begun less than 2  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
    application.

 4. I have considered both those items of evidence.  I consider that  Judge
    Grimshaw may have overlooked the purpose for  which  the  letters  were
    written and which was not to establish Ms  Walrond  and  the  appellant
    were in a relationship but, rather, that the appellant was available to
    provide personal care to Ms Walrond and also her disabled child.  There
    was no need in the letters for the intimate nature of the  relationship
    to be described in any detail at all whilst  there  is  other  evidence
    (for example, from third parties who know the couple)  indicating  that
    the relationship had begun in the spring of 2012.

 5. The Upper Tribunal should hesitate before interfering with the findings
    of fact of the First-tier Tribunal but, in this  instance,  I  consider
    that Judge Grimshaw has taken an unduly harsh view of  evidence  which,
    whilst it may do little to reinforce the appellant's claim to have been
    in a relationship for more than two years with Ms Walrond, can scarcely
    be described as undermining that claim. I have  decided  to  set  aside
    Judge Grimshaw's determination and to remake the decision.  I refer  to
    the observations which I have made above and  find  that  the  evidence
    proves, to the  standard  of  a  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
    appellant and Ms Walrond had been in a relationship  akin  to  marriage
    for at least two years prior to 25 April  2014.   Mr  McVeety  accepted
    that, in the light of this finding, the appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  12
August 2014 is set aside.  I have  remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's
appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

