

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: ia/21974/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision and Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|08 September 2015                     |                  On 02 October 2015    |
|                                      |                                        |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          PAKEENTHIRAN ELADCHUMANAN

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Atinbolu, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Claimant in this case is a Sri Lankan national born on 11 July  1978.
   He entered the UK in 2000 and claimed asylum and was removed  to  Germany
   in 2001. He re-entered the UK in the  same  year.  He  is  married  to  a
   British Citizen and has two children who are also British Citizens. On 15
   January 2014 he applied for a derivative residence card on the basis that
   he was a third country national on whom a British Citizen  was  dependent
   in the UK on the basis of the Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union
   judgment in Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09). The Secretary of State refused  that
   application as it was concluded that the  Claimant's  children  would  be
   able to reside in the UK or another EEA state if he were forced to  leave
   the UK. The Secretary of State concluded that  their  mother  could  look
   after them. The application was  refused  under  regulation  15A  of  the
   European  Economic  Area  Regulations  2006  (as   amended)   ("the   EEA
   Regulations").


2. The Claimant appealed that  decision  and  the  appeal  was  heard  on  3
   February 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke. At that hearing  the
   Claimant conceded  through  his  counsel  that  he  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of regulation 15A of the  EEA  Regulations.    The  Claimant
   relied on Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.  He  also
   relied on paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules.


3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal  finding  that  the  Claimant
   satisfied the requirements of paragraph  EX.1.  He  found  that  was  not
   reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK and  it  would  not  be
   reasonable to expect the  children  to  relocate  to  Sri  Lanka.  Having
   allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules the Tribunal did not  find
   it necessary to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.


4. The Secretary of State sought to appeal that decision on the  basis  that
   the First-tier Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons for  findings
   on material matters. The Secretary of State argues  in  the  grounds  for
   permission to appeal that the Tribunal had  failed  to  provide  adequate
   reasons as to why the Claimant met the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX1;
   there was no requirement for the Claimant's children to leave the  UK  as
   they were British Citizens and it was his wife's choice whether  she  and
   her children remained in the UK or relocated with him.  Further,  section
   117B of the 2002 Act provided that little weight should  be  given  to  a
   relationship formed at a time when  a  person's  immigration  status  was
   unlawful. They could return to Sri Lanka where they were both  originally
   from and continue their family life there.


5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  De  Haney
   on the basis that the Judge's analysis at paragraph 14  of  his  decision
   was arguably inadequate to come to the findings he did.


6. The appeal now comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine  whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal made an arguable error of law and if so, what  to  do
   about it.


7. I heard submissions  from  both  representatives.  Mr  Melvin  sought  to
   extend his grounds to include the point that the finding  Article  8  was
   not arguable. The refusal letter stated that there were no directions for
   removal and it was purely an EEA decision. If the Claimant wished to make
   an application on another basis he had a right to do so. It was  conceded
   by the Claimant that he could not meet  the  relevant  part  of  the  EEA
   Regulations.  The Judge considered the appeal fell to be dismissed  under
   the EEA Regulations. The Judge  had  given  brief  consideration  to  the
   Immigration Rules. The Appellant had never had leave to remain. The Judge
   considered paragraph EX1 as a free standing provision. His findings  were
   scant. He found that there was an unstable  political  situation  in  Sri
   Lanka. Mr Melvin submitted that his findings were simply insufficient and
   it was not argued that British citizens were required to leave. There was
   no  engagement  of  EX1.  The  Judge  found  that  there  would   be   an
   insurmountable obstacles. The finding was almost irrational. He asked  me
   to find that there was a material error of law in the decision.


8. There was no R24 notice on the Court file but Ms Atinbolu said  that  one
   had been sent. I asked her to ensure that her  solicitors  wrote  to  the
   Tribunal confirming this. She submitted that the findings  of  fact  were
   made at paragraph 11 and the conclusions were at paragraph 14. The  Judge
   accepted the evidence that was given by the Appellant and  his  wife  and
   said at paragraph 14 (i) that it was not reasonable for them  to  return.
   Given their nationality they could  not  be  reasonably  be  expected  to
   leave. The Secretary of State argued that it was a choice. With regard to
   section 117B (6), having found that it was  unreasonable  the  Judge  was
   then bound to find that there was no public interest  in  their  removal.
   The Secretary of State did not take issue with the facts as found.  There
   was sufficient reasoning there to explain why the Judge  had  arrived  at
   the conclusion made. That finding was sustainable.


9. The question was to whether there was jurisdiction  to  consider  Article
   8. The Judge set out the claim at paragraph 8 and proceeded to  determine
   it within the Rules. That was legally correct. It was a ground  that  was
   properly raised by the Judge and he was bound to consider it.  The  Upper
   Tribunal concluded in Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human  rights)
   [2015] UKUT 00466 that Article 8 was not arguable in a residence document
   appeal where there were no directions for removal. That  appeared  to  go
   contrary to Dereci and others  (European  Citizenship)  [2011]  EUECJ  C-
   256/11.  This was considered in Ahmed v  SSHD  [2013]  UKUT  89  and  was
   approved by the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
   995. The Upper Tribunal said that jurisdiction in NA was not an issue and
   therefore that NA and Ahmed were not conclusive. This was a  matter  that
   was considered by the CJEU in Dereci and  it  was  made  clear  that  the
   decision on EU residence rights must  incorporate  family  life.  If  the
   situation was not covered  by  EU  law  the  Court  must  undertake  that
   consideration in the light of Article 8 of the ECHR [72].  In Amirteymour
   the  Claimants  were  exclusively  arguing  their  case  under  the   EEA
   Regulations and Article  8  was  a  fall-back  position.  The  First-tier
   Tribunal acknowledged that he was unable to  argue  EEA  points.  If  the
   literal interpretation was accurate in the present  case  it  would  mean
   that by denying that an application had been made it would  prevent  this
   appellant from ever arguing an Article 8 point. This was not a point that
   was entirely new. The IS96 was in the Appellant's  bundle.  The  Claimant
   had been served a notice that he was an illegal entrant and therefore  it
   must be contained within any  decision  that  denial  of  this  route  of
   residence meant that the Appellant must  leave  the  UK.  Article  8  was
   properly before the First-tier Tribunal and he was right  to  decide  the
   case in the way that he did.


10. Mr Melvin said that he  did  not  agree  with  Ms  Akinbolu's  point  in
   relation to Dereci. It was clear that the point had been settled  by  the
   Upper Tribunal as to whether paragraph 72 of  Dereci  was  relevant.  The
   Presidential panel had considered everything. The IS 96 notice was not  a
   decision to remove the Appellant. The Appellant had ignored the  laws  of
   UK for 12 years. He could not meet the EEA Regulations. The decision  was
   inadequately reasoned. There was no jurisdiction  to  consider  paragraph
   EX.1 of the Immigration Rules. He asked me  to  re-determine  the  appeal
   today and find that the appeal fell to be dismissed.

11. I decided to reserve my decision in relation to the  error  of  law  and
   asked for representations concerning the appropriate forum if I  were  to
   hold that I had jurisdiction. Mr Melvin submitted that if I  agreed  with
   him that there was an inadequacy of reasons there  would  be  a  need  to
   consider further oral evidence.

12. I reserved my decision in relation to whether  there  was  an  error  of
   law.

Decision
13. The Upper Tribunal held in the  case  of  Amirteymour  and  others  (EEA
   appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT  00466  that  where  no  notice  under
   section 120 of the 2002 Act had been served and where no EEA decision  to
   remove had been made,  an  appellant  could  not  bring  a  Human  Rights
   challenge to removal under the EEA Regulations.


14. It is common ground that no section 120 notice has been  served  and  no
   EEA decision to remove the Appellant has  been  made  in  this  case.  Ms
   Akinbolu argues, notwithstanding, that in the light of  the  decision  in
   Dereci  and  others  (European  Citizenship)   [2011]   EUECJ   C-256/11,
   consideration of the right to respect of family and private  life  is  an
   inherent part of any consideration of an EU right of  residence,  whether
   in reliance on the ECHR directly, or through its incorporation in the  EU
   its incorporation in the EU Treaties and Charter of Fundamental rights.


15.  The  Upper  Tribunal  in  Amirteymour  comprehensively   examined   the
   legislative framework and case law in relation to the question of whether
   the refusal of a residence document gives rise to a right of appeal under
   Article 8 ECHR either within or outside the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was
   concluded that there was no right of appeal against  the  decision  under
   the Immigration Rules and hence  an  appellant  could  not  rely  on  the
   provisions of Appendix FM. It was further concluded  that  there  was  no
   right of appeal on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Rules.  The  Upper
   Tribunal specifically considered the cases of Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano;  reg
   15 A (3) (c) 2006 EEX Regs) [2013] 00089 which  went  on  appeal  to  the
   Court of Appeal in both NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2014] EXCA Civ 995 and SSHD
   v NA (Pakistan)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  140.  The  Upper  Tribunal  notes  at
   paragraph 65 that no issue was taken by the Court of  Appeal  as  to  the
   jurisdiction to consider human rights arguments.


16. The Upper Tribunal held at paragraph  74  that  if  a  claimant  is  not
   entitled to confirmation of a right of residence under EU law then he  is
   no different position to an  overstayer  who  can  make  a  human  rights
   application which may or may not be successful. I do not consider  it  to
   be the ratio of Dereci that Article 8 must be considered within the ambit
   of a residence document appeal notwithstanding the fact that no  decision
   to remove has been made. It is clear from the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
   that the Claimant is not barred from making a human rights claim  but  he
   must do so by way of a further application.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and re-make it by dismissing it on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L  Murray                     Date:  01  October
2015



