
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21994/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                  REETA [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, legal representative, Maalik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  RL
    Walker, promulgated on 23  February  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by PJM Hollingworth on 9 September 2016.

Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. On 12 March 2011,  the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependant of a Tier 4 (General) migrant, namely  RK.  She  was  granted
    further leave to remain in the same capacity from 11 April 2013 until 9
    April 2015.

 4. On 6 February 2015, the appellant applied for limited leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as the partner of a settled  person,  namely  SD.
    This application was refused on 3 June 2015.  The  Secretary  of  State
    noted that the appellant and her current  partner  confirmed  that  the
    relationship which she relied upon in order to obtain further leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom (with RK) was not  genuine.  Consequently,
    the  respondent  refused  the  application  under  S-LTRP  2.2  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Furthermore, the Secretary of State considered there
    to be discrepancies between the accounts provided by the appellant  and
    DS regarding  their  relationship  and  concluded  that  theirs  was  a
    marriage of convenience. Accordingly, the requirements of  R-LTRP1.1(c)
    were not met and as a  consequence  of  a  failure  to  meet  both  the
    suitability and eligibility requirements, EX.1 did  not  apply  to  the
    application. The appellant's circumstances in relation  to  the  parent
    route also failed under suitability and eligibility  requirements.  The
    circumstances  of  the  appellant's  then  10-month  old   child   were
    considered, but there were said to be no exceptional circumstances.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Following  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the
    relationship between the appellant and DS was accepted as  genuine;  S-
    LTRP2.2 was found to apply because the appellant admitted that she  was
    already living with DS when she applied for further leave to remain  as
    the partner of RK. The judge considered there to be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in  Nepal  and  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to accompany his parents to  Nepal.  The
    judge rejected the argument that it would  disproportionate  to  expect
    the appellant  to  return  to  Nepal  to  make  the  appropriate  entry
    clearance application.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal in support of this application argue  that  there
    was a failure to  consider  section  55  of  the  2009  Act,  the  best
    interests of the child or Ex.1(a) and  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    proportionality assessment.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  solely  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge's reasoning in relationship to  proportionality
    was insufficient, applying section 117.





 8. The  respondent's  Rule  24  response,  received  on  3  October  2016,
    indicated that the appeal  was  opposed;  the  judge  directed  himself
    appropriately  and  the  grounds  amounted  to  little  more   than   a
    disagreement with findings open to the judge on the evidence.

The hearing

 9. Mr Makol relied on the grounds. He reiterated that the  judge  did  not
    consider the best interests of the British child and that Article 8 was
    not considered properly with reference to section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act. He relied on Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
    00674 (IAC) and submitted that it was not reasonable for the family  to
    relocate because the appellant's partner is settled and  the  child  is
    British.

10. Mr Tufan relied on the authorities of R (on the application of  Agyarko
    and Others) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440; MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705 and R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM -  Chikwamba
    - temporary separation -  proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT  189  (IAC).
    He apologised for not providing these to  Mr  Makol  earlier.  At  this
    point I recalled that Mr Makol had left a message to say  that  he  had
    been delayed on his journey and thus he was not present at 1000  hours.
    In any event, Mr Makol told me that he was aware of these  authorities.
    Mr Tufan reminded me that matters had moved  on  since  Treebhawon  was
    decided and that following MA (Pakistan), it  was  clear  that  section
    117B (6) was not a stand-alone section but that all the requirements of
    section 117B have to be considered. He argued  that  having  a  British
    citizen child was not a trump card  and  that  the  background  of  the
    parents and child  was  relevant.  In  this  case,  both  parents  were
    Nepalese nationals, the child was 17 months old  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing and it was open to the judge to arrive at  the  conclusions  he
    did.

11. With regard to the judgment in Chen, Mr Tufan noted that the judge  had
    relied on this authority but concluded that it was reasonable to expect
    the appellant to return and seek entry clearance because of her conduct
    in gaining further leave to remain with a different partner to the  one
    she was in a relationship with. With regard to Agyarko, Mr Tufan relied
    on what was said at  [31]  of  the  judgement  regarding  the  need  to
    establish exceptional circumstances prior to  concluding  that  it  was
    disproportionate for an applicant to have to leave temporarily for  the
    purpose of seeking entry clearance where there were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing overseas.

12. In reply, Mr Makol simply argued that the facts in the case law  relied
    upon by Mr Tufan were not as strong  as  those  of  the  appellant.  He
    described Upper Tribunal Judge Gill's  conclusions  in  Chen  as  being
    "obiter." In essence, Mr Makol submitted that it was not  open  to  the
    judge to dismiss the appeal because the appellant had a British citizen
    child and that the age of the child was irrelevant. He argued that  the
    respondent's guidance said there had to be strong reasons for  refusing
    an application where there was a  British  child.  He  added  that  the
    respondent's decision was wrong in that the suitability  ground  relied
    upon referred to false representations in a past rather than a  current
    application. He  accepted  that  this  was  not  a  ground  of  appeal.
    Otherwise, he emphasised  that  the  judge  did  not  look  at  section
    117B(6).

Decision on error of law

13. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge made no  material
    error of law and that his  decision  was  upheld.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

14. Permission to appeal was granted  solely  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that in considering the Article 8 appeal  outside  the  Rules,
    the judge did not sufficiently apply section 117 of the 2002 Act. While
    the grounds asserted that there had  been  no  reference  to  the  best
    interests of the child or section 55 of the 2009  Act,  permission  was
    not granted on that basis and indeed at  [31]  the  judge  specifically
    considers these matters.

15. The judge considered the appellant's circumstances  and  those  of  her
    partner and child under EX.1 to Appendix FM notwithstanding his earlier
    finding  that  she  did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements.  He
    concluded,  for  a  plethora  of  reasons,  that  it  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place in Nepal and  that
    it would be reasonable for the child to leave the United  Kingdom  with
    his parents, either temporarily or permanently. Those reasons  included
    the presence of family support in Nepal, the  existence  of  a  holiday
    home in Nepal, the young age of the child whose  life  revolved  around
    his parents and that both parents would, if necessary, return to  Nepal
    and thus there would be no interference with family  life.  These  were
    findings he was entitled to make on the evidence before him.

16. It is the case that the judge did not make any direct reference to  the
    factors  set  out  in  section  117B,  specifically  117B(6)   in   his
    freestanding Article 8  consideration.  I  find  that  this  is  not  a
    material error for the following reasons. At [10]  the  judge  directed
    himself regarding the necessity for consideration to be  given  to  the
    aforementioned provisions. Furthermore, at [34], the  judge  considered
    that the Rules catered for the Article 8 claim in this case but that he
    would  "nevertheless   still   conduct   a   freestanding   Article   8
    proportionality exercise." While it might have been preferable for  the
    judge to  have  directly  referred  to  section  117B(6),  he  did  not
    materially err in not doing so because he had considered EX.1(a)  which
    contains identical provisions. Thus the  reasonableness  of  the  child
    returning to Nepal with his parents had already been considered and any
    further consideration was most unlikely to  have  led  to  a  differing
    result,  particularly  when  the  issue  of   the   appellant's   false
    representations was taken into account.

17. The Chikwamba point which emerged in  Mr  Armstrong's  submissions  was
    adequately addressed by the judge who recognised that  this  issue  was
    not contained within Appendix FM. In  view  of  the  appellant's  false
    representations, I find that the judge did not err in  concluding  that
    the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control
    outweighed any interference to the  family  and  private  life  of  the
    appellant and her family. These were findings he was entitled to  make.
    In any event, given what was said at [31] of Agyarko regarding the need
    for exceptional circumstances for  a  finding  to  be  reached  that  a
    decision to remove was disproportionate where, as in this  case,  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place abroad.

18. Mr Makol pointed to no exceptional circumstances in this case.  Indeed,
    owing to the false representations, there were  compelling  reasons  in
    this case which  underpinned  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was  not
    disproportionate to expect the appellant to apply for  entry  clearance
    from abroad.

19. Mr Makol raised an issue which did not form  part  of  the  grounds  or
    grant of permission, that of whether  the  respondent  was  correct  in
    finding that the suitability  requirements  of  the  Rules  were  unmet
    because the false representations related to a previous rather than the
    instant application.  The  reference  to  suitability  in  the  grounds
    related only to whether the respondent and therefore the judge erred in
    not exercising discretion in the appellant's  favour.   S-LTR  2.2  (a)
    states that false information submitted  to  any  person  to  obtain  a
    document used in support of the application is also  affected  by  this
    Rule. It is clear that the appellant's application for further leave to
    remain as the partner  of  RK  when  she  falsely  claimed  to  be  his
    dependant resulted in her being granted leave to remain until  9  April
    2015. Owing to having leave to remain, the  appellant  was  then  in  a
    position to seek further leave to remain as a partner of SD. The  judge
    came to this conclusion at [28]  of  his  decision,  finding  that  her
    application was "quite properly" refused. However, even had  the  judge
    erred in this regard, it would have been immaterial given that he  went
    on to consider the criteria set out in Ex.1 in any event at [29-32]  of
    his decision. The appellant's conduct was relevant in relation  to  the
    judge's  consideration  of  EX.1  and  his  proportionality  assessment
    regardless of whether she failed to meet the  suitability  requirements
    or not.



Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara                  27 October 2016


