
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21975/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 January 2017                          |On 2 May 2017                    |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 shahid ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Sawar, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant (hereafter the Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  brings  a
    challenge with permission to the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Carlin dated 23 February 2016  allowing  the  appeal  outright  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) against a decision made by the SSHD
    dated 28 May 2015 refusing to issue a residence card as a  confirmation
    of a right of residence under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 as the unmarried partner of an EEA national exercising
    Treaty rights.

2.   At the outset of the hearing I  pointed  out  that  there  has  been  a
    recent decision of the Upper Tribunal, Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal:
    Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) of 19 August 2016.  Clearly, given  that
    this decision is very recent,  neither  the  SSHD  nor  the  judge  who
    granted permission to appeal on 25 July 2016 had any reason to refer to
    the issue of jurisdiction, which has hitherto been assessed  to  exist.
    Mrs Aboni requested permission to amend her grounds.  Mr Sawar  opposed
    that.  I had no hesitation in ruling that the Sala  point  must  be  in
    play in this challenge as it is a straightforward  matter  of  law  and
    cannot be left to the contingency of pleading.  Indeed the sequence  of
    events in this case is a perfect  attestation  of  why  Parliament  has
    never sought to bar the Upper Tribunal from amending grounds or  indeed
    in certain circumstances addressing them if need without prior notice.

3.   Mr Sawar did not seek to persuade me to depart from  the  statement  of
    law set out in Sala.  Accordingly I conclude that the SSHD must succeed
    in her challenge because the decision of the FtT is vitiated  by  legal
    error.  The judge erroneously considered he had  jurisdiction  to  deal
    with the appeal.  However, for the reasons set out in Sala, there is no
    right of appeal against a refusal  of  a  residence  card  to  extended
    family members (EFMs).

4.   In light of the fact that there may  be   challenges  to  Sala  in  the
    Court of Appeal I shall deal, albeit only summarily, with  the  grounds
    as presented by the SSHD and as opposed by Mr Sawar.  It is quite clear
    in my view that in the  claimant's  case  the  SSHD  did  not  seek  to
    exercise  her  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4).   It  is  entirely
    understandable why she did  not  -  because  she  did  not  accept  the
    underlying premise that there was a durable  relationship  between  the
    claimant and his Dutch partner.  The furthest the SSHD went at  page  3
    of her refusal letter was to give her provisional view ("it is unlikely
    we would be inclined to exercise discretion in your favour").

5.   That being so, there is no basis for a  Tribunal  seeking  to  exercise
    the discretion.  That is abundantly clear from established case law  in
    Regulation 17(4).

6.   Mr  Sawar  sought  to  argue  that  this  position  had  been  rendered
    redundant by a clear concession  made  by  the  HOPO  representing  the
    claimant before the FtT Judge that the SSHD would not  take  any  point
    about discretion if the judge decided  the  claimant  fell  within  the
    personal and  material  scope  of  Regulation  8.   Leaving  aside  the
    difficulty that the judge did not record any such  concern,  I  do  not
    consider the HOPO could have intended anything other than to  say  that
    the issue before the Tribunal was confined, as far as he was concerned,
    to the Regulation 8 issue.  There is nothing to suggest that  the  HOPO
    had the legal power to exercise the discretion concerned - decisions on
    whether to issue a residence card to EFMs  are  the  responsibility  of
    designated officials dealing with EEA cases.  Further, such  discretion
    cannot properly be exercised until there has been a definitive  finding
    on the Regulation 8 issue - and at the point in time when Mr Sawar says
    the concession was made the Regulation 8 issue  had  not  been  decided
    definitively.

7.   Hence, even if Sala  did  not  determine  the  outcome  of  the  SSHD's
    challenge, I would still have allowed her challenge, as the  FtT  Judge
    was not entitled to allow the appeal outright.  At most he  would  have
    been entitled to allow it insofar as remained  outstanding  before  the
    SSHD to exercise her Regulation 17(4) discretion.

Notice of Decision

8.   For the above reasons:

     The appeal brought by the SSHD against the decision of  the  FtT  Judge
         is granted.

     The FtT Judge materially erred in law.

     The decision I re-make is that there is no right of appeal.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 28 April 2017


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

