
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21333/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 5 June 2014                                  |Promulgated On 15th July   |
|                                                |2014                       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                        Mrs Etinosa Helen Ikponmwosa
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L. Youssefian, D J Webb & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rimington whose determination was promulgated on 4 January  2013.
    The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the appellant  was
    entitled to recognition as a person married to an EEA national.

 2. The appellant applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
    of residence as the family member of an EEA national who was himself  a
    qualified  person.   The  appellant's  spouse  is  a  German   national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Secretary of State took the view that the appellant had  failed  to
    produce a valid marriage certificate as evidence that the appellant was
    related as she claimed as a spouse of an EEA national.  Accordingly the
    application for a residence card was refused.

 4. It was decided by Judge Hall sitting as a Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a determination made on 9 March  2013  that  there  was  an
    error of law and the determination of Judge Rimington was set aside.

 5. Since the decision was made by Judge Hall we have the decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT
    24 (IAC).  That appeal was decided on 16 January 2014.  It was  a  case
    which dealt with  circumstances  which  are  not  dissimilar  from  the
    circumstances in our present case in that it concerned a proxy marriage
    conducted in Nigeria.

 6. In the case of this appellant the proxy marriage was conducted in Lagos
    State and in the Agege local  government  area.   It  is  said  it  was
    conducted on 19 November 2011.  The application is made  on  the  basis
    that this is a valid marriage.  In support of the application there was
    produced a marriage certificate which indicated that the  marriage  was
    performed according to native law and custom and  that  was  signed  on
    behalf of the chairman of the local government council and was  stamped
    by the customary court.

 7. There is also a document at page 5 in the bundle which is said to be  a
    confirmation of a customary marriage between the two persons signed  by
    the president of the Grade A customary court.  In addition, at  page  6
    there is a letter from the registrar seeking to confirm that there  was
    a customary marriage between the parties and, in it, it is said,

         "We repeat our previous  statement  that  the  couple  are  validly
         married in Nigerian law".

 8. There are similar documents,  all  suggesting  that  the  marriage  was
    conducted appropriately in accordance with customary law.  In  addition
    to that there is a letter from  the  Benin  Traditional  Council  which
    speaks of the way that marriages can be conducted in order for them  to
    be a valid marriage.

 9. There is a document from Chief  Ekaette  Edem  who  confirms  that  the
    parties were married according to native law and custom on 19  November
    2011.  Finally, in addition to this material, there is a document  from
    a legal  practitioner  who  speaks  about  the  validity  of  customary
    marriages.

10. This is plainly material which is capable of establishing that this was
    a customary marriage that was lawfully conducted in accordance with the
    law of the state in which it was celebrated in 2011.

11. The point, however, that arises as a result of the judgment  in  Kareem
    is whether it is sufficient to rely upon that marriage certificate  (or
    evidence of a valid marriage) or whether it is necessary to go  another
    stage and to adduce evidence that the  marriage  is  a  marriage  which
    would be recognised by the  German  authorities,  the  spouse  being  a
    national of Germany.

12. The relevant principles of law are set out in the  italicised  headnote
    at:


         b) The production of a marriage certificate issued by  a  competent
            authority (that is, issued according to the registration laws of
            the country where the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
            sufficient.   If  not  in  English  (or  Welsh  in  relation  to
            proceedings in Wales), a certified translation of  the  marriage
            certificate will be required.
         c) A document which calls itself a marriage  certificate  will  not
            raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless
            it has been issued by an authority with legal power to create or
            confirm the facts it attests.
         ...
         g) It should be assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
            evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of
            the EEA country and/or  the  country  where  the  marriage  took
            place, the  Tribunal  is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
            sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of
            proof.  Mere production of legal materials from the EEA  country
            or country where the marriage took place  will  be  insufficient
            evidence  because  they  will  rarely  show  how  such  law   is
            understood or applied in those countries.  Mere assertions as to
            the effect of such laws will,  for  similar  reasons,  carry  no
            weight.




13. The reasoning behind the decision in Kareem emerges from  the  decision
    itself.  In paragraph 7 the panel noted that:

         7.   "Member states do not share a  common  definition  of  spouse,
             each state defining marital  relationships  for  itself.   For
             example, in several member states a person cannot be a  spouse
             if of the same sex as the  partner  whilst  the  other  member
             states describe such a person as a spouse."

    In paragraphs 17 and 18 the following passages occur:

         "17. Spouses' rights of free movement  and  residence  are  derived
             from a marriage having been contracted and depend on  it.   In
             light of the connection between the rights  of  free  movement
             and residence and the nationality laws of the  member  states,
             we  conclude  that,  in  a   situation   where   the   marital
             relationship is disputed, the question of whether there  is  a
             marital relationship is to be examined in accordance with  the
             laws of the member state from which the Union citizen  obtains
             nationality and from which therefore that citizen derives free
             movement rights.

         18.  The same conclusion may readily  be  reached  by  a  different
             route.  Within EU law, it  is  essential  that  member  states
             facilitate the free movement and  residence  rights  of  Union
             citizens and their spouses.  This would not be achieved if  it
             were left to a host member state to  decide  whether  a  Union
             citizen has contracted a marriage.   Different  member  states
             would be able to reach different conclusions about that  Union
             citizen's marital status.  This  would  leave  Union  citizens
             unclear as to whether their spouses  could  move  freely  with
             them and might mean that the Union  citizen  could  move  with
             greater freedom to one member state  than  to  another.   Such
             difficulties  would  be  contrary  to   fundamental   EU   law
             principles."

14. Having looked at the evidence in this particular appeal, the difficulty
    that the Tribunal faces is that it does  not  matter  what  the  United
    Kingdom government consider as to the status of  the  marriage  between
    the appellant and her husband because  neither  are  British  citizens.
    Accordingly it cannot bind any third country as to whether or not there
    has been a valid marriage.

15. The German authorities may take an  entirely  and  radically  different
    view as to whether their national is married.  Accordingly there may be
    a fundamental divergence of view as to whether the  appellant's  spouse
    is married and whether rights of free movement are being exercised.  In
    those circumstances there would potentially be  a  distinction  between
    what the German government  and  what  the  United  Kingdom  government
    consider to be a valid marriage.

16. In my judgment the simple meaning of the decision in Kareem is that  in
    order to avoid such a  divergence  of  status  there  has  to  be  some
    evidence where  as  in  this  case  the  marriage  is  the  subject  of
    controversy from the German state as to whether this is recognised as a
    valid marriage according to German  domestic  law.   Mr  Youssefian  on
    behalf of the appellant suggests that if the Tribunal finds this  is  a
    valid marriage certificate issued by the competent  authority  that  is
    sufficient, that is all that is required to be produced  in  accordance
    with paragraph b. of the italic words.  The obligation to seek evidence
    from the EU State whose national the sponsor is does  not  arise  where
    the Tribunal finds the marriage has been properly evidenced.

17. That reasoning, however, flies in the face of  what  the  Tribunal  was
    saying in paragraphs  17  and  18  of  Kareem.   In  my  judgment  that
    overlooks what is set out in paragraph g. of the italicised words  that
    where there is  a  dispute  there  should  be  sufficient  evidence  to
    discharge the burden of  proof  that  the  marriage  is  recognised  in
    Germany.

18. In these circumstances I do not consider it is enough simply to produce
    a marriage certificate which the United Kingdom  authorities  may  well
    consider to be valid.  It is for the appellant, in order to establish a
    valid proxy marriage, to establish that,  being  married  to  a  German
    national, the marriage is recognised in Germany.

19. At the hearing before me, the appellant's representative also  makes  a
    further point: there has been a considerable period of  time  when  the
    parties have been living together in a durable  relationship,  and  the
    application ought to be extended in order to admit this  factor  to  be
    considered as an alternative basis of a right to remain.  In  my  view,
    that cannot be right.  As a matter of fact the Secretary of State  this
    afternoon does not have the file; Mr Tarlow, who appears on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, cannot be expected to form  a  judgment  as  to
    whether or not there has been a durable relationship giving rise to  an
    alternative right to remain.

20. Whilst this appeal has been adjourned in  order  for  the  case  to  be
    considered fully, it does not seem to me that it is either  appropriate
    or proper to have an application made on a different  basis  considered
    under the umbrella of this appeal which was an appeal based on the fact
    that the appellant was claiming she had  contracted  a  valid  marriage
    with an EU citizen.

21. For these reasons I consider that this appeal must fail.  It  does  not
    of course carry with it a removal  decision  and  it  is  open  to  the
    appellant to provide the necessary  evidence  either  as  to  a  valid,
    recognised marriage or as to a remodelled application on the basis of a
    durable relationship.  Both must remain until another day.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
