
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21543/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                           |                                  |
|Heard at Stoke on Trent                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 July 2015                            |      On 3 August 2015            |
|                                           |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between


                                Sedat Ciniviz
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     No attendance or representation
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sedat Ciniviz, date of birth 12.8.89, is  a  citizen  of
    Turkey.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tully promulgated 17.2.15, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
    of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his  application  for  an  EEA
    Residence Card as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK, pursuant
    to regulation 9 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,  as  the
    family member of a British citizen.  The  Judge  heard  the  appeal  on
    3.2.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    24.4.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 30.7.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. There was no attendance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.  I  am
    satisfied that the appropriate notice of today's hearing  was  sent  to
    the appellant at the only address held  on  file  for  him.   The  file
    contains no relevant correspondence from the appellant or  anything  to
    explain his absence. In the circumstances, I considered it to be in the
    public interest to proceed to hear the representations  of  Mr  McVeety
    and decide the appeal, despite the appellant's absence.

 6. Mr McVeety explained that the appellant has now been granted  leave  to
    remain in the UK. Although it is not entirely clear, this  is  probably
    on the basis of being the spouse of  a  British  citizen,  pursuant  to
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

 7. For the reasons set out herein, I find no error of law in the making of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require the decision
    of Judge Tully to be set aside.

 8. On 22.1.01 the appellant married Laura Cimiviz  in  Turkey.  She  is  a
    British citizen. The grounds and the grant of permission  appeal  raise
    concern about an alleged error on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge as to when she returned to the UK from Turkey. However,  that  is
    not strictly material to the issues in the appeal, as the appellant and
    his wife subsequently went to live in Ireland, for a total of 72  days,
    before returning to the UK. It is the period of  residence  in  Ireland
    and the issue under regulation 9 as to whether she had transferred  the
    centre of her life to Ireland which  is  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    application and subsequent  appeal.  Therefore,  whether  there  was  a
    mistake of fact as to how long after  the  birth  of  their  child  she
    returned to the UK is not material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  The
    grant of permission focuses on this sole issue.

 9. Judge Tully  set  out  in  considerable  detail  the  reasons  why  the
    conclusion was reached that the sponsoring spouse had  not  transferred
    the centre of her life to Ireland. Those were conclusions open  to  the
    judge and for which the reasons are cogent. It cannot be said that  the
    decision was perverse or irrational, but it was one that  was  open  to
    the judge on the evidence before the Tribunal.

10. In the circumstances, no material error of law is disclosed.



Conclusions:

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


