
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21823/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2013                                |On 12th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                MUHAMMAD NOOR


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Syed-Ali, Counsel on behalf of S. Z Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M. A Khan ) who allowed the Respondent's
    appeal against refusal to vary leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post  Study
    Work) Migrant in a determination promulgated on 15th March 2013.

 2. I shall set out  the  history  of  this  appeal.   The  Respondent,  Mr
    Muhammed Noor, is a citizen of Pakistan born on  3rd  March  1982.   He
    originally  landed  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  27th  March  2009  in
    possession of entry clearance, which, conferred leave  to  enter  as  a
    student, subject to a condition restricting employment and recourse  to
    public funds prohibited, until 31st March 2010.

 3.  On 4th June 2010 the Appellant was granted  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student, subject  to  a  condition
    restricting  employment  and  studies  and  recourse  to  public  funds
    prohibited, until  30th May  2013.   On  the  26th  January  2012  his
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 migrant was refused and  on
    that date his leave to remain was curtailed so as to expire on the 27th
    February 2012.  On the 31st May it was decided that  the  Secretary  of
    State would reconsider the application  refused  on  the  26th  January
    2012, and the application was varied to  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    application on  the  4th  April  2012  under  paragraph  245FD  of  the
    Immigration Rules (as amended).

 4. In order to qualify under that particular Rule, Mr Noor was required to
    show that he would be entitled to be awarded 75 points  or  more  under
    paragraphs 66 to  72  of  Appendix  A.   That  Appendix  sets  out  the
    attributes required to  qualify  under  the  points-based  system.  The
    attributes attract different points.  Available  points  are  shown  in
    Table 10 (see paragraph 67).  Mr Noor was required to demonstrate  that
    the qualification was obtained within the period of 12 months prior  to
    the making of the application.

 5. On 25th September 2012 the Appellant refused  the  application.   In  a
    notice of immigration decision dated 26th September 2012,  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant was able to claim 15 points under the  date
    of award section of his Tier 1 (post-study  work)  application  on  the
    basis that the Anglia Ruskin University had confirmed the date of award
    of the eligible qualification as the 6th July 2012  and  this  did  not
    satisfy  the  Rule  as  the  applicant  must  have  been  awarded   the
    qualification at the date of the application.  Thus  Mr  Noor  was  not
    awarded any points under Appendix A.  As a consequence of being awarded
    nil points under Appendix A, he was not  entitled  to  be  awarded  the
    requisite 10 points under Appendix B either.

 6. The Respondent appealed  that  decision  and  Grounds  of  Appeal  were
    submitted on 9th October 2012.

 7. The decision came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Khan),  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 22nd November 2012.  At that  hearing  Mr  Noor  was
    represented by Mr Ahmed, and the Secretary of State was represented  by
    Ms  Chhopra,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on the 7th December 2013, Judge Khan  allowed  the  appeal.
    The basis for that decision is set out at paragraphs 22 to  25  of  the
    determination:-

         "23. It is clear from the evidence that the  Appellant  did  inform
             the Respondent of the date of the award of his degree and that
             the  Respondent  also  made  enquiries  from   Anglia   Ruskin
             University to when the  master  degree  certificate  would  be
             awarded.  I find that the Appellant is not  at  fault  if  the
             certificate is awarded to him July 2012.  It is clear that  he
             has successfully completed the course, passed his examinations
             and is merely waiting  for  the  day  when  his  qualification
             certificate is awarded to him.  If he waits for the award then
             he is out of time with his previous leave to remain.

         24.  In the application form at G5, there are two boxes, which  ask
             to  show  that  the  Appellant  has  sent   his/her   original
             certificate of award to prove his/her qualifications.  If  the
             Appellant has not sent his/her  certificate  then  to  provide
             evidence from the educational institution as to the completion
             of the course.  Under the UKBA guidelines, which are still  on
             their  website,  under  the  heading  'Extra  information'  it
             states;

                  'If you are unable to provide a certificate of award  (for
                  example,  when  the  application  is  made   before   your
                  graduation),   this   letter   (from    the    educational
                  institution) must also be included.  Details of  the  body
                  awarding the  qualification;  and  confirmation  that  the
                  certificate of award will be issued.'

         25.  It is totally unfair to the Appellant  in  this  case,  having
             provided all  the  evidence  necessary  at  the  time  of  the
             application, to have been refused.  The question of common law
             fairness was the subject matter of the Upper Tribunal in Patel
             (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India  [2011]  UKUT
             0021 (IAC) where Mr Justice Blake, the president  states  that
             'Immigration Judges have  jurisdiction  to  determine  whether
             decisions on variation of leave applications are in accordance
             with the law, where issues of fairness arise.'"

 8. Thus he allowed the appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision on the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Khan)  materially  erred  in
    law.  The Secretary of State submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had
    misunderstood paragraph 245FD, and that it required  a  fixed  historic
    timeline.  Applications under a Rule with  an  historic  timeline  must
    meet the requirements of the  Rules  at  the  relevant  cut-off  point,
    usually the date of the application.  In respect of paragraph 245FD and
    Appendix A Table 10 paragraphs 66 to 72,  there  is  a  fixed  historic
    timeline.  For the 15 points required Appendix A Table 10 does employ a
    fixed timeline for the application to be made within twelve  months  of
    obtaining the qualification.  This limits the consideration to  degrees
    obtained before the application was made.  Thus  Appendix  A  Table  10
    expressly or implicitly requires a degree to have been awarded  by  the
    date of the application.  Alternatively, the wording "has been awarded"
    should  be  interpreted  as  a  reference  to  "by  the  date  of   the
    application."  The second ground of  appeal  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law by taking into account evidence which was not
    submitted in support of or at  the  time  of  the  making  of  the  PBS
    application and that the judge should have applied Section 85A  of  the
    Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002.

10. On 20th December 2012, Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald
    gave permission to appeal.  The reasons given were as follows:-

         "What the judge did find was that it  was  totally  unfair  to  the
         Appellant, having provided all the evidence  at  the  time  of  the
         application, to  have  had  the  application  refused.   It  is  an
         arguable error of law, as set out in the grounds,  that  the  judge
         failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  his  decision.   It  is  an
         arguable error of law that if the judge was going to find in favour
         of the Appellant on the basis of fairness that fuller reasoning was
         required.  Permission is granted for the reasons  set  out  in  the
         grounds."

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  According to the court
    file, the appeal had been before the Tribunal last on 3rd June 2013  to
    await the imminent decision from the Court of Appeal in the case of The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department and Raju,  Khatel,  Adhikari
    and Islam.  At the hearing the Secretary of State was represented by Mr
    Tufan and the Respondent by Mr Syed-Ali, Counsel instructed  on  behalf
    of S. Z Solicitors.  Mr Tufan on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that he relied upon the grounds for permission and  that  the
    Court of Appeal decision of The SSHD v Raju & Others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    754 supported the content of the grounds as submitted namely  that  the
    judge erred in law in this appeal by allowing it under the  Immigration
    Rules.  As the Court of Appeal had stated,  that  the  wording  of  the
    paragraph was plain that the Respondent required a score of  75  points
    to be granted leave to remain and that viewed as a whole, qualification
    under Table 10 required strict compliance with the requirement to  make
    the application within the period of twelve months from the  time  when
    the qualification was obtained.  In this case the qualification was not
    obtained until July 2012 which was substantially after the  application
    was made.  In  those  circumstances  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was an error of law and should be set aside.  On the facts  as
    they stand, the only outcome for the appeal in respect of the variation
    of leave to remain was that it should be dismissed.

12. Mr Syed-Ali, on behalf of the Appellant conceded that he  was,  in  his
    own words "defending a precarious position" in the light of  the  Court
    of Appeal decision.  He conceded that the Court of Appeal had now ruled
    upon that issue and that the Tribunal was  duty  bound  to  follow  the
    Court of Appeal's decision.  However he  stated  that  there  were  two
    matters which had not been raised before  the  Court  of  Appeal  which
    demonstrated that Mr Noor should succeed in his application.  The first
    point was that "like cases should be treated as like" on the basis that
    there were a number of similar appeals to that of this Appellant  which
    were allowed by the Secretary of State.  He  submitted  that  once  the
    leave had been granted to those Appellants,  the  leave  could  not  be
    withdrawn and thus they were able to succeed in their  appeals  whereas
    this Appellant could not.  To support this submission he made reference
    to a decision of the Privy Council in Matadeen v Pointuu  [1999]  1  SC
    98.  He did not have a copy of that  authority  nor  had  he  read  the
    authority but had an article  in  which  that  decision  of  the  Privy
    Council had been referred to.  He could not state how  that  authority,
    which had not been produced before the  court,  could  support  such  a
    submission.  Furthermore, he was not able to  provide  any  information
    concerning the similar appeals that he stated  had  been  allowed.   He
    stated that there had been no freedom of information request made as to
    the numbers and therefore he could not  give  any  further  account  of
    those matters.

13.   The second matter that he raised was that there had been a number  of
    Judges of the Upper Tribunal hearing cases on the same  facts  as  this
    Appellant and had allowed their  appeals.   He  said  the  points-based
    system Rules had created a confusion and the confusion had led to Upper
    Tribunal Judges allowing similar cases.  The confusion surrounding  the
    law was contributed to by the way the Secretary of State  had  operated
    their own policy and thus it raised a legitimate expectation  for  this
    Appellant to have his case decided  positively.   He  made  no  further
    submissions concerning this particular  Appellant  and  any  legitimate
    expectation that he had but made the submission  in  general  terms  as
    stated above.

14. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of State by way of reply, indicated
    that these two  issues  had  not  been  raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor had they been raised before the Upper Tribunal in any  way
    before this hearing.  As to the argument of legitimate expectation,  it
    did not apply in this case.  Furthermore whilst some claimants may have
    had their appeals allowed that in itself  would  not  give  rise  to  a
    legitimate expectation for this Appellant who cannot  meet  the  Rules.
    Thus he submitted the only outcome for this appeal is that it should be
    dismissed.

15. I reserved my decision.

16.   The facts of the appeal are set out earlier  in  this  determination.
    On 26th January 2012 the Appellant's application for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student was refused.  On  that
    date his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student was curtailed so as to  expire  on  27th  February  2012.   The
    application that was refused on 26th January, was reconsidered by  UKBA
    reinstating his leave through Section 3C, this application  was  varied
    to a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  application  on  4th  April  2012  under
    paragraph 245FD of the Immigration Rules (as amended).

17.   In order to qualify under that particular Rule, Mr Noor was  required
    to show that he would be entitled to be awarded 75 points or more under
    paragraphs 66 to  72  of  Appendix  A.   That  Appendix  sets  out  the
    attributes required to qualify  under  the  points-based  system.   The
    attributes attract different points.  The available points are shown in
    Table 10 (see paragraph 67).  To obtain 15 points for the date of award
    under Appendix A, Table 10, he  would  have  to  demonstrate  that  the
    qualification was obtained within the period of twelve months prior  to
    the making of the application.

18.   In this appeal, it is common ground, that  Anglia  Ruskin  University
    had confirmed that the date of award of his eligible qualification  was
    6th July 2012.  Mr Syed-Ali concedes that the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in SSHD v Raju & Others  has  stated  that  the  paragraph  when
    viewed as a whole, and the qualification at Table  10  requires  strict
    compliance with the requirement to  make  the  application  within  the
    period of twelve months  from  the  time  when  the  qualification  was
    obtained.  Thus Mr Syed-Ali concedes that the Upper Tribunal  is  bound
    by the decision of the Court of Appeal in The SSHD v Raju  (as  cited).
    In those circumstances, on the facts of this  case  which  are  not  in
    dispute, the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 245FD.
     However he has raised two points as set out in the submissions that  I
    have recorded earlier.  It is right  to  observe  that  those  two  new
    points were raised for the first time at this hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Despite directions that were sent from  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which directed those representing the Respondent to file and serve upon
    the Secretary of State any response under Rule  24  to  the  notice  of
    appeal and  also  any  submissions  made  and  importantly,  where  the
    Respondent wished the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that evidence  (including  any  witness
    statement) must be filed with the Upper Tribunal and  served  upon  the
    Secretary of State, together with the notice required by  Rule  15(2A),
    indicating the nature of that evidence and why it was not submitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The directions also state at paragraph 4 that
    the parties are on notice that:

    (b)  A failure by a party to comply with any of  these  directions  may
         lead the Upper Tribunal to proceed on the basis  that  nothing  (or
         nothing further) is to be said  or  advanced  in  support  of  that
         party's case before the Upper Tribunal.

19. Despite there having been a previous hearing, there has never been  any
    documentation either  under  Rule  24  or  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the
    Procedure Rules setting out any reply made on behalf of Mr  Noor.   The
    decision of the Court of Appeal in The SSHD v Raju &  Others  was  made
    available from 25th June 2013, some three weeks after the  parties  had
    appeared before the Upper Tribunal thus they were  on  notice  of  this
    case being heard.  Despite the decision being made available since that
    date and before the hearing of this appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    there still has been no compliance with any of  those  directions  that
    have been made.  Similarly there has been no Rule 15 notice or any Rule
    24 response concerning any further  argument  or  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the Respondent. In those circumstances, having considered the
    procedural history, and the failure to follow directions of  the  Upper
    Tribunal even to the extent  of  not  producing  evidence  before  this
    Tribunal at the hearing, I do not admit those grounds.

20.   Even if I did consider them, I do not find that they are made out  on
    the evidence that has  been  presented  to  the  Tribunal.   As  stated
    earlier, in respect of the submission made that "like cases  should  be
    treated as like", there is no information put before this  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Respondent to demonstrate the number of appeals  that  it
    is claimed were allowed or the facts of those appeals.  The  fact  that
    the Secretary of State has granted leave to a group  of  applicants  by
    mistake, which is in effect what Mr Syed-Ali was stating, does not mean
    that this Appellant, who cannot satisfy  the  appropriate  Rule  should
    therefore succeed.

21.  Even at this hearing, Mr Syed-Ali did not have a copy of the authority
    that he relied upon nor could he provide any further details in respect
    of his primary submission on the  basis  that  "like  cases  should  be
    treated as like" namely that a  number  of  similar  appeals  had  been
    allowed on the same facts as of this Appellant and therefore  it  would
    be wrong to treat this Appellant any differently.  He has not  produced
    any evidence relating to those similar appeals that he states have been
    allowed or the circumstances of those  appeals.   He  has  produced  no
    evidence concerning his assertion  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    granted a group of applicants on  the  same  facts  as  this  Appellant
    either. Thus he has  provided  no  evidence  before  this  Tribunal  to
    support the submission he has made and thus has not  demonstrated  that
    there  was  any  unfairness  applied  to  the  circumstances  of   this
    particular Appellant.

22.   Whilst he submits that the points-based  system  Rules  have  created
    some confusion and that Upper  Tribunal  Judges  have  allowed  similar
    cases and that the confusion has been contributed to by  the  Secretary
    of State and thus this raises a legitimate expectation on behalf of the
    Appellant, he has  not  provided  any  evidence  to  show  how  such  a
    legitimate expectation applies to this particular Appellant.  should be
    treated as like", there is no information put before this  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Respondent to demonstrate the number of appeals  that  it
    is claimed were allowed or the facts of those appeals.  The  fact  that
    the Secretary of State has granted leave to a group  of  applicants  by
    mistake, which is in effect what Mr Syed-Ali was stating, does not mean
    that this Appellant, who cannot satisfy  the  appropriate  Rule  should
    therefore succeed.

23.   In respect of the submission made  that  relates  to  the  legitimate
    expectation for this Appellant, I have considered that submission.  The
    Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider a  challenge  to  an  immigration
    decision  on  the  basis  of  the  public  law  concept  of  legitimate
    expectation which falls within the grounds "otherwise not in accordance
    with the law" (see s.84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act).  However  in  order  to
    establish  a  legitimate  expectation,  the  Appellant  would  have  to
    establish that there was a clear and unambiguous  representation  of  a
    particular benefit being granted, detrimental reliance on that claim or
    representation and that there was no overriding public  interest  which
    could defeat that expectation.

24.  In this case it has not been established that there was any such clear
    and unambiguous representation made and Mr Syed-Ali does  not  identify
    through any documentation or otherwise as to what has given rise to the
    legitimate expectation.  Consequently I do not find that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that there was any legitimate expectation on the  part  of
    the Appellant that he would be entitled to be granted leave  to  remain
    based on his past history and based on the fact that there had been any
    " confusion" in the law.  The only legitimate expectation  is  for  his
    application to be decided in accordance with the Rules at the time  the
    decision is made. The fact remains that he is not able to qualify under
    the Immigration Rules for the reasons given.

25.   I am satisfied that this was a  case  where  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that he thought the decision to be an  unfair  one.
    As noted in the case of Fiaz  (cancellation  of  leave  to  remain  and
    fairness) [2012] UKUT 0057, the Tribunal noted that the jurisdiction of
    the Tribunal to determine that a decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law because of a lack of fairness was not to  be  downgraded  to  a
    general judicial power to depart from the Rule where the  judge  thinks
    such  a  case  appropriate  or  to  turn  a  mandatory  factor  into  a
    discretionary one. That was an error of law in the light of the reasons
    I have set out; the Appellant could not meet the  Rules.  There  is  no
    unfairness in that.

26. Thus I have reached the decision that to refuse leave to remain  was  a
    lawful one as the  Appellant  cannot  demonstrate  that  he  meets  the
    Immigration Rules. It has not been demonstrated  before  this  Tribunal
    that  that there has been any unfairness in the decision making process
    when considering the circumstances of this particular Appellant for the
    reasons set out earlier in this determination  as  there  has  been  no
    evidence to support the submissions made by Mr Syed-Ali. I refer to the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in Thakur (PBS  decision  -  common
    law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC) which while not on all
    fours with the facts before me does contain the following remarks:

                  'We emphasise the guidance given by Lord Mustill that  the
                  principles of fairness are  not  to  be  applied  by  rote
                  identically in every  situation  and  that  what  fairness
                  demands is dependent on the context of  the  decision  and
                  the Appellant's particular circumstances'.

27.    Judge Khan dealt with the  fact  that  the  removal  decision  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  is
    unlawful, having been made at the same time as the decision  to  refuse
    to vary leave to remain. A lawful decision will have to be made if  the
    Secretary of state wishes to remove the Respondent. Thus that  decision
    I find is not in accordance with the law

28. Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the decision is set  aside.
 The decision is re-made as follows.  The  appeal  against  the  refusal  to
vary leave under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.  The decision  made  to
remove is not in accordance with the law and the appeal is allowed  in  that
respect only.




Signed                              Date:  9th July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

