
[pic]
IAC-FH-GJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21848/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determination Without a                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|Hearing at Field House                        |                             |
|On 7th February, 2012                         |On 8th March 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                          Vrishali Haridas Nagdive

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 8th October,  1982.
     On 4th April, 2012 she applied for further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  The  application
    was made under paragraph 245FD(c) and (d) of Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395, as amended ("the Immigration Rules")

2.   On 20th September, 2012 the respondent refused to grant  her  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 245 as a result of which the appellant appealed.



3.   Her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doran  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 26th November, 2012 dismissed  her  appeal
    on the basis that the appellant had not met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules because at the date of her application  she  had  not
    been awarded a qualification.

4.   The eligible qualification was not awarded to the appellant  until  6th
    July, 2012, and thus was not within twelve months immediately prior  to
    the date of her application  (5th  April,  2012)  as  required  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  As a consequence the appellant could not be awarded
    fifteen points for attributes under Appendix A.

5.   With  the  appellant's  application  to  the  Secretary  of  State  she
    enclosed a letter dated 2nd April, 2012 from her college, LLS  Business
    School, which confirmed that the first assignment marks indicated  that
    the appellant had passed her modules.  The letter was  not  acceptable,
    however, because the awarding body was Anglia Ruskin University and not
    LLS Business School.

6.   The appellant challenged the determination of the  judge  and  on  14th
    January,  2013,  one  of  my  colleagues  granted  permission  on   the
    understanding that lead  cases  were  pending  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    involving the issue raised in the ground concerning what  is  meant  by
    "within twelve months  of  obtaining  the  relevant  qualification"  is
    Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.

7.   Notice of a decision in respect of the application  for  permission  to
    appeal was sent to the parties by first  class  prepaid  post  on  17th
    January, 2013 accompanied by directions in the form set out in Appendix
    A of this determination.

8.   As at 7th  February,  2013  neither  representative  has  responded  to
    either the decision or to directions and  presumably  their  considered
    position is that they have nothing further worth saying on  the  merits
    of the case and that they agree to the matter being decided without  an
    oral hearing.  The matter came before me for such a decision.

9.   I have concluded that it is appropriate  that  this  appeal  should  be
    disposed of without an oral hearing.

10.  The Tribunal has recently  promulgated  its  presidential  decision  in
    Khatel and Others (s85A; effect of continuing application) [2013]  UKUT
    00044 (IAC) on facts which are on all four with this  appeal.   At  the
    time of the appellant's application, the academic part  of  her  course
    had been completed and she was expected by the  institution  where  she
    had been studying to have been awarded a qualification by the  awarding
    institution, in this case Anglia Ruskin University.

11.  The appellant's application  was  made  on  5th  April,  2012  but  the
    respondent's decision was not made until 20th September, 2012.  In  the
    intervening period the appellant  was  actually  awarded  her  master's
    degree on 6th July, 2012.  The basis of the  respondent's  refusal  was
    that at the time of the application the award of qualification had  not
    been  made.   In  Khatel  and  Others  the  Tribunal   concluded   that
    applications were continuing applications and that there  is  a  single
    application for a single  purpose  made  before  6th  April,  2012  but
    supplemented by data supplied before the application ceased to be  made
    and was before the decision maker at the time of the decision.

12.  I conclude that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    contain a material error of law.  On the information that was known  to
    the Secretary of State at the time of her decision,  the  Secretary  of
    State's  refusal  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Rules  and   the
    appellant's appeal is therefore allowed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

