
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/21495/2014

                                                  IA/50906/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21st April 2016                        |On 10th May 2016                    |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr benzhi lin (1)
                               jine jiang (2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Walsh, (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Higgins, promulgated on 13th  January  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 13th January 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellants, following which the  Appellants
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife.  They are nationals of China.  The
    first Appellant, who is the principal Appellant, is the husband, and he
    was born on 21st  August  1978.   The  second  Appellant,  who  is  his
    dependant, was born on 19th September 1982.  The first  Appellant  came
    to the UK on 3rd November 2008 with entry clearance to work as  a  work
    permit holder and his wife joined him on  17th  August  2010  some  two
    years later with entry clearance as his dependant.  Before  the  expiry
    of the Appellant's leave, he applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    This application was refused on  28th  April  2014  and  the  Appellant
    appeals that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has  satisfied  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain and that the decision of the  Respondent  is
    not in accordance with the law, insofar as  his  application  has  been
    rejected.  The Appellant was told that he could  not  comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 134 of HC 395 which was to  the  effect  that
    the Appellant can be granted ILR provided that certification  from  his
    employer can confirm that he is paid at or above the  appropriate  rate
    for the job as stated in the Codes of Practice.

 4. The Appellant maintains that he  has  never  been  able  to  provide  a
    certification from the employer to this  effect.   However,  he  relies
    upon the Upper Tribunal's determination in Phillipson (ILR -  not  PBS:
    evidence) India [2012] UKUT  00039.   The  Appellant  states  that  the
    relevant requirements in this case are  not  the  requirements  in  the
    current regime of paragraph 134.  The relevant requirements are in  the
    version of paragraph 134 which had been  in  force  when  he  had  been
    granted entry clearance as a work  permit  holder.   Previously  before
    paragraph 134 existed in 2008, the position was that an  applicant  for
    indefinite leave to remain simply had to  show  that  he  had  spent  a
    continuous period of five years lawfully in the UK,  and  that  he  had
    complied throughout with the requirements to which he is subject  as  a
    work permit holder, and his employer had certified  that  his  services
    were still required and he had sufficient knowledge of the English  and
    a better life in this country.

 5. The Appellant contended that he met those requirements.  The additional
    requirement now imposed that he be paid at or above the prescribed rate
    for the job had been included only in the Rules with  effect  from  6th
    April 2011 and it was not a requirement  that  he  had  to  meet.   The
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter contests this version  of  the
    law and argues that the general principle is that an application for  a
    variation of leave to remain is determined on the basis of the Rules in
    force when the Respondent's decision is made.  The  Appellant  had  had
    ample time to ensure that the requirement was met before the Respondent
    refused his application in April 2014.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge heard argument from Mr Walsh of Counsel (who  appears  before
    this Tribunal today as well)  that  if  one  considers  HC  863,  which
    introduced the requirement in paragraph 134(iv)  and  (v)  with  effect
    from 6th April 2011 of having to provide certification of an  applicant
    being paid at or above the  appropriate  rate  for  the  job,  that  is
    accompanied by  a  copy  of  an  explanatory  memorandum,  and  HC  863
    expressly provides that an application for leave to remain made  before
    6th April 2011, but which had not been determined by that date, will be
    decided in accordance with the Rules in force on 5th  April  2011.   So
    far as the memorandum was concerned, two  bullet  points  in  paragraph
    7.12 were relevant for the present purposes.  Work permit holders  were
    entitled to apply to extended leave to remain up to  a  total  of  five
    years.   Mr  Walsh  argued  that,  "as  a   transitional   arrangement"
    applicants for extension of  their  leave  to  remain  as  work  permit
    holders would not be subject to the new salary thresholds.

 7. The judge observed how in Phillipson, where the applicant  had  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain very shortly after 6th April  2011,  her
    application had been refused in June  2011  because  the  pay  she  was
    receiving was less than the rate prescribed for the job she was  doing,
    and she appealed and in support of  her  appeal  she  had  submitted  a
    letter from her employer confirming that it had awarded her a pay  rise
    sufficient to meet the requirements in paragraph  134(iv)  and  it  had
    backdated the pay rise to a date before the refusal of the  applicant's
    application.  The Upper Tribunal ruled that the decision the  Appellant
    had appealed had not been made under the points-based system.   It  had
    been made in response to an application for indefinite leave to remain.
     Therefore, the employer's letter had been admissible, even  though  it
    had not been put before the Secretary of State prior to  her  decision,
    and the Appellant succeeded in her appeal.  The Upper Tribunal observed
    (at paragraph 14) that, "as we understand it the claimant never  needed
    a certificate of sponsorship because she came under the old system  and
    not the new PBS one and accordingly never held one.

 8. Before the Tribunal, Mr Walsh argued that the uncertainty as to whether
    work permit holders, such  as  the  Appellant,  would  be  required  to
    demonstrate that they were being paid at a prescribed rate, if and when
    they made an application for indefinite leave to remain,  optimised  by
    the Upper Tribunal's observations in  Phillipson,  had  given  rise  to
    conspicuous unfairness.  In the circumstances the Respondent should  be
    required to grant leave to the Appellant to remain notwithstanding  his
    failure to meet the requirements for indefinite leave to  remain  under
    paragraph 134.

 9. The judge rejected  Mr  Walsh's  submissions  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent Secretary of State was entitled to determine the Appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of the Rules in
    force on 28th April 2014 and the requirements of paragraph 134(iv)  and
    (v) had not been complied with by the Appellant.  The Appellant had  no
    legitimate expectation that the UK's policy in relation to work  permit
    holders would remain unchanged during the five years that the principal
    Appellant would have to send here before he would be entitled to  apply
    for indefinite leave to remain.

10. The judge went on to consider then Article  8  ECHR  and  rejected  the
    appeal on that basis either because neither Appellant  was  entitled  a
    grant of leave to remain on the basis of their marriage under  Appendix
    FM of the Rules because  neither  of  them  were  British  citizens  or
    settled here.  Paragraph 276ADE did not apply.  If the first and second
    Appellants were removed, together with their son, they will be  removed
    as a single family unit and  the  family  will  be  kept  intact.   The
    decision  to  remove  in  these   circumstances   would   be   entirely
    proportionate to the legitimate ends of immigration control that had to
    be served.

11. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the salary requirement of the Immigration Rules applied
    from April 2011.  The grounds also assert that the judge  wrongly  held
    there to be no legitimate expectation given the conspicuous  unfairness
    in the decision reached against the Appellant.  On 7th August 2015, the
    Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal.  On 3rd September 2015,  a
    Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent Secretary  of  State  to
    the effect that the judge's findings were based on the evidence and are
    supported by clear analysis of the evidence.  The  conclusions  reached
    by the judge at paragraph 27 were entirely open to him.

Submissions

13. At the hearing  before  me  on  21st  April  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  Walsh,  of  Counsel,  and  he  made  three   basic
    submissions before me.

14. First, that the Appellant's application was rejected on the basis  that
    he had failed to submit evidence from his employer in the form  of  his
    sponsorship certificate confirming that he was paid  at  or  above  the
    appropriate rate for the job as stated in  the  Codes  of  Practice  in
    Appendix J.  However, if one looks at his application form, there is  a
    section 5.5, in which the Appellant has drawn a line to  indicate  that
    this is "not applicable" because his application was made on the  basis
    that he had entered  the  UK  under  a  work  permit  some  five  years
    previously.

15. The case of Phillipson (ILR - not  PBS:  evidence)  India  [2012]  UKUT
    00039 had made it clear that,

         "the claimant never needed a certificate of sponsorship because she
         came under the old system and not the new PBS one  and  accordingly
         never held one.  If there was no guidance as to  the  salary  level
         applicable to her, then Rule 134(iv) would not apply and her  claim
         to settlement should have been granted without more".

16. The judge accepted at  paragraph  10  of  the  determination  that  the
    Appellant has not been in a position to comply with the requisite  Rule
    and his solicitors (see  paragraph  12)  confirmed  that  the  relevant
    requirements were not requirements in the current version of  paragraph
    134 as far as this Appellant was concerned.

17. Second, Mr Walsh submitted that if one looks at  the  "Tier  2  of  the
    points-based system - policy guidance" (which applies "for all  Tier  2
    applications made on or after 6th April 2016"), there is a provision at
    paragraph 265 to the extent that,

    "You will be exempt from the minimum earnings threshold if any  of  the
    following apply to you:

       . your most recent grant of leave  was  as  a  Tier  2  (Minister  of
         Religion) Migrant;

       . your continuous five year period includes all or part of a grant of
         leave as a qualifying work permit holder, or as a  Tier  2  Migrant
         where your certificate of sponsorship was assigned before 6th April
         2011; ...".

    Mr Walsh submitted that, again that  the  Appellant's  application  was
    made on 18th October 2013  the  Appellant  could  succeed  now  because
    paragraph 265 makes it clear  that  one  is  exempt  from  the  minimum
    earnings threshold.

18. Third  Mr  Walsh  relied  upon  the  case  of  HM  (PBS   -  legitimate
    expectation - paragraph 245ZX(l)) Malawi [2010] 446 UKUT, where  it  is
    stated that,

         "we do not consider that the Appellants are precluded from  relying
         upon the guidance which, though as Pankina makes clear,  cannot  be
         employed adversely to an Appellant, nevertheless in  our  view  can
         give rise to a legitimate expectation that the Secretary  of  State
         will adhere to that guidance when considering an Appellant's claim"
         (see paragraph 14).

    It was submitted by Mr Walsh, the cumulative effect of the guidance and
    the explanatory memorandum, which led to a legitimate expectation  that
    the Appellant would not be expected to have to comply with the  minimum
    earnings requirement.  At any rate, even if  this  was  not  so,  as  a
    question of conspicuous unfairness, his appeal should have  be  allowed
    in the circumstances of this case.

19. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that at the time that  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State made her decision the Immigration Rules had  changed
    and paragraph 134 of  HC  395  had  stipulated  an  appropriate  levels
    earning requirement which the Appellant had to  comply  with.   As  the
    judge had said, the Appellant  had  ample  time  to  comply  with  this
    requirement, and if he chose not to do so, then he could  not  succeed.
    There was no legitimate expectation but the Rules will not change.  The
    fact was that there was no certificate or sponsorship from the employer
    as required under the Rules.

20. Second, as far as the case of Phillipson was concerned, this was  about
    an applicant who in his 59th  month  of  a  60  month  stay,  had  wage
    conditions imposed on her, that were irrelevant to the  original  grant
    of a work permit (see paragraphs 16 to  17  of  Phillipson)  which  the
    Tribunal held indicated an "intrinsic lack of  justice".   The  present
    case was quite different.  There was no question  of  conditions  being
    imposed at the eleventh hour, such that the Appellant was "unaware" and
    he had ample time to be able to comply with the Rules, which he had not
    done.  The change in Rules came about some half way  through  the  five
    year grant of leave that  the  Appellant  had  under  the  work  permit
    system.   The  Appellant  needed  a  certificate  from   his   employer
    confirming that he was paid at the appropriate rate.  His failure to do
    so could only have led to one decision.   The  Rules  changed  and  the
    Appellant had adequate notice of that change.   This  was  exactly  the
    manner in which the judge had dealt with the Rule change position  with
    respect to the Appellant at paragraph 27  of  the  determination.   The
    judge was  correct  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had  no  legitimate
    expectation during his five year work permit leave.

21. Finally, Mr Mills did nevertheless accept that if the guidance in  Tier
    2 Policy Guidance (version 04/2016) applied and paragraph 265  of  that
    guidance stood to be implemented, then he would have to agree that  the
    Secretary of State would lose in this  appeal  because  this  makes  it
    quite clear that,  "you  will  be  exempt  from  the  minimum  earnings
    threshold ..." if certain conditions are satisfied.

22. In his reply, Mr Walsh referred to, what he described as an  "indulgent
    concession outside  the  Immigration  Rules"  made  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that if people are coming to the UK on
    a work permit around the period of 2010 then they would not be  subject
    in 2015 to  Rule  changes,  such  that  they  will  be  prevented  from
    applying, as was normally the case, for  indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    after  five  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in  this   country.
    Essentially this would have been unfair and as a question  of  fairness
    these concessions have been made and should be applied by the  Tribunal
    now.

23. Second, Phillipson could not be limited in the manner submitted  by  Mr
    Mills because that case made it clear (see paragraphs 15  to  17)  that
    "the claimant never needed a certificate  of  sponsorship  because  she
    came under the old system and not the new PBS one" and that, "if  there
    was no guidance as to the salary level applicable  to  her,  then  Rule
    134(iv) would not apply and a claim  to  settlement  should  have  been
    granted without more" (paragraph 14).

Error of Law

24. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

25. First, the Appellant entered on a  work  permit,  whereby  he  received
    �16,500 per annum, and the evidence was that his  salary  reached  that
    level at all material times.  On 6th April 2011, HC  863  introduced  a
    requirement that the employer "certifies that he has paid at  or  above
    the appropriate rate for the job as stated in the Codes of Practice for
    Tier 2 Sponsors published by the UK Border Agency".  The Appellant  did
    not have a Tier 2 Sponsor.  The new requirement could not apply to him.
     That this is the case, is confirmed by the explanatory memorandum  (at
    paragraph 7.12) which states that those,

         "who are already in the UK under the  Rules  in  place  before  6th
         April 2011 will be able to apply to extent their stay without being
         subject to the annual limit, the new  guidance  level  requirement,
         the new salary threshold, or the new English language  requirement.
         This applies whether they are extending with the same  employer  or
         changing employers".

    This explanatory memorandum is dated  16th  March  2011  and  expressly
    refers  to  the  fact  that  this  exception  is   promulgated   as   a
    "transitional arrangement", with respect to people such as work  permit
    holders and others.  The net effect of this was that the Appellant  was
    not caught by the changes that were brought into effect  on  6th  April
    2011 by HC863.

26. Second, that this is a case is  confirmed  by  Phillipson  [2012]  UKUT
    00039 where the Tribunal held that, "if there was no guidance as to the
    salary level applicable to her, then Rule 134(iv) would not apply and a
    claim to  settlement  should  have  been  granted  without  more"  (see
    paragraph 14).  Phillipson had confirmed that the Rule changes  on  6th
    April 2011 by HC  863 did not cover a person on  the  old  work  permit
    system (and had not transferred to Tier 2).

27. Third, the judge observed that in the Rules in 2012 and 2013 an attempt
    was made to remedy or fill that lacuna, the lacuna being that the  Rule
    changes in 2011 did not catch everyone.  However, it remained the  case
    as confirmed by the explanatory memorandum  of  16th  March  2011  that
    those who entered the UK as workers before  6th  April  2011  were  not
    subject to the salary thresholds contained in the Immigration Rules.

28. Fourth, the judge erred  in  concluding  that  the  salary  requirement
    applied from April 2011 (see his paragraph  27).   This  could  not  be
    right given that the explanatory memorandum  of  16th  March  2011  had
    provided a specific exemption in precisely this  kind  of  case  for  a
    person in the Appellant's position who had entered via a work permit.

29. Finally, the judge erred in concluding that there will be no legitimate
    expectation because the Appellant's case fell to be determined  by  the
    Rules then in place.  The difficulty with this conclusion is two  fold.
    First, the explanatory memorandum clearly states that  persons  in  the
    position of the Appellant, who are already in the UK before  6th  April
    2011, would not be subject  to  the  salary  requirement.   Second,  to
    subject them to a salary requirement would be unfair in  terms  of  the
    strictures set out by the Tribunal if Phillipson  itself  was  recorded
    that,

         "the claimant never needed a certificate of sponsorship because she
         came under the old system and not the new PBS one  and  accordingly
         never held one.  If there was no guidance as to  the  salary  level
         applicable to her, then Rule 134(iv) would not apply and a claim to
         settlement should have been granted without  more"  (see  paragraph
         14).

    No less importantly, however, is the policy guidance used for all  Tier
    2 applications made on or  after  6th  April  2016.   In  this  respect
    because this makes it clear at paragraph 265 that, "you will be  exempt
    from the minimum earnings threshold if ..." it is the case that,  "your
    continuous five year period includes all or part of a grant of leave as
    a qualifying work permit holder ...", and  this  is  plainly  the  case
    here.

30. In short, this is a  case  where  the  Appellant's  circumstances  fell
    squarely within paragraph 7.12 of the explanatory memorandum.   It  did
    not come within the latest statements that ILR application  would  have
    to meet the salary requirement, because this applied to those  employed
    by Tier 2 Sponsors only, and  it  is  agreed  by  all  sides  that  the
    Appellant never had  a  Sponsor,  so  that  the  requirement  of  being
    employed by Tier 2 Sponsors did not  apply.   It  is  well  known  that
    policy statements made by a government department can give  rise  to  a
    legitimate expectation, and are at any rate, expected to be abided  by,
    in the interests of legality and the observation of the  rule  of  law,
    such  that  they  cannot  be  arbitrarily  resiled  from.   The  policy
    statement in this case was absolutely explicit and as clear as it could
    be.  All that the Appellant had to show was that he complied  with  the
    requirements of the work permit holder at the time, and  complied  with
    the salary requirements specified  during  the  work  permit  grant  of
    permission.  There is no question that  he  has  been  able  to  do  so
    throughout.   Paragraph  134(iv)  would  never  have  applied  to   the
    Appellant, and Phillipson confirmed that as long ago as 2012,  and  any
    amendment to deal with the lacuna in 2012 or 2013 could not obviate the
    duty upon the public administration to bear  in  mind  the  explanatory
    memorandum of 16th March 2011 and the exemption contained at  paragraph
    7.12.  This fell in the Appellant's favour.

Re-Making the Decision

31. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submission that  I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for  the  reasons  that  I  have  set
    above.  This appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that it  falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original judge.  I remake  the  decision  as  follows.  This
appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th May 2016




