
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21220/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th January 2017                      |On 8th February 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     JRg
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Sidhu of Bassi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Somal of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 23rd November 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female Jamaican citizen born 14th October 1957.  She
    entered the UK on 30th November 2000  as  a  visitor  and  subsequently
    overstayed.  On 22nd April 2015 the  Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her private and family life.

 3. This application was refused on  27th  April  2015  and  the  Appellant
    subsequently appealed  to  the  FTT  pursuant  to  section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).   The
    appeal before the FTT was put on the basis that the Appellant could not
    satisfy any of the provisions of Appendix FM either as a partner or  as
    a parent, but her appeal should be allowed in relation to  her  private
    life pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and/or Article 8 of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human  Rights  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    taking into account that the Appellant is  in  a  relationship  with  a
    British  citizen  Tennyson  Walker  to  whom  I  shall  refer  as   the
    Appellant's partner.  He has a 10-year-old daughter from  his  previous
    marriage.

 4. The Appellant had married a British citizen in 2007 and explained  that
    he had deserted her and she did not know his whereabouts.

 5. The FTT found that the Appellant's relationship with  her  partner  was
    not "the close and devoted relationship that has been made  out."   The
    FTT found that the Appellant had not proved that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration to Jamaica.

 6. Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  was  considered.   The  FTT
    considered the Appellant's relationship  with  her  partner,  and  also
    considered the best interests of the partner's daughter.  The FTT noted
    that any private and family  life  established  by  the  Appellant  was
    established when she knew that she did not have leave to remain in  the
    UK.

 7. The FTT dismissed the appeal.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending the FTT had  erred  in  law  and  permission  was  initially
    refused by FTT Judge Baker who found no arguable error of law disclosed
    in the grounds.

 9. The application was renewed and permission to appeal on one ground  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor.  He found  it  arguable  that
    the FTT erred in failing to address section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  as
    evidence had been given to the FTT that the Appellant and her partner's
    daughter enjoyed a very close  relationship,  and  the  daughter  is  a
    British citizen.  The Appellant claimed to play an active parental role
    in her partner's daughter's life.  The FTT had made no specific finding
    on this issue.

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FTT had not erred in law  and  the  ground  of
    appeal  was  merely  a  disagreement  with  the  FTT's  decision.   The
    Appellant's representatives lodged a response  to  the  rule  24  reply
    making reference to R v SSHD IJR [2016] UKUT  00031  (IAC)  which  gave
    guidance on the meaning of "parental relationship."

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

12. In summary Ms Sidhu pointed out that the FTT had  in  paragraph  6  had
    when setting  out  the  Appellant's  evidence  made  reference  to  the
    Appellant's claim to have a very close relationship with her  partner's
    daughter, and  playing  an  active  parental  role  in  her  life.   In
    paragraph 8 the Appellant was recorded as stating that  she  enjoyed  a
    good relationship with her partner's daughter, who she regarded as  the
    daughter she had never had, and that she intended  to  play  an  active
    part in her life.

13. it was submitted that the FTT erred in paragraph 18 by failing to  give
    reasons for finding the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    partner was not as close as had been made out, and the FTT had erred by
    failing to make a finding as to whether the Appellant was in a parental
    relationship with her partner's daughter.  If the  FTT  had  considered
    this, and made a finding that a parental relationship existed, then the
    FTT must have gone on to consider section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

The Respondent's Submissions

14. Mr Mills commented that it was unfortunate that the FTT had not made  a
    specific finding on  parental  relationship,  but  it  was  clear  from
    reading  the  decision,  that  the  FTT  had  concluded  that  such   a
    relationship did not exist between  the  Appellant  and  her  partner's
    daughter.

15. Mr Mills pointed out  that  the  Appellant  and  her  partner  did  not
    cohabit.  The FTT was entitled to find their relationship  was  not  as
    close as they had made out, as  both  had  given  conflicting  evidence
    about the progress or lack of progress of the Appellant's divorce.

16. Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant could not be regarded as a  step-
    parent as she was not in a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  with  her
    partner.

17. The FTT had made clear findings in paragraph 24 as to the  relationship
    between the Appellant's partner's daughter and her  biological  mother.
    I was also asked to note the absence of any evidence from the child  to
    the FTT.

18. Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  concluded  that  no  parental
    relationship existed and therefore did not  need  to  consider  section
    117B(6) and had not materially erred in law.

The Appellant's Response

19. Ms Sidhu argued that the FTT had accepted that the  Appellant  and  her
    partner were in a relationship, and the  error  was  in  not  making  a
    finding as to parental relationship, and if the FTT  had  any  concerns
    about the lack of evidence from the child, these concerns  should  have
    been put to the Appellant.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. I find no material error of law in the FTT decision for  the  following
    reasons.

22. It is common ground that the FTT did not consider section  117B(6)  but
    this would only be  necessary  if  the  FTT  had  considered  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her
    partner's child.  Although there is no specific finding on this  point,
    I am satisfied that the FTT considered this issue, and  concluded  that
    there was no such relationship.  For ease of reference I  set  out  the
    head note to R v SSHD;

         1.   It is not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
             responsibility"  in  law  for  there  to  exist   a   parental
             relationship.

         2.   Whether a person who is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
             "parental relationship" with  a  child  for  the  purposes  of
             section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002 depends on the individual circumstances and  whether  the
             role that individual plays establishes he or she has  "stepped
             into the shoes" of a parent.

         3.   Applying that approach, apart  from  the  situation  of  split
             families where relationships between parents have broken  down
             and an actual or de  facto  step-parent  exists,  it  will  be
             unusual, but not impossible, for more than two individuals  to
             have a "parental relationship" with  a  child.   However,  the
             relationships between a child and  professional  or  voluntary
             carers or family friends are not "parental relationships".

23. The FTT made a clear finding in paragraph  24  about  the  relationship
    that the Appellant's partner's daughter  enjoyed  with  her  biological
    mother stating;

         "She enjoys a full and loving  relationship  with  her  father  and
         mother and spends the vast majority of her time with her mother and
         weekends with her father."

24. In the same paragraph the FTT found;

         "The Appellant spends some time with R but there is  little  before
         me to shed light on the nature and extent of the relationship  from
         R or her mother."

    The FTT described R (the daughter of the Appellant's partner) as having
    an enduring relationship with her own mother.

25. I do not find that it could be said that  the  Appellant  has  "stepped
    into the shoes" of a parent in this case.  The Appellant could  not  be
    regarded as a step-parent.  She is not divorced from her husband.   She
    does not live with her partner, and therefore is not in a  relationship
    akin to marriage.  The FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that  her  claimed
    relationship with her partner was not as close as made out, noting  the
    conflicting  evidence  that  the  couple  had   given   regarding   the
    Appellant's divorce.

26. The FTT was entitled to note at paragraph 24 the lack of  any  evidence
    regarding the relationship between R and the Appellant, from  either  R
    or her biological mother.

27. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the FTT did consider the  nature  of
    the relationship between the Appellant and R, and concluded that it was
    not a "parental relationship" and gave adequate  reasons  for  reaching
    this conclusion.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision  and  the
appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
order is made to protect the identity of  the  child  referred  to  in  this
decision.



Signed                              Date 3rd February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed                              Date 3rd February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
