
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21833/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th February 2014                         |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                          MR Muhammad Sarfraz Aslam
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background and Procedural History

1.   On 24th September 2012, the Secretary of State  decided  to  refuse  to
    vary the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   She  also
    decided, on the same occasion, to remove him by way of directions under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006  ("the
    section 47 removal decision").

2.   Earlier that year, on 21st February 2012, during the  currency  of  his
    student leave, the appellant applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant under the points-based system.   In  refusing
    that application, and in making the two adverse immigration  decisions,
    the Secretary of State found that the date of the  academic  award  the
    appellant relied upon as showing that the  requirements  of  the  rules
    were met was 11th June 2012, a  little  under  four  months  after  his
    application for leave to remain.  She concluded that the appellant  was
    not entitled to the points claimed under Appendix A of the  Immigration
    Rules ("the rules") as his  application  was  not  made  within  twelve
    months of obtaining the relevant qualification and so  it  fell  to  be
    refused under paragraph 245FD of the  rules.

3.   The appellant's appeal against the adverse decisions was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 3rd January 2013.  The judge found that the requirements
    of the rules were not met.  So far as Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention is concerned, he found that the appellant had established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom but concluded that the  decision  to
    remove him was a proportionate response.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted, in  the  light  of  the  decision  in
    Khatel [2013] UKUT 00044.  The Upper Tribunal then allowed  the  appeal
    in a determination promulgated on 20th May  2013,  having  first  found
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    such that it fell to be set aside.  In allowing the appeal,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that the only  issue  requiring  determination  was  the
    lawfulness of the decision to refuse to vary leave  and  there  was  no
    separate consideration of the section 47 removal decision.

5.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court
    of Appeal.  Shortly afterwards, and following the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in  Raju  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754,  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave
    directions to the parties.   In  the  light  of  that  judgment,  which
    overturned Khatel, the Upper Tribunal, acting pursuant to rule 45(1)(b)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 proposed:

    (a)  to set aside the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
         present case; and


    (b)  to substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
         against the variation decision but allow  the  appeal  against  the
         section 47 removal decision; and


    (c)  to do so without an oral hearing.

    The parties were advised that if they wished to object to any  part  of
    the proposal, they were required to do so, setting out reasons.

6.   Following an  objection,  a  hearing  was  listed  before  me  on  26th
    February 2014.  On 2nd  August  2013,  submissions  were  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf by his solicitors.  This letter  was  passed  to  Mr
    Duffy, who was able to read and assimilate the contents.

The Submissions Made by the  Parties  in  Response  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Directions

7.   At the outset, Mr Duffy indicated that the  Secretary  of  State  would
    not oppose the appeal being allowed  against  the  section  47  removal
    decision.  That decision was made on the same occasion as the  decision
    to refuse to vary leave, on 24th September 2012, long  before  8th  May
    2013 (when section 51 of the  Crime  and  Courts  Act  2013  came  into
    effect).

8.   Mr Karim said that  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors dated 2nd August 2013.  In that letter,  it  was
    contended on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  his  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave ought to be allowed.   Mr  Karim  also
    adopted the submissions made by in the first case heard  in  the  list,
    the appeal of Mr M Ramzan,  IA/21916/2012.   In  brief  summary,  those
    submissions were that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Raju  did  not  give
    sufficient weight to Home Office guidance on the post-study work scheme
    or to the application form required to be completed by claimants, or to
    the award of 20 points  in  the  present  appeal  and  others  for  the
    qualifications obtained.  The submissions also included  reliance  upon
    evidential flexibility and the de minimis rule and  a  submission  that
    the two decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Nasim and Others [2013] UKUT
    610 and [2014] UKUT 00025 did not provide  a  complete  answer  to  the
    appellant's case.  Overall, the Upper  Tribunal  came  to  the  correct
    decision in allowing the present appeal in the light of the case law at
    the time.  Moreover, the Secretary of State  had  decided  applications
    inconsistently, with some in the same position as the  appellant  being
    granted leave and others not.

9.   Mr Karim said that  a  submission  would  be  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the decisions in Nasim were not  binding  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  They were persuasive.  Of importance  was  the  inconsistent
    treatment by the Secretary of State.  If the law had been  clearer  and
    if the  post-study  work  scheme  had  not  been  so  complicated,  the
    appellant might have chosen to make a different  sort  of  application.
    There had been a great deal of confusion and chaos but this was not the
    doing of the appellant.  He was disadvantaged,  having  invested  funds
    and having incurred costs.  He was deprived of an opportunity  to  make
    another application and two years of his life had been wasted.

10.  So far as Article  8  was  concerned,  the  appellant  had  established
    private life ties in the United Kingdom but he had no family life here.
     He arrived with student leave as long ago as September 2009.

11.  Mr Duffy said that  there  was  no  good  reason  to  depart  from  the
    guidance given in the two Nasim cases.  The appellant might have  found
    himself in an unfortunate position but this was so of the appellants in
    those other cases.  The appellant was really in no different a position
    and it appeared that he was relying on the same arguments  put  by  the
    appellants in Nasim and Others.  Moreover, he could still make  another
    application if he wished, even though he might not have the benefit  of
    a right of appeal should the  application  fail.   As  yet,  no  lawful
    removal decision had been made in his case.  So far as  Article  8  was
    concerned, the guidance given in Nasim and Others should  be  followed,
    as should the guidance given by the Supreme Court in Patel [2013]  UKSC
    72.

12.  Mr Karim made a brief response.  Although the appellant might still  be
    able to make an application, he could not benefit from the  concessions
    that might have been available to him.  For example, he would be unable
    to rely upon "established status"  as  a  student.   His  options  were
    limited.

Findings and Conclusions

13.  Having heard from the parties,  I  conclude  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should, in the exercise of  its  powers  under  rule  45(1)(b)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008   set   aside   the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in the present case and  substitute
    a fresh decision.  That this is the proper course is apparent from  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Raju, overturning the  determination
    in Khatel.

14.  The  decision  substituted  in  relation  to  the  section  47  removal
    decision is simply to allow the appeal against it.  On the date it  was
    made, on 24th September 2012, the Secretary of State had  no  power  to
    make such a removal decision on the same  occasion  as  a  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave.

15.  So far as the appeal against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave  is
    concerned, the decision to be substituted is one  which  dismisses  the
    appellant's  appeal.   Mr  Karim  made  careful  submissions   on   the
    appellant's behalf and suggested that although  the  two  decisions  in
    Nasim and Others were persuasive, they should not  be  followed.   With
    great respect to him, I find that the judgment in Raju and the guidance
    given in the two Nasim and Others cases ought to be applied as there is
    no sensible reason to do otherwise.   The  fundamental  difficulty  the
    appellant faces is that his application was made on 21st February  2012
    but the qualification relied  upon,  required  to  have  been  obtained
    within the period of twelve  months  prior  to  that  application,  was
    awarded only on 11th June 2012.  As explained in the first decision  in
    Nasim and Others, neither the guidance issued by the Secretary of State
    on the scheme in July 2010 and, subsequently, in April  2012,  nor  the
    case work instruction of 23rd May 2012 (which was not expressly  relied
    upon in the present appeal) make any substantial difference.  The Upper
    Tribunal in the first decision in Nasim and Others  drew  attention  to
    the finding made in Raju by Moses LJ that there is no ambiguity or lack
    of clarity regarding the "temporal" requirement in the  fourth  section
    of table 10 of Appendix A to the rules.  That clear requirement was not
    met by the appellant.  Nor do arguments based on evidential flexibility
    advance the  appellant's  case.   Again,  as  explained  in  the  first
    decision in Nasim and Others,  the  Secretary  of  State  did  in  fact
    consider the evidence of the qualification obtained by  the  appellant,
    as is clear from the letter containing  the  notice  of  decision,  but
    found it not to meet the requirements of the rules.  And,   of  course,
    as the qualification obtained was taken into account and found wanting,
    there was no missing information or minor error requiring correction by
    means of the application of the policy.

16.  So far as the  de  minimis  principle  is  concerned,  this  is  of  no
    application in the present appeal.  The  requirement  of  the  rule  in
    issue is clear and, as the Court of Appeal held in Raju,  there  is  no
    room for a "near miss".

17.  Arguments based on fairness and legitimate expectation, and indeed  the
    proportionality of refusing the application for leave to  remain,  were
    all considered by the Upper Tribunal in the two decisions in Nasim  and
    Others.  Those arguments do not have merit in the present appeal.   The
    appellant is simply not in a position akin to those within the category
    of highly skilled migrants, who were encouraged to come to  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of representations  contained  in  the  rules  and
    elsewhere.  He had no legitimate expectation that  he  would  be  given
    leave notwithstanding failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rules.
    Again, there was no ambiguity in the rules  themselves.   It  may  very
    well be the case that others known to the appellant, perhaps  including
    some he studied with, have been given post-study work leave.  Mr  Karim
    emphasised the  importance  of  this  aspect.   However,  there  is  no
    evidence before me remotely close to showing any systemic inconsistency
    in decision making by the Secretary of State.   There  is  no  evidence
    setting out the details in those other,  successful  cases  and  it  is
    readily apparent that the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  to
    vary the appellant's leave was  accompanied  by  cogent  reasons  which
    related to the requirements of the rules.  The fact  that  applications
    made  by  others  succeeded,  some  following  application  and  others
    following  an  initial  refusal,  has  no  substantial  impact  on  the
    lawfulness of the decision made in the appellant's own case.

18.  So far as the decision to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is  concerned,  the
    decision to be substituted is dismissal of the appellant's  appeal,  as
    he has not shown that the requirements of the rules have been met.

19.  I turn next to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention and  take  into
    account the findings of fact I have already made.  In this context, the
    appellant must prove the facts and  matters  he  relies  upon  and  the
    standard of proof is that  of  a  balance  of  probabilities  (see  the
    determination in EH (Iraq) [2005] UKAIT 00065).  The appellant has  not
    established family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  first  arrived
    relatively recently, in September 2009.   His  leave  was  extended  in
    January 2011 and was valid until  28th  February  2012.   He  made  his
    application for post-study work leave about a week before  his  student
    leave expired.

20.  Mention was made of Article 8 in the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, at paragraph 7, although there is  very  little  detail.
    The First-tier Tribunal judge's Article 8  assessment  was  also  brief
    and, as noted above, there was no mention of Article  8  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal's determination.

21.  Mr Duffy drew attention to the recent judgment of the Supreme Court  in
    Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72 and to the approach to Article 8  taken
    in the second decision in Nasim and Others.  In that  case,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that those who have a desire,  as  former  students,  to
    undertake a period of post-study work in the United Kingdom, lie at the
    outer reaches of cases requiring an affirmative answer to the second of
    the five "Razgar" questions.  Even if an affirmative answer needs to be
    given, so that Article 8 is engaged (as the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found it was in the appellant's case),  the  issue  of  proportionality
    should generally be resolved decisively in favour of the respondent, by
    reference to her functions as the guardian of the system of immigration
    control, entrusted to her  by  Parliament  (see  paragraph  21  of  the
    decision in Nasim and Others [2014] UKUT 00025).  I have no doubt  that
    the appellant may well have formed friendships since his  arrival  here
    as a student in September 2009.  I have no doubt, either, that  he  has
    been well-aware that he has only had limited leave to remain throughout
    his time here.  There is little detail of any particular friendships or
    associations and nothing to show that ties established here by him as a
    student, and following  his  post-study  work  application,  cannot  be
    maintained from abroad.  The appellant has succeeded  in  obtaining  an
    academic award and this may very well be useful to him in  the  future,
    on his return to Pakistan.   Mr  Karim  drew  attention  to  the  funds
    invested by the appellant in his education and to wasted costs  and  to
    the disappointment felt over the past two years  following  refusal  of
    his application for further leave.  These features are typical of  this
    sort of case and the appellant is in no different a  position  in  this
    regard from the appellants in Nasim and Others and  Raju.   Overall,  I
    find that Article 8 is  engaged  in  the  private  life  context.   The
    appellant has no family life here.  The decision to refuse to vary  his
    leave was made in accordance with the law.  So far  as  proportionality
    is concerned, in weighing the competing interests, I find that there is
    little of real substance to place in the  balance  on  the  appellant's
    side, taking into account the limited  evidence  before  me,  and  very
    little to set against the Secretary of State's case.  I  conclude  that
    the decision to refuse to vary leave, and the appellant's  removal  and
    consequence of that decision, would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end being pursued, the operation of a coherent and  fair  system
    of immigration control, in the interests of the economic  wellbeing  of
    the United Kingdom.  The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.

Decision

22.  The determination of the Upper Tribunal in  the  present  case  is  set
    aside.  A fresh decision is substituted as follows:


    (i)  The appeal against the section 47 removal decision is allowed.


    (ii) The appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is
         dismissed.


    (iii)    The appeal on human rights grounds, in reliance upon Article 8
         of the Human Rights Convention, is dismissed.

24.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered  whether  a  fee  award  should  be  made.   Although  the
appellant succeeded in relation to the  section  47  removal  decision,  his
appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave has been  dismissed  and
he did  not  succeed  in  making  out  his  human  rights  case.   In  these
circumstances, I make no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



