
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21945/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               FESTUS IMOGIRIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 2 March 2015, dismissing his appeal against the  SSHD's  decision
    to refuse him a residence card  based  upon  his  marriage  to  an  EEA
    citizen.

 2. The grounds of appeal raise three points.  First,  the  hearing  should
    not have taken place on 27 February  2015  when  a  notice  of  hearing
    indicated that the hearing was adjourned to 8 July 2015.   Second,  the
    Judge was wrong to find that the sponsor was not  an  employed  person.
    Third, the respondent's decision is unfair.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on  10
    July 2015.  He was concerned that the appellant seemed to be told  that
    the hearing listed for 29 January 2015 was to be adjourned  around  the
    same time that the appellant's representatives told the  Tribunal  that
    they wished for the appeal to be determined on the papers  rather  than
    orally.

Hearing

 4. Prior to the hearing before me a bundle  of  documents  was  submitted.
    This contains a skeleton argument addressing the substantive merits  of
    the  appeal  and  evidence  said  to  be  relevant  to  the   sponsor's
    employment.   There  was  no  appearance  by  the  appellant   or   his
    representative at the hearing before me.  There was no explanation  for
    this non-attendance.

 5. Ms Johnstone asked me to dismiss the appeal and I indicated that I  did
    not consider the appellant's grounds were made out, in the  absence  of
    any further explanation, and I would be dismissing the appeal.   I  now
    give my reasons for dismissing the appeal.

Error of law discussion

 6. The Judge was satisfied that the marriage could not be said to  be  one
    of  convenience  [15].   The  Judge  was  however  concerned  that  the
    appellant's spouse had ceased work on a date prior to 22 March 2014 and
    there was insufficient evidence to suggest she had started another  job
    or was looking for work [18].  This was a finding entirely open to  the
    Judge on the material available.

 7. It is necessary to rehearse a little more about events leading  to  the
    Judge determining the appeal on the papers.  The appeal was due  to  be
    heard as an oral hearing on 29 January 2015.   Prior  to  this,  on  26
    January 2015, the appellant's solicitors requested the  hearing  to  be
    changed from  an  oral  hearing  to  a  paper  hearing.   The  Tribunal
    responded to this on 27 January 2015 by  issuing  a  notice  confirming
    that the appellant has indicated that he wants the appeal to be decided
    on the papers without a hearing.  This notice  also  states  "You  must
    send any written evidence and  submissions  to  the  Tribunal  and  the
    Respondent by 19 February 2015".

 8. I have checked the Tribunal  file.   It  appears  from  this  that  the
    Tribunal did not receive any further written  evidence  or  submissions
    until the bundle that was recently received on  25  August  2015.   The
    First-tier Tribunal was  therefore  fully  entitled  to  determine  the
    appeal  on  the  papers  (because  this   is   what   the   appellant's
    representatives requested) and on the material  available  (because  no
    further material was sent in compliance with directions).

 9. I accept that coincidentally on 27 January 2015  the  appeal  that  was
    listed for 29 January 2015 was adjourned due to a lack  of  court  time
    and was relisted for 8 July 2015.  A notice to this effect was sent  to
    the appellant's solicitors.  This notice seems to have crossed with the
    appellant's solicitors request  for  the  hearing  to  proceed  on  the
    papers.  I am not satisfied that this notice has caused any  procedural
    unfairness to the appellant.  The appellant  and  his  solicitors  were
    clearly told that the application for the hearing to take place on  the
    papers was granted and that any additional material needed to be  filed
    by 19 February 2015.   The  appellant's  solicitors  have  provided  no
    explanation for not complying with these directions.  There has been no
    explanation as to how the appellant was caused any unfairness in having
    his appeal determined on the papers as requested.   The  appellant  has
    not appeared at the hearing before me and I still have  no  explanation
    as to how he has been caused any unfairness.

10. That disposes of the first ground of  appeal.   The  second  ground  of
    appeal amounts  to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  factual
    findings.  The Judge was entitled to these on the  material  available.
    It is difficult to understand the third ground of appeal which does not
    criticise the Tribunal's findings but the fairness in the  respondent's
    decision.  This does not identify any error of law on the part  of  the
    Judge.

11. Finally, the appellant sought to rely upon Article 8 before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  As no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been
    served and no EEA decision to remove has been made, the  appellant  was
    not entitled to bring a human rights challenge to removal in an  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations.  That  this  is  so  has  now  been  clearly
    decided in Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]
    UKUT 466 (IAC).

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and is not set aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 September 2015
