
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia/21250/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 06.08.2015                        |On 17.08.2015                        |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judges
                       John FREEMAN and Kate MARKUS QC


                                  Between:

                                 Mohd. ATIQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Darryl Balroop (counsel instructed by Chauhan)
For the respondent: Mr Stephen Walker


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Christopher Woolley), sitting at Newport on 19 December
    2014, to  an entrepreneur/long residence/Article 8 appeal by a  citizen
    of Pakistan, born 26 October 1980.  The  entrepreneur  ground  was  not
    pursued before us: permission was given in the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that the judge had found the appellant had achieved the necessary
    length of lawful residence to benefit from paragraph 276B of the Rules,
    the relevant part of which follows.

         'The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  are
         that:

             (i)    (a) he has had at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence in the United Kingdom.

             (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons
             why it would be undesirable for him  to  be  given  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence,  taking  into
             account his:

                  (a) age; and

                  (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  personal  history,  including   character,   conduct,
                  associations and employment record; and

                  (d) domestic circumstances; and

                  (e) compassionate circumstances; and

                  (f) any representations received on the  person's  behalf;
                  ...'

 2. The reasons why the judge did not consider it in  the  public  interest
    for this appellant to have indefinite leave to remain were based on his
    conduct. To follow them,  his  history  needs  to  be  considered.  The
    appellant had been in this country, first as a student, and  then  with
    leave to remain as a post-study work migrant till 20 March 2014. On  17
    March last year he applied for leave to remain as an entrepreneur;  but
    he could not show the necessary  funds,  and  so  his  application  was
    refused on 24 April. The appellant nevertheless appealed,  but  without
    citing any error in the decision  on  the  funding  point,  or  on  the
    entrepreneur refusal at all; he also relied on Article 8, on the  basis
    that his right to a private life required him to be allowed  to  pursue
    his business ambitions in this country.

 3. This appeal gave the appellant leave to  remain  under  s.  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, so long as it was pending; and by 5  December  he
    had been here lawfully for ten years. The judge accepted  that  he  had
    the continuity of residence he needed, and, following MU ('statement of
    additional grounds'; long residence; discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT
    442 (IAC) that he could qualify on that basis by way of  leave  pending
    appeal.

 4. However, it is worth looking at what actually happened in MU. This  can
    be seen from paragraph 11. Judge McKee found that:

         "... the  blatant  deception  practised  by  the  appellant,  which
         triggered a  mandatory  refusal  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  his
         application for further leave, justifies refusing  his  application
         for indefinite leave under paragraph 276D.  That the appellant  was
         only able to raise the 'Ten-Year Rule' in the first  place  because
         his appeal against  the  mandatory  refusal  took  so  long  to  be
         resolved, is also a circumstance which is  not  irrelevant  to  the
         exercise of the discretion under rule 276B."

 5. In the present case, Judge Christopher Woolley found, in a particularly
    clear and robust decision, for reasons  he  gave  on  the  facts,  that
    (paragraph 29) at no time did this appellant have  any  expectation  of
    the funds he needed; but he put in a hopeless entrepreneur application,
    simply to prolong his stay in this country. He went  on  to  put  in  a
    hopeless appeal, against advice he had been given as  to  the  grounds,
    again for that sole purpose.

 6. At paragraph 30 Judge Woolley went on to find that  the  appellant  had
    manipulated both the application and the appeal process,  in  order  to
    manufacture a period of  lawful  leave,  when  he  could  have  had  no
    expectation of any further lawful leave being granted  when  his  post-
    study work migrant leave ran out on 20 March 2014.  The  judge  pointed
    out that it was no answer to this point for the appellant to  say  that
    he had raised Article 8 grounds on his appeal: he  could  have  applied
    for leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  before  his  post-study  work
    migrant leave ran out, if he had genuinely thought himself entitled  to
    it.

 7. It is interesting to read this appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, drafted by Mr Zane Malik, who had been counsel for  the
    appellant in MU.  Mr Malik argues at paragraph 11 that Judge  Woolley's
    approach "... stands to undermine the ratio of this authority [MU]  ...
    There must be something more than mere  residence  [sci.  reliance]  on
    section 3C of the 1971 Act to disqualify an Appellant  under  Paragraph
    276B (ii) of  the Immigration Rules." He points out that the  appellant
    in MU was disqualified by his reliance  on  a  bogus  qualification  to
    support his leave application.

 8. At paragraph 12 Mr Malik suggests that, since s. 3C leave is automatic,
    it could not be right for Judge Woolley to say that this appellant  had
    'manufactured' it for himself, since it was simply part of a  statutory
    scheme. He makes a further point at paragraph 13, which  I  shall  deal
    with in due course. Mr  Balroop  essentially  stood  by  these  grounds
    before us.

 9. Dealing first with Mr Malik's points on this appellant's achieving  ten
    years' stay by way of the entrepreneur application  and  appeal,  there
    was indeed  on  Judge  Woolley's  findings  something  more  than  mere
    reliance on s. 3C: he had found that this  appellant  had  deliberately
    set out to clock up the necessary period on the basis of an application
    and an appeal, which he must have known all along were hopeless,  since
    he never had any expectation  of  the  necessary  funding.  Mr  Balroop
    suggested that this process could not be  regarded  as  so  heinous  as
    relying on a false document, as in MU.

10. That may be a question of opinion; but in either  case,  the  appellant
    had set out to achieve a result to which he knew he was  not  entitled,
    by what amounted to a false representation that he was. We  invited  Mr
    Balroop to suggest any difference in  principle,  rather  than  on  the
    facts in themselves, which would justify distinguishing what we  regard
    as the principle set out in MU; but he was unable to do so.

11. In our view, there was a clear statement of principle in  MU,  part  of
    the ratio, even if not included in the judicial head-note, which can be
    re-stated in  this  way:  if  an  appellant  has  achieved  ten  years'
    residence by way of s. 3C leave, through  misconduct  which  is  to  be
    taken account of under paragraph 276B (ii), and in particular (c), then
    it may be undesirable in the  public  interest  for  him  to  be  given
    indefinite leave to remain.

12. The rest of paragraph 276B (ii) should of course be considered; but  Mr
    Balroop did not pursue before us any suggestion  that  Judge  Woolley's
    decision was inadequate for that reason. It would in any case have been
    hard for him to pursue  Mr  Malik's  points  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    grounds, undeveloped in any detail, but for what Mr Malik describes  as
    the fact that this appellant had an  unblemished  immigration  history,
    which has at least to be seen in the light of Judge Woolley's  findings
    about how he tried his best to manipulate the system.

13. In the present case,  Judge  Woolley  very  clearly,  and  for  reasons
    already explained,  found  that  this  appellant  had  been  guilty  of
    misconduct, which made it undesirable in the public interest for him to
    be given indefinite leave to remain. That  decision  in  our  view  was
    fully in accordance with MU, and with general principle; so we turn  to
    Mr Malik's other point, raised at paragraph 13 of the grounds.

14. This was to the effect that  Judge  Woolley  had  not  found  that  the
    appellant's Article 8  claim  was  hopeless  or  abusive;  and  he  was
    entitled to raise it, to resist his removal from this country. So  far,
    that is literally correct, and the judge  had  indeed  dealt  with  the
    Article 8 claim on its merits, and in some detail, at paragraphs  35  -
    42, in a way of which no complaint is made.

15. This point however quite ignores what Judge Woolley had  actually  said
    about the relevance of the appellant's Article 8 claim, in  considering
    how far his acquisition of ten years' residence could  be  regarded  as
    legitimate reliance on, rather than abuse of the law. We have set  that
    out at 6; as the judge said, if the appellant  had  thought  he  had  a
    genuine Article 8 claim, likely to succeed on its merits on his private
    and family life, then there was nothing to stop his raising it  in  the
    proper way, by making a claim outside the Rules (but for which there is
    an established process, known as an FLR  (O)  application)  before  his
    post-study work migrant leave ran out.

16. Clearly Judge Woolley found that the appellant did not do that, because
    he wanted to prolong his stay till  he  could  make  a  long  residence
    claim. That is why he regarded the  way  in  which  the  appellant  had
    stayed on with s. 3C leave, not  only  by  appealing  the  entrepreneur
    refusal, but by raising Article 8, as misconduct in terms of  paragraph
    276B (ii) (c). In our judgment he was entitled to take that  view,  and
    to decide the case as he did.

Appeal
                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
