
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21912/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd March 2014                               |On 10th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            muhammad danish ahmed
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs T. White, Counsel instructed by Adams Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Muhammad Danish Ahmed is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  the  18th
    April 1987. He was the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and  it
    is convenient if I continue refer to him throughout  as  the  Appellant
    for the remainder of this determination.

 2. He had first entered the United Kingdom on 3rd March 2008 with leave as
    a student and had subsequently  been  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student thereafter until 31st July 2010.  On 3rd  August  2010  he  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  until
    28th June 2012.

 3. On the 22nd March 2012 he made a  combined  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant  and
    for a biometric residence permit.  The application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 25th September 2012 under paragraph 245FD  and  a
    decision was made to remove the Respondent by way of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The basis for that refusal was that he had made his  application  under
    Tier 1 on 22nd March 2012 however from verifying the date of award  the
    documentation provided at that time confirmed the date of the award was
    the 11th April 2012.  The decision cited the Upper Tribunal decision of
    NO (Post-Study Work - award needed  by  date  of  application)  Nigeria
    [2008] UKIAT 0054  that  the  applicant  must  have  been  awarded  the
    qualification at the date of the application and that  the  Immigration
    Rules state that the date of the award must be within the twelve months
    directly prior to the date of the application and the date of the award
    is after that date.   The  claimed  points  under  Appendix  B  English
    language were refused due to the failure to meet  the  requirement  for
    the eligible award.

 5. The Appellant appealed that decision and it came before the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Edwards) sitting at  Manchester  on  the  7th  December
    2012.  In a determination promulgated on 13th December 2012 and  having
    heard the evidence of the Appellant,  he  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    judge noted at paragraph 15 that the point in issue in the appeal was a
    "very narrow one" in that it concerned whether or not the Appellant had
    been awarded his relevant qualification  no  more  than  twelve  months
    before the date of his application.  At paragraph  15  the  judge  made
    reference to the Appellant's course of study namely an  MBA  at  Kaplan
    Financial, the degree to  be  awarded  by  the  Liverpool  John  Moores
    University.  The Appellant had produced the letter dated 13th  February
    2012 stating that the completion/award date was 11th February 2012  and
    that the graduation ceremony would be on 11th July 2012.  It went on to
    say that he  had  completed  his  course  successfully,  and  that  his
    certificate and transcript would be awarded "in the next three to  four
    weeks".  The judge made reference to a certificate that was dated  11th
    April 2012 and emails that were sent from the  university  to  UKBA  in
    August 2012.  Thus the judge found the degree  was  not  awarded  until
    11th April 2012 and not on either 11th or 13th February 2012.  Applying
    the decision of the Tribunal in NO, he found that the  Appellant  could
    not succeed.

 6. However, in respect of the removal direction under Section  47  of  the
    2006 Act, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not deal  with  this  issue
    and did not state that that was an unlawful decision. Thus he dismissed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 7. Following the promulgation of the determination, the  Appellant  sought
    permission to appeal. Permission was refused by  Designated  FTT  Judge
    Manuell on the 9th January 2013 but on 13th  February  2013  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.

 8. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal (Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McClure) on the 9th May 2013.  In a determination promulgated  on
    the 13th May 2013 he found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law.   His  analysis  is  set  out  at  paragraphs  5  to  10  of   the
    determination that in the light of the decision of  Khatel  and  Others
    [2013] UKUT 0044 the judge was wrong to proceed on the basis  that  the
    claimant had to have obtained his eligible award prior to the date when
    he lodged his application with the UKBA and that provided Mr Ahmed  had
    obtained his degree before  the  date  of  decision  and  had  provided
    evidence of this before the date of decision, the award could have been
    taken into account.  He therefore found there was an error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and allowed  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules. He noted that the judge had not dealt  with  the
    S47 decision and that the refusal to vary the claimant's leave was  not
    in accordance with the law (at [11]).

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal against the determination of the Upper Tribunal.   At  the  time
    she did so, permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been
    granted by the Upper Tribunal in respect of the decision in Khatel  and
    Others.  The Secretary of State's grounds of application reiterated the
    critique of Khatel contained in the grounds  of  application  that  had
    been submitted to the Court of Appeal.

10. As set out in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim  and  Others
    (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610(IAC) at paragraphs  3-
    5, 200 applications for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    were made by the Secretary of State  in respect  of  determinations  of
    the Upper Tribunal, allowing  appeals (or dismissing  the  Respondent's
    appeals) on the basis of Khatel.  It appears that a significant  number
    of applications for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    made by the Secretary of State  against  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, applying Khatel.

11. Since it was known that permission to appeal in Khatel had been granted
    (with arrangements made for the Court of Appeal to expedite the hearing
    in  that  court),  it  was  considered  appropriate  to  consider   the
    Respondent's permission applications once the judgments of the Court of
    Appeal became known.

12. On 25th June 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary of State's
    appeal against the Upper Tribunal's determinations in  Khatel  and  the
    cases of three other applicants: Raju and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
    754.

13. As a result, the Tribunal gave directions in the cases before it  where
    the Respondent had applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The Tribunal did so pursuant to Rule 45(1)(b) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "45.-(1)      On receiving an application for permission to  appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision  in  accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-




                             ...


                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a  material  effect  on  the
                      decision."

14. The Upper Tribunal's directions indicated  that  it  proposed,  in  the
    light of Raju, to review the determinations of the Upper Tribunal,  set
    them aside and re-make the decisions in the appeals by dismissing them.
     The directions made plain that the Appellants would be (or continue to
    be) successful in their  appeals  against  removal  decisions  made  in
    respect  of  them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  This was  because  those
    decisions were unlawful (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512).

15. Further directions were sent out by the Upper Tribunal as  follows:  On
    21st January 2014, the Tribunal  issued  directions  in  the  following
    terms:


    1.   Any directions previously given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  these
         proceedings are hereby revoked.


    2.   The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing in the Upper
         Tribunal on the basis that the issues  to  be  considered  at  that
         hearing will be as follows:


         (a)  whether the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  made  by
             reference to the determination in  Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;
             effect of continuing application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC),
             should be set aside in light of the judgment of the  Court  of
             Appeal in Raju and Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754 (as to  which,  see  Nasim  and
             Others (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?)  [2013]  UKUT  00610
             (IAC));


         (b)  if so, whether there is an error of law in  the  determination
             of the First-tier Tribunal, such that the determination should
             be set aside; and


         (c)  if so, how the decision in the appeal against the  immigration
             decisions should be re-made (see Nasim and Others).


    3.   The party who was the Appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         directed to serve on the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent,  no
         later than seven days before the forthcoming hearing,  all  written
         submissions and written evidence (including witness statements)  on
         the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, upon which they  will  seek  to
         rely at that hearing (where necessary, complying with  Rule  15(2A)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

16. In compliance with those  directions  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    further evidence and submissions  were  received  by  the  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Appellant Mr Ahmed.

17. Thus the appeal was listed  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Mrs  White,
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the Appellant and the Secretary of  State
    was represented by Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer.

18. A skeleton argument had been produced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in response to directions  from  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  that
    skeleton argument, it set out  the  history  recited  above.   It  made
    reference to the emails that were produced  on  7th  August  2012  from
    Liverpool John Moores University (the  awarding  body)  at  E1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle informing UKBA that the Appellant's  MBA  had  been
    awarded on 11th April 2012.  The skeleton argument noted that there had
    been legal action taken against the university  who  had  informed  the
    Appellant that the date of the award was in fact 16th March 2012  which
    would make his application successful, if it  were  true  and  had  the
    Secretary of State been notified that it was the case before 6th  April
    2012.  The skeleton argument sets out  that  the  Appellant  was  first
    notified that the date of the award was 16th March 2012 and that was in
    a letter dated 3rd December 2012,  three  months  after  the  decision.
    Therefore the notification of the date of the  award  is  3rd  December
    rather than 16th March.  It is further submitted  that  the  university
    delayed in awarding the  Appellant  his  qualification  and  thus  they
    retrospectively changed the date of the award and that at the  date  of
    the application the degree had not been awarded as it was  not  awarded
    until 11th April 2012.  The skeleton argument also makes  reference  to
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act.

19. In her oral submissions Ms Isherwood submitted that there was an  error
    of law in the determination of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McClure
    because it had been decided  in  the  light  of  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in Khatel and Others  (Section  85A  -  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) and  that  in  the  light  of  the
    decision of Raju and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754  that  he  could
    not have allowed the appeal on the basis set out in the  determination.
    She further relied upon the decision of Nasim and Others (Raju: reasons
    not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 610 (IAC) at paragraph 88 of that  decision
    that Raju should be followed.  Therefore there was a material error  of
    law in the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure.

20. Ms Isherwood made reference to the Appellant's arguments set out in Mrs
    White's skeleton argument noting that his case was  that  the  evidence
    presented demonstrated that the decision of Judge McClure was right but
    for the wrong reason.  She submitted that the judge did get it wrong by
    applying the wrong legal principle.  She  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    argument was that at the time  of  the  decision,  the  judge  did  not
    consider the other arguments that were to be advanced on his behalf and
    therefore the decision should be set  aside.  However  that  could  not
    assist the appellant because of Section 85A of the  2002  Act  and  the
    documents from the University could not be adduced.

21. Mrs White had produced a helpful  skeleton  argument  for  the  hearing
    which she relied upon.  In that skeleton argument she made reference to
    the bundles of documentation that  had  been  provided  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The skeleton argument  at  paragraph  4  accepted  that  the
    application made by the Secretary of State  had been made in time.   At
    paragraph 5 it made reference to Rule 45 and the practice of  reviewing
    a decision on receipt of an application for permission to  appeal.   In
    her submission, she stated that the  Tribunal  should  not  reopen  the
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure.  She  stated  that  it
    was clear that the judge at the time  of  the  hearing  had  based  his
    decision solely on the decision in Khatel and  on  the  basis  that  he
    would have succeeded even if the qualification  was  awarded  in  April
    (although that was in dispute) and therefore it was  not  inappropriate
    to decide the case in the Appellant's favour on the principal  set  out
    in Khatel.  Thus it became immaterial as to whether  the  date  of  the
    award was 16th March, which is what the Appellant had  stated,  because
    the Appellant would have succeeded in the case of Khatel in any  event.
    The relevance of Khatel was thought to be that the application was made
    on 22nd March 2012 but the Appellant did not obtain  his  qualification
    until April 2012 after the application but before the decision.  Khatel
    said that in those circumstances he would be entitled to the points  he
    claimed for the date of his award.  As she stated  Raju  held  that  he
    would not be so entitled.

22. Mrs White submitted however, that was  not  the  only,  or  indeed  the
    primary, issue in the Appellant's appeal.  In the evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, including a supplementary witness statement and  bundle
    of documentation, it was asserted by the Appellant that the information
    submitted to the Secretary of State concerning the date  of  his  award
    was in fact incorrect and had been acknowledged to be incorrect by both
    the teaching college (Kaplan Financial Limited) and the awarding  body,
    namely Liverpool John Moores University.  Mrs White made  reference  to
    the documentation before the Tribunal including email exchanges between
    the Appellant and the teaching college, and a formal  letter  from  the
    university which confirmed that the planned assessment board  had  been
    delayed and that the date of the award was 16th March  2012,  which  is
    before the application was made.   The  date  of  the  letter  was  3rd
    December 2012 (see page 21 of the bundle) noting  that  his  award  was
    indeed made on 16th March 2012 and that this was a  letter  written  by
    the university registrar.   The  Tribunal  was  also  referred  to  the
    Appellant's grounds to the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 11 in support of
    this argument.  Since the hearing of the appeal on 9th May 2013,  there
    was further evidence from the university acknowledging that the date of
    the award was indeed 16th March 2012.  They have since agreed  (without
    prejudice) to provide a sum of money of �4,200.  It is  submitted  that
    that is  evidence  that  a  mistake  of  fact  had  been  made  by  the
    university.

23. Mrs White  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  in  her  oral  submissions
    acknowledged that the letter of 3rd December from  the  university  was
    not before the First-tier Tribunal.  As the skeleton  argument  states,
    that was no doubt because the argument  then  being  advanced  was  the
    effective date of the award was in February relying on the letter dated
    13th February 2012.  Nonetheless, the argument  that  was  subsequently
    put before the Upper Tribunal was also put forward in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, albeit not with excessive clarity.   However  as  the  skeleton
    argument concedes, notification of the date of the award must  be  from
    the awarding institution and not the teaching institution (as  set  out
    in the decision of Nasim (as cited) at paragraph 80).  Thus she submits
    there were two separate arguments, other than that in Khatel, raised by
    the Appellant to say why his appeal should succeed.  They were there to
    be advanced if necessary but those arguments had  not  been  addressed.
    Thus she submitted that if a review under Rule  45  took  place  and  a
    substitution of a decision dismissing the appeal  was  made,  it  would
    prevent those  arguments  from  ever  being  addressed.   Although  she
    accepted that one of the  arguments  was  wrong,  the  other  argument,
    relating to the fact that the university had subsequently  stated  that
    the date of the award had been wrongly given and that it was 16th March
    2012, was still an argument that would be unresolved.  Thus she said in
    her oral submissions, the court, when looking at this issue should have
    an eye as to what is fair as an overriding concept and that he was  not
    able to advance an argument if the decision is set aside and dismissed.

24. She further submitted that the decision of Nasim did not apply to  this
    Appellant because, with the exception of the fourteenth Appellant,  all
    the principal Appellants in the case of Nasim had  been  awarded  their
    qualifications after the dates of their  applications  therefore  their
    cases fell squarely within Khatel and Raju whereas this  Appellant  did
    not because he was awarded his qualification before  the  date  of  his
    application according to the documentation from the university.

25. In her oral submissions, Mrs White submitted that the  Tribunal  should
    exercise justice and fairness but also common sense and that given  the
    history of the case, not to reopen the decision, when  clear  from  the
    facts that to do so would be entirely unfair such a decision should not
    be taken.  The Appellant, she reiterated, would not be able to put  his
    case if the decision set the decision aside and that the most important
    argument before the Upper Tribunal had not been argued.   She  referred
    the Tribunal to paragraph 11 of her skeleton argument noting  that  the
    documentation now produced on behalf of the Appellant was that  he  had
    been  awarded  his  degree  by  the  university  before  he  made   his
    application and that he had been prevented from demonstrating this as a
    result of the delay from the university rather than any  fault  of  his
    own and that the university  had  later  provided  information  to  the
    respondent about the date of his award which they now themselves stated
    was wrong.  Thus she  submitted,  the  Upper  Tribunal  got  the  right
    answer, even if it was for the wrong reason.

26. In her oral submissions she made reference to paragraph  11  and  where
    the affect of the provisions of  Section  85A  of  the  2002  Act  were
    referred to.   She  stated  that  this  prevented  the  Appellant  from
    adducing any new evidence that was not before  the  Respondent  at  the
    date of the decision, to prove his entitlement to points  as  clarified
    in the decision of Nasim at paragraph 76 but that it  did  not  prevent
    the consideration of that evidence for other purposes, including  human
    rights.  The combination of the factors raised  potential  problems  of
    fairness, justice and disproportionate interference with  private  life
    for the Appellant and thus  if  that  was  added  to  the  prospect  of
    dismissal of his appeal, without further hearing, because the  decision
    on his appeal focused on only one of his  arguments  and  the  approach
    that had been taken had since been overruled in  a  separate  case  (in
    this case Raju) the apparent injustice appears very great indeed.

27. Thus she submitted that it had  not  been  shown  that  had  Raju  been
    decided before this appeal was heard in the UT, it  would  have  had  a
    material effect on  the  decision.   She  stated  that  it  would  have
    affected  the  reasoning,  and  would  have  forced  attention  on  the
    Appellant's other Grounds of Appeal, but does not mean that it could or
    would have affected the decision.  It was irrelevant to the real  issue
    as to whether or not the Appellant's  degree  was  awarded  before  his
    application.  Thus she submitted, the  necessary  preconditions  for  a
    review were not met.  The Appellant was not arguing that, despite  Raju
    he should succeed with a qualification awarded  after  his  application
    because it was  his  case  that  his  degree  was  awarded  before  his
    application thus on that basis, like the fourteenth Appellant in Nasim,
    the judgment in Raju could not affect the correctness of  the  original
    UT decision.

28. In the alternative, it was submitted that as a matter of discretion the
    Upper Tribunal should not review  the  decision,  or  if  the  Tribunal
    decided to do so, should take no action on it.  At paragraph 13, it was
    submitted that what mattered was that the Appellant should not find his
    appeal now dismissed because, understandably at the time, only  one  of
    his arguments was considered and that has  since  been  overruled.   He
    would have a strong sense of injustice  from  an  outcome  which  meant
    that, although he was in fact awarded his degree in time,  he  was  not
    allowed to prove that or even to argue the case.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    has a discretion and it should be exercised in  his  favour.   In  this
    context, in her oral submissions she reminded  the  Tribunal  that  the
    case had been ongoing since 2012 and that the  university  had  made  a
    factual mistake and that this had led to the Appellant having  to  wait
    for an opportunity for that to be dealt with.  She submitted  that  had
    the Deputy Judge allowed the appeal under the  contrary  argument  then
    the Appellant would not be  in  the  position  that  he  currently  is.
    However, the judge decided it upon a principle which is  now  found  to
    not be the case  and  there  is  a  "glaring  unfairness"  in  such  an
    approach.  She submitted that this was a case that needs to  be  looked
    at by the Tribunal holistically when looking at the issue of fairness.

29. Towards the end of her submissions, the Appellant indicated  he  wished
    to give some instructions to Mrs White and thus the Tribunal  gave  the
    parties time to do so.  Upon resuming her submissions, Mrs White stated
    that her client wished to reiterate the point that he had been  in  the
    United Kingdom legally and had  been  studying  and  had  obtained  his
    qualification as  a  chartered  accountant.   She  submitted  that  her
    overriding argument was that the court should not reopen  the  decision
    in the first place  and  that  it  had  been  properly  stated  by  the
    university that the degree was awarded on 16th  March  2012  which  was
    before the date of the application and that the  case  fell  under  the
    common law duty of fairness thus the case should not be reopened.

30. By way of reply Ms Isherwood  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that the Appellant only commenced enquiries in  October  2012
    which was after the decision  in  September.   She  conceded  that  the
    Appellant was in an unfortunate position that he did not meet the Rules
    and whilst there were unusual circumstances in this case, he could  not
    succeed.  In respect of the decision of the Tribunal in  Nasim  (2)  in
    Article 8 terms, the Appellant came as a student and had no  legitimate
    expectation to remain and there is no unfairness  in  this  case.   She
    made the point that the Appellant did not inform the Respondent that he
    had obtained his date of award in March before the  date  of  decision.
    She further submitted that much emphasis had been placed on  Article  8
    that the Appellant had no legitimate expectation to be entitled to stay
    and it cannot be argued that because friends  had  been  granted  visas
    that he should be granted a visa.  He had been in the United Kingdom on
    3C leave and there has been no evidence about what he has been doing in
    the interim.  She posed the question as to how had the  Appellant  been
    unfairly treated?  The decision of Nasim (2) demonstrated that  it  was
    insufficient to enter the United Kingdom as a student and to argue that
    you would be entitled to stay due to the award being granted after  the
    date of the application.

31. Mrs White, wished to reiterate at  the  conclusion  of  Ms  Isherwood's
    submissions, that the Appellant's case did not fall  within  the  Nasim
    category and that it would not be right  to  overturn  Judge  McClure's
    decision.  She submitted that the university had got it wrong and  that
    was crucial when looking at the issue of fairness and that it was not a
    separate legal matter.  She  referred  the  Tribunal  to  the  relevant
    letters, both from the awarding body namely the  university  making  it
    clear that the awarding date was 16th March 2012.

32. At the conclusion of the submissions, I indicated to the  parties  that
    whilst I had not made a decision upon the issues raised by the parties,
    that it would be of assistance to hear  evidence  from  Mr  Ahmed  now,
    rather than at a later stage if it were thought to be necessary so that
    there would not be any further delay.  Both parties were in agreement.

33. Mr Ahmed gave evidence and confirmed that the statements  that  he  had
    filed before the Tribunal and their  contents  were  true.   Mrs  White
    asked him what further information he would wish to give to  the  court
    and he stated that he had been in the United Kingdom for  a  period  of
    six years and been in litigation for two years and that he had  studied
    accountancy and had been awarded an MBA.  He stated that  it  had  been
    out of his control and out of his  hands  (concerning  the  information
    about the date of the award) and that the facts had not been considered
    by the judge.  He further stated that he wished to  move  on  with  his
    life and that there had been an error made by the university.

34. In cross-examination he was asked to clarify if he  had  now  become  a
    chartered accountant.  He said that he had.  He  said  he  believed  an
    error had been made by the university and that he should succeed in his
    appeal.  He said that he was not working at the  moment  but  had  been
    working when his appeal was allowed but following this had  to  resign.
    He explained why namely that the  employer  was  asking  for  leave  to
    remain and he lost his job when the Secretary of State appealed  as  he
    could not give his employers a visa and they could not wait.   He  said
    that on his student visa he did have permission to work.  He said  that
    he had some family in the United Kingdom  namely  his  uncle,  maternal
    uncle, aunts and cousins and he had his father in Pakistan.

35. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my determination.

Analysis and Discussion:

36. I have carefully considered  the  competing  submissions  made  by  the
    parties and the documentation relied upon and I have been ably assisted
    by both advocates in advancing their respective  cases  before  me.   I
    should also observe that I accept the  factual  account  given  by  the
    Appellant concerning the events as they have unfolded.

37. I begin my assessment of this appeal by noting that  the  circumstances
    of this appeal are highly unusual.  These circumstances it is said, are
    very different from the Appellants in the decision  of  Raju  and  also
    from the Appellants in Nasim who sought  to  argue  their  cases  on  a
    different footing.  The principal argument advanced  by  Mrs  White  on
    behalf of the Appellant is that the Tribunal should not set  aside  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal for the reasons set out in the  skeleton
    argument  and  in  the  preceding  paragraphs.   The  thrust  of  those
    submissions were to the effect that to do so would  be  unfair  to  the
    Appellant and would preclude him from  advancing  the  other  arguments
    that he had sought to put before the Upper Tribunal but which  had  not
    been decided  upon  because  the  case  of  Khatel  at  that  time  was
    determinative and  thus  it  was  unnecessary  to  consider  the  other
    arguments.  Thus it is submitted that there  was  a  further  argument,
    other than that dependent upon Khatel  as  to  why  his  appeal  should
    succeed and those arguments have not been addressed and that the review
    and substitution of a decision dismissing the appeal would prevent them
    from ever being addressed.  In this case, she submits, it is clear from
    the documents now produced that the  Appellant  had  been  awarded  his
    degree by the  university  before  he  made  his  application  and  was
    prevented from proving this as a  result  of  the  delay  made  by  the
    university  rather  than  any  fault  through  his  own  and  that  the
    university have provided information about the date of his award to the
    Respondent which they now themselves say was a mistake in  fact.   Thus
    the Tribunal got the right answer, even if it was for the wrong reason.

38. I have therefore considered the power of the Tribunal to set aside  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.  The history recited  earlier  in  this
    determination demonstrates that before  this  case  was  listed  for  a
    hearing to consider the setting aside under Rule 45, the  Secretary  of
    State had applied for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  The
    relevant legislation set out in the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 in conjunction with the Tribunal  procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 indicate that it is within the  jurisdiction  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside its decision in particular limited circumstances.
     Those are set out in Section 10(4)(c) and Rules  45  and  46.   It  is
    plain that a decision on whether to exercise such  a  power  must  take
    place before any consideration of whether to grant permission to appeal
    to the Court of Appeal.  Rule 45(1) sets out  that  upon  receiving  an
    application for permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal may review its
    decision in accordance with Rule 46.  If  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  is  set  aside,  then  there  is  no  longer  any  basis  for
    considering whether to grant permission to appeal.

39. Rule 45(1)(a) provides that the Upper Tribunal may review a decision of
    the Upper Tribunal if "since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has
    made a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and  which,  had
    it been made before the Upper Tribunal's decision,  could  have  had  a
    material affect on the decision."   It  is  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that since the Upper Tribunal decision in Khatel, upon which
    the appeal of this Appellant was allowed, there has been a judgment  in
    Raju and Others which constitutes binding  Court  of  Appeal  authority
    overturning the decision in Khatel.  It seems to me that  the  relevant
    part of that provision is the discretion given to the Upper Tribunal in
    reviewing an earlier decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  and  whether  it
    would have had "a material effect on the decision".

40. In this context as Rule 45 sets out, the Upper Tribunal  may  review  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal if "since the Upper Tribunal's decision,
    a court has made a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal, and
    which, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision,  could
    have had a material effect on the  decision."   The  Appellant  submits
    that the decision in Raju and Others, whilst a binding Court of  Appeal
    authority, does not have a material effect on the decision made by  the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the Tribunal should not set aside the decision.

41. I am satisfied that there is jurisdiction to consider  whether  to  set
    aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal and that it is  in  accordance
    with the overriding objective of the Procedure Rules to deal with cases
    justly and fairly (see Rule 4).  The procedure that has been adopted by
    the Tribunal was to notify the parties in advance of the  hearing  that
    it would consider whether to exercise  its  powers  to  set  aside  the
    decision and both parties have had the opportunity to address  this  by
    providing their respective skeleton arguments.

42. The decision of the Upper Tribunal (Deputy UT Judge McClure)  proceeded
    solely on the basis of the decision in Khatel.  It is  plain  from  the
    determination  that  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  solely  on   the
    principles set out in the case of Khatel.  He set out  at  paragraph  7
    the relevant timeline namely that the Appellant made his application on
    22nd March 2012 to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant.   The
    decision was made on 25th September 2012.  At  paragraph  5  the  judge
    made explicit reference to the decision of Khatel noting that the  case
    made the point that an application is not complete until  the  date  of
    decision.  The judge considered the evidence in the refusal  letter  at
    paragraph [8] noting

         "The Appellant had been refused  the  points  because  he  had  not
         submitted his qualification with the initial  application  on  22nd
         March 2012.  However an examination of the refusal letter makes the
         point that the eligible qualification was obtained in the middle of
         April  2012  and   was   submitted.    Accordingly   the   eligible
         qualification was submitted to the Secretary of State prior to  the
         decision being taken."

43. And at paragraph 9 the judge stated:-

         "As the Appellant had submitted the qualification in April 2012  to
         the Secretary of State the principles set out in the case law cited
         come into play.  As the application was  not  completed  until  the
         date of decision in September the Secretary of State did  have  the
         required qualification prior to the date of decision and  prior  to
         the completion of the  application.   In  those  circumstances  the
         Appellant had submitted the qualification and was  entitled  to  15
         points under attributes - date of obtaining eligible award  and  to
         10 points under English language."

    Thus he allowed the appeal.

44. The point made by Mrs White is that the judge  based  the  decision  on
    Khatel  and  did  not  consider  any  other  argument.   This  was  not
    surprising as Khatel was determinative of the issue in the  Appellant's
    favour.  However she goes on to submit that this was not the only issue
    in the appeal and that there were two arguments to be  advanced  before
    the Upper Tribunal in May 2013 other than those based on  Khatel.   The
    first argument is that  the  effective  date  of  the  award  was  11th
    February 2012 (relying on the letter from Kaplan Finance  Limited  (the
    Appellant's college)).  That letter stated that the award date was 11th
    February 2012 and noted that a transcript and certificate would be made
    available shortly.  This was advanced in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  (see
    paragraphs 4 and 8).  However in the skeleton argument prepared by  Mrs
    White at paragraph 9, she concedes that this could not  succeed  before
    the Tribunal because the notification of the award is dependent on  the
    awarding institution and not the teaching  institution  (see  table  10
    annex A attributes paragraphs 69-70 and also the decision of  Nasim  at
    paragraph 80).

45. This leaves the second ground;  the  documentary  evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal  that the information provided to UKBA in the  email  of
    7th August 2012, ( that the date of the award was 11th April 2012)  was
    incorrect  and  was  acknowledged  to  be  incorrect  by  the  teaching
    institution and the awarding body, Liverpool John Moores University and
    that the evidence set out in a letter from  the  university  dated  3rd
    December 2012, in conjunction with the emails at the date of the  award
    was 16th March 2012 and therefore  before  the  application  was  made.
    Therefore she submits that the Appellant had been awarded his degree by
    the university before he made his application and that he was unable to
    show this as a result of the delay of the university  rather  than  any
    fault of his own.  Thus it is submitted that the Upper Tribunal got the
    right answer even if it was for the wrong reason.

46. In those circumstances she submitted that it would not be right for the
    Upper Tribunal to exercise its discretion to  set  aside  the  decision
    because firstly, this argument was not reliant on Khatel principles, it
    had not been addressed by Judge McClure and by substituting a  decision
    to dismiss the appeal would prevent such an argument  from  ever  being
    addressed.  The second point made is that the effect of the  provisions
    of Section 85A of the 2002 Act prevents the Appellant from adducing new
    evidence (although not for human rights) and the combination  of  those
    factors,   raise   problems   of   fairness   and   justice   and   the
    disproportionate interference with the private life of the Appellant.

47. The argument at paragraph 11 of the skeleton argument and  advanced  in
    her oral submissions was that  if  the  appeal  was  dismissed  without
    further hearing it would be unfair because the hearing before the Upper
    Tribunal focused on only one of the  arguments.   She  also  makes  the
    point that it has not been shown that the decision in Raju had it  been
    decided before the appeal would have had any  material  effect  on  the
    decision and that Raju was irrelevant to the real issue of  whether  or
    not the Appellant's degree  was  awarded  before  the  application  and
    therefore the judgment in Raju, or Nasim cannot affect the  correctness
    of the Upper Tribunal decision because the Appellant  was  not  arguing
    that despite Raju he should succeed  but  that  his  qualification  was
    awarded before he made his application.

48. To consider the arguments it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  factual
    background, the timelines involved  and  the  evidence  produced.   The
    Appellant made the Tier 1 application on 22nd March 2012.  He  provided
    evidence of the application, that he had passed  his  dissertation  and
    that he would be awarded his qualification on 11th February  2012.   An
    email  was  sent  on  10th  February  2012  confirming  that   he   had
    successfully completed his MBA and that  he  would  be  issued  with  a
    degree later.  Those emails stated that his results board took place on
    3rd February and that he had passed the dissertation and the transcript
    would be available "in the next four to six weeks".  The  letter  dated
    11th February 2012 came from Kaplan Financial  Services  (the  teaching
    institution).  It  is  accepted  that  this  evidence  could  not  have
    satisfied table 10 of Appendix A paragraph 70 as  it  did  not  emanate
    from the awarding institution.  In any event,  prior  to  the  decision
    being  taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  further  enquiries   were
    undertaken by the UKBA officials to  clarify  the  date  of  the  award
    before making such a decision.  The email was sent on 7th August and  a
    reply was received on the same day from the university confirming  that
    the award was made on 11th April 2012.  Following  this,  the  decision
    was made by the Secretary of State on 25th September 2012 refusing  the
    application  based  on  the  information  supplied  by  the  university
    themselves and in conjunction with  the  information  supplied  by  the
    Appellant that the date of the award was 11th April 2012.

49. The Grounds of Appeal issued by the Appellant on 8th October 2010  sets
    out the following;

      i) At paragraph 4, the letter from the Tier 4 Sponsor states the  date
         of the award was 11th February 2012 (page 21  of  the  bundle)  not
         11th April 2012.

     ii) At paragraph 5 it reiterates  this  and  that  the  college  letter
         issued on 11th February 2012  gives  written  notification  of  the
         award of his qualification.

50. At this stage there is no reference to any other information  from  the
    university.

51. In the witness statement for the purposes of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in December 2012, some three months after the refusal, there is
    no reference to any other information from the university that the date
    was given incorrectly.  Indeed the Appellant produced  a  copy  of  the
    certificate in which it is stated:-

         "This is to certify that Muhammad Ahmed Danish has been awarded the
         degree of the masters in business administration dated  11th  April
         2012."

    Consequently the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on the  basis
    of the law as it then was and on a finding that the date of  the  award
    was 11th April 2012.  The Appellant therefore not demonstrating that he
    had been awarded his qualification in the preceding twelve months which
    was required under the Rules.

52. However it is clear that there were two pieces of  evidence  that  were
    not considered by the First-tier Tribunal,  through  no  fault  of  the
    Tribunal Judge.  The first piece of evidence  was  a  letter  from  the
    university dated 3rd December 2012 (see  page  21  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle before the Upper Tribunal in May).  The letter seeks to  clarify
    the dates relating to the meeting of the formal  assessment  board  and
    the conferment of the award.  It further notes that all  the  work  was
    submitted and marked within the  timescales  and  that  the  board  was
    scheduled to take place 3rd February 2012 however  owing  to  technical
    and administration problems the board had to be postponed.  The  letter
    went on to say that the Regulations of the university required a

         "properly constituted assessment board to be held in order to  make
         recommendations for an award.  The postponed assessment  board  was
         subsequently held  on  March  16th  2012  and  recommendations  for
         approval of awards were made to the  university's  academic  board.
         The university can confirm that the award date is, therefore, March
         16th 2012."

    This letter was never put before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  reasons
    are not entirely clear.  The witness statement from the Appellant  (see
    paragraph 3; 6th May 2013) is that the letter was provided to his legal
    representative  but  was  not  used.   He   stated   that   his   legal
    representative refused to show the evidence to  the  Immigration  Judge
    because he deemed it to be "irrelevant and unnecessary".  The Appellant
    stated that he did not understand why he took this course of action but
    that it was a "key piece of evidence  that  was  not  submitted."   Mrs
    White in her skeleton argument (paragraph 9) states  that  it  was  not
    provided no doubt because the argument being  advanced  was  the  award
    date was 11th February 2012.

53. The second piece of evidence is that in  or  about  October  2012,  the
    Appellant contacted Kaplan Financial Services and the university with a
    letter  of  complaint  regarding  the  date  of  the  award  and  email
    correspondence between the Appellant and  the  university  ensued  (see
    pages 5-21 of bundle A; before UT Judge McClure).   Those  emails  were
    never put before the First-tier Tribunal either.

54. The Appellant sought leave for  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision (see pages  32-39  of  bundle  A  before  Deputy  UTJ
    McClure).  Again relying on  a  number  of  matters  however  the  most
    relevant is at paragraph 11 (page 36) setting out that the Secretary of
    State had considered the date of the issue of the  certificate  as  the
    date of the award  which  was  wrong  and  that  the  letter  from  the
    Liverpool St John's University confirmed that the date of the award was
    16th March 2012.  The application  came  before  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manuell on 9th January 2013.  It is plain  from  reading
    the document that the application for  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    admitted.  At paragraph 2 the judge set out the grounds  for  delay  in
    issuing the application  but  he  found  that  there  were  no  special
    circumstances to extend time.  He went on nonetheless to  consider  the
    merits but found at paragraph 3 that the grounds sought  to  "introduce
    new evidence which was not before the judge and which  the  judge  thus
    could not have taken into account."  He  referred  to  the  grounds  as
    "specious" (see paragraph 4) and found  that  the  conclusions  reached
    were  open  to  the  judge  and  were  properly  reasoned.   Thus   the
    application for permission to appeal was not admitted.   The  Appellant
    sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  essentially  the
    same grounds.  This application was not considered until 13th  February
    2013 by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins and by that time the Tribunal  had
    promulgated the decision in Khatel and Others (Section 85A;  effect  of
    continuing application) [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) and  following  that,  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge considered that it was arguable that he  did  have
    the necessary award on 11th April 2012  on  the  basis  of  Khatel  and
    therefore he extended time and gave permission to appeal.

55. It is plain from reading the documents that the permission was  granted
    on the basis that the qualification was  awarded  on  11th  April  2012
    despite it being clear that the argument now before the Upper Tribunal,
    irrespective of Khatel was that there had been  a  mistake  as  to  the
    actual date of the award.  Thus I am satisfied that at the time of  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal there was another argument  that  was
    capable of being advanced but was not because, as Mrs White submits, in
    Khatel was a decision in favour of the Appellant and thus  it  was  not
    necessary for the judge to consider any competing arguments.

56.  Whilst I am satisfied that there was a  competing  argument  that  was
    capable of being advanced, it seems to me that that is quite  different
    from stating that this was an argument capable of succeeding  and  that
    the judge reached the right result but for the wrong reason.  I  should
    state that in this regard the thrust of the  submissions  made  by  Mrs
    White on behalf of the Appellant is that it would be wrong to set aside
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal because an alternative argument  was
    not placed before the Tribunal because of the decision  in  Khatel  and
    that if the decision is set aside it does not give  the  Appellant  the
    ability to advance such alternative argument.  In my judgment, that  is
    not correct. It seems to me that in deciding whether or not there was a
    competing argument that was capable of being advanced  and  whether  it
    was an argument capable of succeeding when  considering  her  principle
    submission that the judge reached the right result but  for  the  wrong
    reason,  necessarily  involves  consideration  of  the  merits  of  the
    alternative argument.  I  have  therefore  looked  and  considered  the
    evidence that was before the Upper Tribunal in May 2013.   I  have  set
    out earlier the documentation that was  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McClure which included the letter of 3rd December 2012,  and  the
    emails between the Appellant and the university from  October  onwards.
    The documents that were before the Upper Tribunal have  been  helpfully
    provided in a bundle and has been marked as "bundle  A".   The  hearing
    before Judge McClure took place on 13th May 2013.  In considering  that
    information, the letter of  3rd  December  2012  would  not  have  been
    admissible under the provisions of Section 85A of the  2002  Act.   The
    Appellant was not able to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules under Appendix A because they required that he had  been  awarded
    the eligible qualification within the twelve month period.  Table 10 of
    annex A "attributes" states as follows:-

         "QUALIFICATION: NOTES

         69.  Specified documents  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of  the
             qualification and, where relevant, completion  of  the  United
             Kingdom  Foundation  Programme  Office  affiliated  Foundation
             Programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist.

         70.  A qualification will have been deemed to have been  'obtained'
             on the date on which  the  applicant  was  first  notified  in
             writing, by the awarding institution, that  the  qualification
             had been awarded."

    Thus paragraph 70 makes it clear that the qualification will have  been
    deemed to have been obtained on the date on  which  the  Appellant  was
    first notified in writing by the awarding institution.  Whilst  Section
    85A of the 2002 Act  does  not  prevent  a  Tribunal  from  considering
    evidence that was before the Secretary  of  State  when  she  took  the
    decision even if post application (see  Nasim  at  paragraph  76),  the
    letter was dated 3rd December 2012  and  was  significantly  after  the
    decision and could not have been taken into  account  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McClure (nor even if it had  been  produced  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Edwards) in reaching a decision about whether
    or not the Appellant met the Immigration Rules.  Section 85A is primary
    legislation and is binding on the Tribunal.  As the  skeleton  argument
    on behalf of the Secretary of State (see page 2) notes, it has not been
    explained how the Tribunal would be  able  to  take  into  account  the
    letter of 3rd December, and any subsequent  documentation  (given  that
    this is a case to which Section 85A of the 2002 Act  applies).   It  is
    right to note that Mrs White made reference to Section 85A at paragraph
    11 of the skeleton  argument  in  which  she  noted  that  the  Section
    operated so as to prevent the Appellant from adducing any new  evidence
    not before the Respondent at the date of decision but  stated  that  it
    did not prevent consideration of  that  evidence  for  other  purposes,
    including human rights.  It was further submitted at paragraph  11  and
    in her oral submissions that the combination of  these  factors  raised
    problems of "fairness, justice and is a  disproportionate  interference
    with the private life  of  the  Appellant."   Thus  it  appears  to  be
    acknowledged that the evidence could  not  be  taken  into  account  by
    either the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McClure  or  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (even if the documents had been put before Judge Edwards)  but
    that it should be taken into account when considering the private  life
    of the Appellant and matters of fairness.

      During the hearing I enquired of the parties as to whether or not the
    Appellant had made an Article 8 claim.  Both parties  on  perusing  the
    documentation in the bundles, could find no document in  which  grounds
    relating to  Article  8  were  referred  to.   The  Grounds  of  Appeal
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant on 8th October  2012  against  the
    decision of the Respondent make no reference to Article 8 grounds as  a
    Ground of Appeal and as the First-tier Tribunal Judge  (Edwards)  noted
    at paragraph 23 "no human rights argument was advanced  before  me  and
    none appears to be readily obvious to me."  There has been  no  Section
    120 notice served on  the  Respondent  or  the  Tribunal  at  any  time
    throughout the proceedings and therefore there is no  jurisdiction  for
    the Tribunal to consider any Article 8 grounds.

57. As to arguments  based  on  fairness  generally,  they  have  not  been
    particularised other than in the general sense that  fairness  requires
    the evidence that was not admissible under Section 85A to be taken into
    account in general terms and on the basis that if the decision  is  set
    aside under Rule 45 it would prevent consideration of his argument.   I
    have dealt with that  earlier.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  argument
    submitted that to set aside the decision would be unfair on  the  basis
    that the Appellant would not  be  able  to  advance  his  case  on  the
    alternative argument  that  he  would  have  had  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McClure is not arguable.  The merits of the  alternative
    argument and  the  documentation  (including  the  Appellant's  witness
    statements, letters from the university, the information that has  been
    subsequently provided concerning the claim made against the university)
    is relevant information in considering  whether  or  not  the  decision
    should be set aside, or to put it another way, if the  Appellant  would
    have succeeded on the alternative argument, then any error of law  made
    by the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge would not  be  material.   Thus  the
    alternative  argument  by  necessity  has  to  be  considered  in  this
    exercise.

58. In my analysis set out earlier in this determination, I have considered
    that the Appellant would not have been  successful  before  the  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge McClure even advancing his alternative argument by
    producing documentation to show that the date of  the  award  was  16th
    March 2012 because the document relied upon could not have  been  taken
    into account by the judge due to the operation of Section  85A  of  the
    2002 Act for the reasons that I have set out.  It could not  have  been
    considered under Article 8 either as the Appellant had  not  sought  to
    appeal the Respondent's decision on Article 8 or human  rights  grounds
    nor has there been any Section  120  notice  relying  on  such  grounds
    subsequent to that.

59. As to the general argument of fairness, I  do  not  consider  that  the
    general argument concerning fairness has been made  out.   The  general
    principles concerning fairness in this context demonstrate that in  the
    context of a statutory scheme, the public law requirement  of  fairness
    must be observed and fairness may impose additional obligations on  the
    Secretary of State as the decision maker under the points-based system.
     The Secretary of State is therefore under a common  law  duty  to  act
    fairly in deciding claims properly made.  The Respondent's  failure  to
    act fairly is a failure to act in accordance with the law and a failure
    to make a decision in accordance with the law is a Ground of Appeal  to
    the Tribunal under Section 84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act.  Thus the Tribunal
    has jurisdiction to determine that a decision is not in accordance with
    the law because of a lack of fairness.  As the Tribunal  said  in  Fiaz
    (Cancellation of leave to remain and fairness) [2012] UKUT 0057  (IAC),
    this is not to be downgraded to a general  power  to  depart  from  the
    Rules where the judge thinks  such  a  course  appropriate  or  turn  a
    mandatory factor into a discretionary one; fairness in this context  is
    essentially procedural.

60. The factual history above demonstrates that when the decision was taken
    by the Secretary of State, it was a decision  taken  properly  and  one
    that took into account all the evidence that had been placed before the
    Secretary of State.  The application was made on 22nd  March  2012  and
    accompanying  that  application  was  documentation  provided  by   the
    Appellant (including letter from Kaplan Financial Services  dated  13th
    February 2012 stating that the  completion  and  award  date  was  11th
    February 2012 and graduation 11th July 2012; a letter  saying  that  he
    had completed the course of study and that the award would be made  "in
    the next three to four weeks").  As accepted by Mrs White and  for  the
    reasons already set out that letter could not satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules as it came from the educational provider rather than the awarding
    body.  However the Secretary of State did not leave  the  matter  there
    but sought further information for clarification from  the  university,
    who was the awarding institution and the body to provide the  requisite
    information by way of email exchange.  Those emails exchanged from  the
    university registrar and UKBA on  7th  August  2012  confirm  that  the
    Appellant was awarded his MBA on 11th April  2012.   A  certificate  of
    award for the degree  on  that  date  was  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

61. It cannot be said when based on the factual background set  out  above,
    that the decision of the Secretary of State was unlawful in any respect
    nor can it be said that there was any flaw or  unfairness  demonstrated
    in the decision making process and at the time the decision was made on
    25th September 2012 the decision was made on all  the  evidence  before
    the Secretary of State.  It was not  even  argued  at  the  hearing  in
    December that there had been any unfairness.  The letter  sent  by  the
    university on 3rd December 2012 makes reference to the delays owing  to
    the "technical and administrative problems" with the board meeting  and
    noted the date of the award was March  16th  2012.   That  letter  came
    three months after the decision made by the Respondent which  was  made
    entirely lawfully.  In those circumstances it could not  be  said  that
    the Secretary of State in September 2012 had made an unlawful  decision
    nor can it be said  the  Secretary  of  State  acted  unfairly  in  the
    decision  making  process;  there  has   been   no   procedural   error
    demonstrated on the part of the Secretary of State.

62. Therefore in summary, I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal should be set  aside.   As  noted  earlier,  since  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Khatel there has been the  judgment  in  Raju  and
    Others, which constitutes binding Court of Appeal authority overturning
    Khatel. Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated  that  the  Appellant
    could have succeeded in the alternative argument  that  he  would  have
    advanced  for  the  reasons  given  above  and   therefore   in   those
    circumstances I set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

63. This necessarily leads me to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The grounds that have been advanced in respect of the decision  to  set
    aside are those arguments also relevant to the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  For the same reasons therefore, it cannot be said  that
    the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law in respect of the decision
    made under the Immigration Rules.  However an error  of  law  has  been
    made out in relation to the Section 47 decision  which  was  not  dealt
    with by the judge.  Therefore in remaking  the  appeal  I  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal except in relation to the Section 47 decision  (  in
    respect of removal)which I hold to be not in accordance with the law.

64. As I have set out in this determination, the factual background to this
    appeal is most unusual.  I have taken the facts that have been given by
    the  Appellant  as  the  correct  factual  background   including   the
    documentation from the university but have found that in  law,  despite
    that factual background, it has not been  demonstrated  that  he  could
    succeed in this appeal.  However in  the  light  of  the  most  unusual
    factual background and one that the Secretary of State is now aware of,
    I have no reason to  assume  that  the  Secretary  of  State  will  not
    consider any request made by  the  Appellant  to  look  afresh  at  the
    application in the light of the facts as we now know  them  to  be  and
    that consideration will be given to exercising a discretion outside the
    Rules in his favour.

Decision

65. The decision of the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Judge McClure) is set aside.

66. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Edwards)  involves
    the making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.

67. I remake the appeal against the immigration decision of 25th  September
    2012 and dismiss it on all grounds save that  the  appeal  against  the
    Section 47 decision under the 2006 Act is  allowed  as  it  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

