
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/21402/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th February 2014                         |On 9th July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                             MR SUMAIR JAHANGIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Shah (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Background and Procedural History

1.   On 24th September 2012, the Secretary of State  decided  to  refuse  to
    vary the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   She  also
    decided, on the same day, to remove him from the United Kingdom by  way
    of  directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006 ("the section 47 removal decision").

2.   Earlier that year on  2nd  April  2012,  during  the  currency  of  his
    student leave, the appellant applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant under the points-based system.   In  refusing
    that application, and in making the two adverse immigration  decisions,
    the Secretary of State found that the date of the  academic  award  the
    appellant relied upon as showing that the  requirements  of  the  rules
    were met was 11th April 2012.  This was nine days after the date of his
    application.  She concluded that the appellant was not entitled to  the
    points claimed under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules ("the  rules")
    as his application for post-study work leave was not made within twelve
    months of obtaining a relevant qualification  and  so  it  fell  to  be
    refused under paragraph 245FD of the rules.

3.   The appellant's appeal against the adverse decisions came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C H Bennett ("the judge") on  14th  December  2012.
    The judge allowed the appeal against the section 47  removal  decision,
    finding that it was not in accordance with the law.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave and also found that
    the appellant's removal in consequence would not breach the appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

4.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal, which  was  granted  on
    12th March 2013 in the light of the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Khatel and Others [2013] UKUT 44.  The Upper Tribunal then allowed  the
    appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave, on 3rd June  2013.
    There followed an application by the Secretary of State for  permission
    to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   In  the  same  month  as  that
    application, and in the light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
    Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754, the Upper Tribunal  gave  directions  to  the
    parties.  Acting pursuant to rule 45(1)(b) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, it was proposed:

    (a)  to set aside the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
         present case; and


    (b)  to substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
         against the variation decision but allow  the  appeal  against  the
         section 47 removal decision; and


    (c)  to do so without an oral hearing.


    The parties were advised that if they wished to object to any  part  of
    the proposal, they were required to do so setting out reasons.

5.   On  5th  August  2013,  the  appellant's  solicitors  provided  written
    reasons objecting to the Upper Tribunal's proposal  to  set  aside  the
    previous determination.  In summary, it was contended that the decision
    in Raju  did  not  "imply"  that  supporting  documents  could  not  be
    submitted late in points-based scheme applications, so long as they are
    submitted before the Secretary of State  made  a  decision.   This  was
    described as "the premise of evidential flexibility", as  contained  in
    policies and paragraph 245AA of the rules.  In the appellant's case,  a
    sequence of documents was required to be submitted but  unintentionally
    he omitted one of the items in the sequence.  It was asserted that,  in
    any event, there were other "much more dominant and  important  aspects
    of the present case" concerning the rules, policy  guidance,  fairness,
    human rights and errors of law.  The appellant had a  letter  from  his
    course provider informing him that he had  successfully  completed  his
    MBA.  He received a second letter, advising him that the awarding  body
    might be unable to confirm the award and that  there  might  be  delay.
    The appellant in  error  omitted  the  first  letter  from  his  course
    provider and only sent the second one with his application for  further
    leave.  The Secretary of State took six months to make a  decision  but
    did not contact the appellant.  This was  unfair.   Reliance  was  also
    placed on the policy guidance for the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  scheme.
    This suggested that the  date  of  award  was  the  date  on  which  an
    applicant was first notified of it by the institution at  which  he  or
    she studied.

6.   So far as Article 8 is concerned, the reasons containing the  objection
    to the Upper Tribunal's proposed course made mention of the appellant's
    private  and  family  life  ties.   The  appellant  had  a   legitimate
    expectation to "fulfil his educational and professional  objectives  in
    the UK, with established family and private life".  He  was  a  capable
    student.  It was asserted that the appellant had built up a private and
    family life that deserved respect.

7.   The appeal was listed for hearing  at  Field  House  on  26th  February
    2014, with several similar cases.  The written reasons were  passed  to
    Mr Duffy on the day and he was able to read and assimilate them.

Submissions made by the Parties on 26th February 2014

8.   Mr Duffy said that the appeal against the section 47  removal  decision
    should be allowed.  Mr Shah said that he wished to  adopt  the  written
    reasons and the arguments contained in them.  In Khatel  and  Raju  the
    claimant did not have an award when the post-study work application was
    made.  In the  appellant's  case,  circumstances  were  different.   He
    received notification of success in his studies from his  college.   Mr
    Shah accepted that the  appellant  did  not  have  a  letter  from  the
    university, the awarding body, when he made his  application.   He  was
    only in possession of a letter from the institution at which he studied
    but the policy guidance suggested that this was  sufficient.   He  also
    accepted that this point was argued in Nasim [2013] UKUT 610 and failed
    in that case.

9.   Mr Shah said that the appellant's Article 8 case was  strong.   He  had
    private life ties here and a family life with  relatives.   There  were
    grandparents here.  Also in issue was fairness.

10.  In response, Mr Duffy said that a letter from  the  awarding  body  was
    required.  This was clearly set out in the rules.  This  could  not  be
    overlooked even if the guidance suggested otherwise.  The arguments had
    already been put in Nasim.  The appeal against the decision  to  refuse
    to vary leave should be dismissed.  So far as Article 8 was  concerned,
    the First-tier Tribunal had  heard  evidence.   It  appeared  that  the
    appellant was responsible for a cousin or a maternal uncle, while  this
    person's parents were out of the country.  The appellant provided  some
    support for two or three months of the year.  There was a  professional
    carer involved.  None of  that  rendered  the  appellant's  removal  in
    consequence  of  the   decision   to   refuse   to   vary   his   leave
    disproportionate.  It was clear that he was not a permanent carer.

11.  Mr Shah said that the  appellant  had  private  life  ties  here.   The
    maternal uncle was cross-examined before the First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    was clear that the appellant's  removal  would  breach  his  Article  8
    rights and he had a legitimate expectation to be allowed to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

Findings and Conclusions

12.  Having heard the submissions made by the  representatives,  I  conclude
    that the Upper Tribunal should, in the exercise  of  its  powers  under
    rule 45(1)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 set
    aside the determination of the Upper Tribunal in the present  case  and
    substitute a fresh  decision.   That  this  is  the  proper  course  is
    apparent from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Raju,  overturning
    the determination in Khatel.

13.  So far as the section 47 removal decision is concerned, the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal.  There is no mention of that  aspect
    of the case in the determination of the Upper Tribunal  in  June  2013.
    That determination concludes with the  setting  aside  of  the  judge's
    decision and the allowing of the appeal against the decision to  refuse
    to vary leave.  I conclude that there is no need to disturb the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  He properly concluded that the section
    47 removal decision was not in accordance with the law.

14.  So far as the appeal against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave  is
    concerned, the decision to be substituted is one  which  dismisses  the
    appellant's appeal.  Mr Shah adopted the submissions contained  in  the
    written reasons for objecting to the Upper Tribunal's  proposed  course
    of action.  I have considered them carefully but find that they have no
    real merit.  I do not  accept  that  the  judgment  in  Raju  does  not
    undermine the appellant's case that he could meet the  requirements  of
    the  rules  by  submitting  documents  after  his  application  or  the
    submission  that,  in  any  event,  the  documents  he  provided   were
    sufficient.  With respect to Mr Shah, the  judgment  in  Raju  and  the
    guidance given in the two Nasim cases - [2014] UKUT 610 and [2014] UKUT
    00025 - must  be  applied  in  the  present  appeal.   The  fundamental
    difficulty the appellant faces is that his application  was  made  some
    nine days before he received the qualification he relied upon.  He  was
    unable to show that the qualification was obtained within a  period  of
    twelve months prior to his application.   As  explained  in  the  first
    decision in Nasim, neither the guidance  issued  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on the post-study work scheme in July 2010 and, subsequently,  in
    April 2012, nor the casework instructions of 23rd  May  2012  make  any
    substantial difference.  As held by Moses  LJ  in  Raju,  there  is  no
    ambiguity or lack of clarity regarding the  "temporal"  requirement  in
    the fourth section of Table 10 of Appendix A to the rules.  That  clear
    requirement was not met by the appellant.

15.   Nor  do  arguments  based  on  evidential  flexibility   advance   the
    appellant's case.  As explained in the first  decision  in  Nasim,  the
    Secretary  of  State  did  in  fact  consider  the  evidence   of   the
    qualification obtained by the appellant, as is clear  from  the  letter
    containing the adverse decisions.    She  found  it  not  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules.  As the qualification the appellant obtained
    was taken  into  account  and  found  wanting,  there  was  no  missing
    information or  minor  error  requiring  correction  by  means  of  the
    application of evidential flexibility, whether expressed in a policy or
    in the rules (in paragraph 245AA).  In the written submissions,  it  is
    suggested that the appellant's case concerned a sequence  of  documents
    that he was required to submit and that he unintentionally omitted  one
    of them.  It appears that this is a reference  to  a  letter  from  his
    course provider, dated 30th March 2012.  In fact, the appellant did not
    omit evidence of his qualification.  The  true  position  was  that  he
    simply did not have the award he required when he made his application.
     As such, and in the light of Raju, he  could  not  succeed  under  the
    rules.  There is no room in his case for  the  application  of  any  de
    minimis principle and no scope or room for a "near miss".

16.  Arguments based on fairness and legitimate expectation, and indeed  the
    proportionality of refusing the application for leave to  remain,  were
    all considered by the Upper Tribunal in the  two  decisions  in  Nasim.
    Those arguments do not have merit in the present appeal.  The appellant
    is not akin to those who fell within the  category  of  Highly  Skilled
    Migrants, who were encouraged to come to  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of representations contained in the rules and elsewhere.  He  had
    no legitimate expectation, contrary to what is argued  in  the  written
    submissions, that he would be given leave notwithstanding a failure  to
    meet the requirements of the rules.  Again, there was no  ambiguity  in
    the rules themselves.  There was no  obligation  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to inform the appellant of "the deficiency  in  application",  as
    contended on the appellant's behalf.  There  is  nothing  to  show  any
    systemic inconsistency in decision making by  the  Secretary  of  State
    although it was argued, in some of the cases  heard  on  26th  February
    2014, that this is shown by the grant of post-study work leave to  some
    claimants in similar circumstances to  those  of  the  appellant  here.
    There  is  no  evidence  setting  out  details  of  other,   successful
    applications.   The  appellant's  application  was  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State and  her  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  was
    accompanied by cogent reasons which related to the requirements of  the
    rules.  The appellant has failed to show that the decision to refuse to
    vary leave in his case was unlawful.  The decision to be substituted is
    dismissal of his appeal against that decision.

17.  So far as Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  is  concerned,  the
    appellant must prove the facts and  matters  he  relies  upon  and  the
    standard of proof is that of a  balance  of  probabilities  (EH  (Iraq)
    [2005] UKAIT 00065).  The appellant was given leave to enter the United
    Kingdom on 21st August  2009,  as  a  student.   He  made  his  Tier  1
    application in early April 2012, before closure of  that  category  and
    during the currency of his leave.   He  claimed  to  have  private  and
    family life ties here.

18.   Mr  Shah  said  that  the  appellant  enjoyed  family  life  with  his
    grandparents.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination shows that
    the appellant's Article  8  case  was  fully  put.   It  has  not  been
    suggested that the judge's summary is inaccurate.  The appellant  lived
    with his grandparents for about five  or  six  months  after  he  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom and  has  visited  them  regularly  since
    then.  One of his grandparents' sons  has  a  learning  disability,  is
    unable to read and has little self-confidence.  A professional carer is
    employed to look after him.  When the appellant's grandparents are  not
    present in the United Kingdom, he visits this  relative,  his  maternal
    uncle, every day and makes decisions about his  care.   The  judge  has
    recorded that the appellant's grandparents are absent from  the  United
    Kingdom about once a year and for a period of two to  three  months  on
    each occasion.  He found that the appellant  has  worked  part-time  at
    McDonald's since about December 2009.  The judge took  into  account  a
    letter from the appellant's grandfather, a British citizen, in which it
    was stated that the appellant makes weekly  visits.   The  letter  also
    described the maternal uncle as having a  learning  disability  and  as
    living in a residential care home, where he receives care  24  hours  a
    day.  The home is not far from the appellant's address.   The  maternal
    uncle visits the appellant at his home twice a week.

19.  Giving due weight to that evidence, it is  readily  apparent  that  the
    appellant's ties to the United Kingdom are relatively modest.   He  has
    been here for a relatively short period of time and with limited  leave
    as a student.  The judge found that  the  evidence  did  not  show  any
    dependency between the appellant and his relatives here and  I  make  a
    similar finding.   The  evidence  shows  that  the  appellant  provides
    support and care to his maternal uncle and may well be  close  to  this
    relative and to his grandparents.  He lives independently and  although
    these relationships no doubt form substantial components in his private
    life, I find that they do not show family  life  ties  here.   Even  if
    wrong on that, the content of any family life is very modest.  There is
    no reason to doubt that  the  appellant  may  have  formed  friendships
    through his studies  and  his  employment  at  McDonald's.   There  is,
    however, nothing to show that he would  be  unable  to  maintain  those
    friendships from abroad, following his removal to Pakistan, as he could
    similarly maintain ties to his relatives here.

20.  The judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72  is  of
    importance, as noted in the second decision  in  Nasim.   Opportunities
    for a promising student to complete  a  course,  or  for  a  successful
    student to obtain work experience,  do  not  in  themselves  amount  to
    rights which are protected under Article 8.

21.  There are no particular  reasons  to  reduce  the  public  interest  in
    enforcing immigration  control  in  the  appellant's  case.   As  noted
    earlier, the Secretary of State gave cogent reasons for concluding that
    the requirements of the rules were not met.   Set  against  the  public
    interest, the appellant has only the modest  ties  he  has  established
    here.  Those  ties  have  been  established  and  deepened  during  his
    presence here with only limited leave.  As there  is  nothing  to  show
    that he can meet the requirements of the rules, so as to give  rise  to
    any further leave, his immigration status is precarious.   It  has  not
    been suggested that he can show that the requirements of Appendix FM or
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules are met.

22.  As the threshold of engagement is not particularly high,  I  find  that
    Article 8 is engaged, in  the  light  of  the  private  life  ties  the
    appellant has established here.  If his relationships with his maternal
    uncle and grandparents amount to family life, albeit with  very  modest
    content, then Article 8 is engaged in that  context  too  (although  my
    primary finding is that family life has not been shown).  The  decision
    to refuse to vary leave was made in accordance  with  the  law  and  in
    pursuit of a legitimate aim (the maintenance of immigration control  in
    the  interest  of  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom).
    Weighing the competing interests and taking into  account  my  findings
    above, it is readily apparent that the decision to refuse to vary leave
    and the appellant's removal in consequence amount  to  a  proportionate
    response.  The appellant has not made out  his  grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

Decision

23.  The determination of the Upper Tribunal in  the  present  case  is  set
    aside.  A fresh decision is substituted as follows:

    (i)  The appeal against the section 47 removal decision was allowed  by
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that decision shall stand.


    (ii) The appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is
         dismissed.


    (iii)    The appeal on human rights grounds, in reliance upon Article 8
         of the Human Rights Convention, is dismissed.


24.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.




Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




Fee Award

I have considered whether  a  fee  award  should  be  made.   The  appellant
succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation  to  the  section
47 removal decision.  However, his appeal against the decision to refuse  to
vary leave has been dismissed and he has not succeeded  in  making  out  his
human rights case.  In these circumstances, I make no fee award.




Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


