
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/21736/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 13 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL Ms G A BLACK


                                   Between

                              CYNTHIA TAH AFOR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wainwright (Counsel instructed by Law Klinik LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination before the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Haynes).  The appeal was determined on the  papers
    and promulgated on 7 August 2014.  The Tribunal dismissed the appeal by
    the appellant against a refusal of her application under  Regulation  7
    of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (EEA Regs.).

2.   The appellant, Cynthia Afor, whose date of birth is 19  February  1987.
     She is a citizen of Cameroon.

Grounds for permission

3.    The first ground argued that the judge erred by treating the  marriage
    as a proxy marriage when it was not.  The second ground  was  that  the
    Judge failed to  follow  Razgar  and  did  not  conduct  an  Article  8
    proportionality assessment.

Permission to appeal

4.   Permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibb  in  the
    following terms:

         "The grounds, which were in time, complain that the judge erred  in
         (1) treating the marriage as a customary one by proxy when  it  was
         not and (2) not conducting the  Razgar  steps  and  proportionality
         assessment in considering Article 8."

5.   He further stated

         "The grounds are arguable.  The appellant's  representative  should
         be prepared to say why the error in  treating  the  marriage  as  a
         proxy one was material, in that the Kareem principle would arguably
         still have applied and there was no evidence of  legal  recognition
         of a non-proxy civil marriage in Cameroon (although this may  be  a
         simpler question for a non-proxy marriage).  The judge's  reasoning
         as to why human rights had 'no application' is arguably obscure."


Hearing before me
Submissions
6.   I heard submissions this morning from Mr  Wainwright  and  Mr  Kandola.
    The respondent opposes the appeal.  However, it was common ground  that
    there was an error to the extent that the Tribunal treated the marriage
    as a "proxy" marriage [7]  when it was in fact  a  customary  marriage,
    and it is the appellant's claim that both she and her  spouse  attended
    the ceremony in Cameroon. The issue before me is materiality having  in
    mind the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Kareem  and  TA&  others(  Kareem
    explained) Ghana[2014]00316(IAC).

7.    Mr Wainwright concedes that he faces some difficulty having regard  to
    Kareem(Proxy marriages - EU law[2014] UKUT 00024(IAC), and accepts that
    in the absence of evidence from the  relevant EU state ( France) ,  the
    appellant cannot meet the evidential requirements. There is no evidence
    to show that the marriage is legally recognised in France.  He  further
    submits that the Tribunal ought to have considered  whether  there  was
    evidence of a durable relationship under Regulation 8(5) (EEA Regs) and
    considered Article 8.

Discussion & decision


8.   I find that the determination  discloses  no  material  error  of  law.
    There was an error by the Tribunal  by  finding  incorrectly  that  the
    parties were married by proxy.  The  appellant's  claim  is  that  both
    parties attended the marriage ceremony in Cameroon and it was therefore
    not a proxy marriage, rather a customary marriage. Issue was  taken  as
    to the lawfulness of the marriage in the  Cameroon  as  the  respondent
    considered that the  evidence  in  support  of  the  marriage  and  the
    certificate were unreliable.

9.      I am satisfied that the Tribunal correctly  applied  the  principles
    in Kareem.  There was no evidence to show that the  customary  marriage
    was legally recognised in France, the relevant EU State [7].

10.  As  regards  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Wainwright  on  Regulation
    8(5)(EEA Regs), this was not a matter that was argued  in  the  grounds
    for permission, and no application for leave to amend was made. In  any
    event I find that the  Tribunal  gave  adequate  consideration  to  the
    available  evidence  and  concluded  that  there  was  unreliable   and
    insufficient evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the  parties  were  in  a
    relationship at all. [8-10]

11.     The second ground of appeal was the question of Article 8.   I  find
    no material error of law disclosed in the determination in this regard.
     There was clearly no evidential basis for founding an Article 8  claim
    and none has been put before me today.

Decision

12.  There was no material error of law in the determination.
13.   The determination shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 10.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

No fee award
No anonymity order made.


Signed                                  Date 10.10.2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
