
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21153/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 16 December 2014                             |Promulgated On 12 January 2015 |
|                                                |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MR BILAL KAMIL RANA
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Failed to attend

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  (with  permission)  against
   the decision of Judge Callender Smith to allow  the  respondent's  appeal
   against his removal from the United Kingdom pursuant to Section 10 of the
   Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

Background to the appeal

2. The Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  raises  questions  about
   the dates upon which a number of the relevant Immigration Decisions  were
   made and served upon the respondent. However, the copy documents on  file
   seem to me to bear out the account that is given by the respondent  in  a
   witness statement that he  made  on  the  23rd  May  2014.  This  may  be
   conveniently summarised as follows.

3. The respondent made an application for leave  to  remain,  as  a  Tier  4
   (General) Student, on the 31st January 2014. As the  appellant  had  last
   been granted leave to remain from the 26th  February  2013  to  the  17th
   April 2014 this application was made 'in  time'.  However,  following  an
   investigation, the appellant concluded  (rightly  or  wrongly)  that  the
   English language certificate that the respondent had submitted in support
   of his application had been obtained by deception. On the 6th  May  2014,
   Immigration Officers arrested the respondent at his home. On the same day
   he was handed the following documents, each of which is dated the 6th May
   2014:

    i) A letter explaining the reasons for  refusing  his  application  for
       further leave to remain (hereafter, "the explanatory letter");

   ii) A 'Notice to a Person Liable to Removal' (Form  IS.151A)  explaining
       that the appellant's official had concluded that the respondent  was
       "a person in respect of whom removal  directions  may  be  given  in
       accordance with section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999
       (administrative removal) as [amongst other things] a person who used
       deception in seeking (whether successfully or not) leave to remain;

  iii) A 'Notice of Immigration Decision' (Form IS.151A Part  2)  informing
       the respondent that the appellant had taken the decision  to  remove
       him from the United Kingdom.

4. The explanatory letter stated that there was no right of  appeal  against
   the decision to refuse his application for further leave to  remain.  The
   Notice of Immigration Decision stated that whilst there was  a  statutory
   right of  appeal  against  the  removal  decision,  this  could  only  be
   exercised once the respondent had "left the United Kingdom".

5. Directions for the respondent's removal were issued on the 15th May  2014
   and were set for the 20th May 2014.

Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

6. The Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was received on the  19th
   May 2014. It was accompanied by an application for an extension  of  time
   that was in turn based upon the claim that the respondent had been misled
   into believing that the did not  have  a  right  of  appeal  against  the
   decision to refuse his application  for  further  leave  to  remain  [see
   paragraph 4, above]. The Notice of Appeal also argued that the respondent
   was entitled to exercise his right of appeal against the removal decision
   whilst he was in the United Kingdom. That argument  was  predicated  upon
   the assertion that the respondent had "submitted his Human  rights  Claim
   on 13 May 2014 under his private life  before  issuance  of  his  removal
   directions".

7. A handwritten note by a Duty Judge, dated the 20th  May  2014,  sets  out
   his conclusion that the Notice of Appeal was lodged 'in time',  and  that
   there was "at least an argument that there is a valid in-country appeal".

8. At the  hearing,  the  Presenting  Officer  raised  a  preliminary  issue
   concerning jurisdiction, which the Tribunal dealt with at  paragraphs  12
   to 18 of its determination:

       12. As a preliminary issue the Presenting Officer invited me, on the
           basis of         (Mohamed Bilal Jan) v SSHD (Section 10 removal)
           IJR UKUT 265 (IAC) to  determine  that  I  had  no  jurisdiction
           because a decision had been made for removal under Section 10 of
           the Immigration and Asylum Act. He referred me in particular  to
           Paragraph 33 and 34 of that decision.

       13. The appeal had been before a duty judge who made a  decision  on
           20 May 2014 that there was a valid appeal  to  come  before  the
           Tribunal.

       14. In deciding that I had jurisdiction to entertain the  issues  in
           this appeal I note, in particular, Paragraph 3 of  the  headnote
           of the above judgement which states:  "The  First-tier  Tribunal
           has jurisdiction to consider issues of procedural  fairness  and
           the lawfulness of the exercise of discretion  when  deciding  to
           make a removal decision under the ground of appeal permitting  a
           challenge on the basis that the decision is  "otherwise  not  in
           accordance with the law".

       15. To arrive at that position it is necessary to consider what  the
           Appellant  states  both  in  his  witness  statement  dated   25
           September 2014 and in a letter he wrote when he was in detention
           dated 12 May 2014.

       16. In paragraphs 1 and 2 of the letter of 12  May  2014  he  states
           that he passed both of the assessments and qualified for  a  CAS
           after the London School of Marketing  had  determined  that  his
           English  capability  was  satisfactory  and  that  the   English
           language certificate provided was genuine. He then  queries  why
           the Home Office suggested that he took a fresh test  in  English
           and sent them the certificate.

       17. He raises the issue about why 40,000 candidates in the  original
           test that he had taken had been issued with the same certificate
           and whether all 40,000 had received them  because  of  fakes  or
           deception.

       18. He points out that he was asked to provide  another  certificate
           from another English language provider, immediately took another
           exam and completed it successfully by scoring 6.5 overall.

9. The First-tier Tribunal thereafter concluded that, "without  more  direct
   information about the [alleged] fraud or deception" which  the  Secretary
   of State had levelled  against  the  respondent,  it  was  unable  to  be
   satisfied that the removal decision was "fair or lawful" [paragraph  21].
   The Tribunal therefore allowed the appeal "to the limited extent that  it
   is remitted to the [Secretary  of  State]  to  make  a  lawful  decision"
   [paragraph 25].





The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

10. The respondent attended at the hearing before me on  the  16th  December
   2014. However, his representative did not. At 15.11 hours,  the  Tribunal
   received a facsimile transmission from Denning Solicitors,  in  which  it
   was stated that the Counsel whom they had instructed (and  who  had  also
   appeared before the First-tier Tribunal) was "running  late"  due  to  an
   appearance at another  Hearing  Centre.  Then,  at  16.04,  the  Tribunal
   received a further facsimile transmission, from the same source,  stating
   that "the instructed counsel ... is unable to represent the matter  today
   due to unforeseeable delay caused  from  his  running  matter  in  Taylor
   house". It therefore requested that the matter "be adjourned for  another
   day".

11. Mr Shilliday strongly opposed the adjournment request.  He  argued  that
   the fact that Counsel was 'double-booked' was not a good  and  sufficient
   reason to adjourn the hearing. I agreed with his submission. If there are
   arguable grounds of appeal against my decision,  then  these  will  arise
   from my making an error of law of my own rather than due to  any  claimed
   unfairness  arising  from  Counsel  taking  on  too   many   professional
   commitments. I therefore heard submissions from both Mr Shilliday and the
   respondent before deciding to allow the appeal.

Reasons for decision

12. It will be recalled that the respondent had applied  for  further  leave
   to remain before his  then  extant  leave  to  remain  had  expired  [see
   paragraph 3, above]. At first blush, therefore,  it  may  seem  that  the
   effect of refusal to vary his leave to remain  was  that  the  respondent
   "had no leave to enter  or  remain",  and  that  this  was  therefore  an
   'immigration decision' against which there was  an  in-country  right  of
   appeal under Section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act. However, the effect of the
   removal decision was also to invalidate the respondent's extant leave  to
   remain [see Section 10(8) of the 1999 Act and RK (Nepal)  v  SSHD  [2009]
   EWA Civ 359]. It was thus the decision  to  remove  the  respondent  that
   rendered him without leave to remain, rather than the  refusal  to  grant
   his application for a variation of leave.

13. The question of whether a statutory right of appeal is exercisable  from
   within the United Kingdom is governed by Section 92 of the 2002 Act. This
   states that a person may not appeal while he is in  the  United  Kingdom,
   unless his appeal is of a kind to which that section applies [sub-section
   1]. An appeal against a decision to  remove  a  person  from  the  United
   Kingdom pursuant to Section 10 of the 1999 Act is not a decision to which
   Section 92 of the 2002 Act applies, unless the person "has made an asylum
   claim or a human rights claim while in the United Kingdom"  [sub-sections
   2 and 4].

14. The argument that was advanced by  the  respondent  in  his  grounds  of
   appeal does not appear to have been that which was advanced by Counsel at
   the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. Counsel appears  to  have  argued
   (and the Tribunal accepted) that jurisdiction was dependent upon  "issues
   of procedural fairness and the lawfulness of the exercise  of  discretion
   when deciding to make a removal decision" [see paragraph 14 of the First-
   tier Tribunal's decision, quoted under paragraph 8 above]. This  somewhat
   circular line of reasoning was supposedly based upon the authority  of  R
   (on the application of Mohamed Bilal Jan) v Secretary of  State  for  the
   Home Department (section 10  removal)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT  00265,  and  in
   particular that portion of the judgement which is summarised at paragraph
   3 of the head-note. However, as Mr Shilliday  correctly  observed,  those
   remarks were taken completely out  of  context.  They  were  intended  to
   underscore the right of a person to challenge a  removal  decision  under
   Section 10 of the 1999 Act on the ground that it was  "otherwise  not  in
   accordance with the  law",  thereby  rendering  a  challenge  by  way  of
   Judicial Review inappropriate. They were not  intended  to  suggest  that
   such a decision could necessarily be challenged upon this (or any  other)
   ground from within  the  United  Kingdom.  On  the  contrary,  the  Upper
   Tribunal made it plain that such  a  challenge  could  normally  only  be
   pursued from outside the United Kingdom [see the second paragraph of  the
   head-note].

15. The First-tier Tribunal thus  made  a  material  error  of  law  in  its
   assessment of the issue of jurisdiction. It is therefore necessary for me
   to remake the decision.

16. At paragraph 29 of Nirula v The First-tier  Tribunal  [2011]  EWHC  3336
   (Admin), Deputy High Court Judge Ockelton held as follows:

    The provision is that a  person  may  appeal  from  within  the  United
    Kingdom only if he "has made" an asylum or human rights  claim.  It  is
    perfectly clear that the making of the claim - a human rights claim  in
    this case - must precede, at  any  rate,  the  Notice  of  Appeal.  The
    provision makes no sense at all if a right  of  appeal  is  granted  by
    appealing.  No  authority,  in  my  judgement,  is  needed   for   that
    conclusion. It is the simple meaning of the words.

17. The respondent's Notice of Appeal claims that he  made  a  human  rights
   claim on the 13th May 2014. I have not however seen any evidence that  he
   had made such a claim. Furthermore,  it  is  not  a  claim  that  Counsel
   appears to have pursued before the First-tier Tribunal, and  neither  did
   the respondent pursue that argument before me. I  accordingly  find  that
   the Tribunal did not have  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  respondent's
   appeal whilst he was in the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

18. The appeal is allowed.

19. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  respondent's
   appeal against his removal from the United Kingdom is set aside,  and  is
   substituted by a decision that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to
   determine the appeal and will not therefore take any  further  action  in
   respect of it.

Signed                              Date


Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

