
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21301/2015
     IA/22655/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2017                          |On 18th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                         Remi [R] (first Appellant)
                          [P R] (second Appellant)
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Jaquiss, instructed by Farani-Javid-Taylor
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are a mother  and  daughter.
    They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision made by the
    Secretary of State on 22nd May 2015 to  refuse  their  application  for
    leave to remain based on their private and family life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision made on 20th December 2016.  The  Appellants  now  appeal
    with permission granted on 4th August 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the first Appellant  claims  that
    she entered the UK in March 2002 and has had no leave to  remain  since
    then.  Her daughter was born in the UK on  [  ]  2008.   The  Appellant
    applied for leave to remain on 26th March 2015.  The Secretary of State
    refused the application on 22nd May 2015 on the basis that she was  not
    satisfied that the Appellants met the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules nor  would  the  decision  to
    remove them be disproportionate under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was  evidence  that  the
    first Appellant was in the UK in 2002 and that  there  is  no  evidence
    that her status has been anything other than illegal.  The judge  noted
    that the child's father is a Belgian citizen who is  exercising  treaty
    rights and living and working in Scotland but there was no evidence  in
    relation to him and no evidence that he was settled  in  the  UK.   The
    judge  also  noted  that  the  majority  of  contact  with  the  second
    Appellant's father is by telephone.  The judge  assessed  the  evidence
    and considered the best interests of the child at  paragraph  56.   The
    judge  concluded  that  the   Secretary   of   State's   decision   was
    proportionate and dismissed the appeal.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  judge
    failed to consider all of the evidence.  It is contended that the judge
    failed to properly consider paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the case of PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) in the context of the fact that at the time
    of the decision the second Appellant was 8 years of age and  had  spent
    her entire life in the UK.  It was submitted that the judge  failed  to
    consider whether it was reasonable to expect the  second  Appellant  to
    leave the UK in accordance with paragraph 276ADE and Section 117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is contended that
    the tests in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and Section  117B(6)  are  similar
    and that the judge failed  to  properly  assess  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

 5. When the appeal first came  before  me  in  October  2017  Ms  Jaquiss'
    application for an adjournment  was  granted  to  enable  her  to  seek
    further evidence in relation to the status of  the  second  Appellant's
    father in light of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  finding  that  the
    father is a Belgian national exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.  At
    that stage she submitted that if the father is settled in the  UK  then
    the child will be entitled to British citizenship. Given that  evidence
    relating to this matter could change the entire basis of the appeal and
    might in fact indicate that the Tribunal did not have  jurisdiction  to
    determine the second Appellant's appeal, I granted an adjournment.

 6. At the resumed hearing Ms Jaquiss advised that the  second  Appellant's
    father was not co-operating and in these circumstances  she  could  not
    take any further the submission that the child had  an  entitlement  to
    British citizenship.

 7. In Ms Jaquiss's submission the judge failed to apply the test  set  out
    in paragraph 276ADE and considered in the cases of MA (Pakistan) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705  and PD as to whether it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK.  In her submission, in considering the issues in
    relation to the child  the  judge  imposed  too  high  a  threshold  in
    considering reasonableness.  She relied on the guidance in paragraph 46
    of the case of MA (Pakistan).  She submitted that, although  the  judge
    referred to paragraph 276ADE(iv) at paragraph 59, she failed to  engage
    with it properly.  She pointed out that, instead of engaging  with  the
    Rules, the judge said at paragraph 59 that the child was  not  able  to
    satisfy other aspects of the Immigration Rules without specifying which
    aspects of the Rules were being referred to.  She referred also to  the
    finding at paragraph 56 where the judge said that the child  would  not
    "face adaptation problems of any magnitude" in Nigeria and at paragraph
    57 where  the  judge  said  that  there  was  no  suggestion  from  any
    independent source "that the removal of the child to Nigeria  would  be
    harmful to her and should be opposed".  In her submission  the  use  of
    the words 'magnitude'  and  'harmful'  indicated  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  applying  too  high  of  standard  in   assessing
    reasonableness.  In her submission  this  error  infected  the  judge's
    consideration of proportionality.  She accepted that the  Tribunal  was
    bound to take into account the mother's status but  in  her  submission
    this did not negate the  need  for  powerful  reasons  to  consider  it
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.   Ms  Jaquiss  accepted
    that the judge had made a finding that the  second  Appellant's  father
    was Belgian and was exercising treaty rights in  the  UK  [52]  on  the
    basis of the first Appellant's oral evidence.   However  she  submitted
    that having made that finding the judge should have attached weight  to
    this factor.   In  her  submission  the  deficiencies  in  the  judge's
    reasoning affected the decision as a whole.

 8. In response Mr Tarlow submitted that this challenge is  a  disagreement
    with the valid reasoned findings made by the  judge.   He  pointed  out
    that the judge considered the best interests of the child at  paragraph
    56 and considered a number of factors including the fact that the child
    could adapt to life in Nigeria, that the child has a wide family circle
    in Nigeria, that the child would be able to make visits to the  UK  and
    could reintegrate  in  Nigeria.   In  his  submission  the  conclusions
    reached by the judge in these paragraphs and at paragraph 59 were  open
    to the judge.  In his submission the determination as a whole is  sound
    and can stand.

 9. In response Ms Jaquiss referred to MA(Pakistan) and contended that  the
    judge had not adopted the approach set out in that case.

Error of Law

10. In my view the judge made no material error of law in her  approach  to
    this appeal.  As accepted by the Secretary of  State  in  the  Rule  24
    response the First-tier Tribunal Judge could have set out her  findings
    differently.  I accept that it would have been preferable had the judge
    firstly considered the Immigration Rules before going  on  to  consider
    Article 8 outside of the Rules in accordance with the  guidance  in  PD
    and Others.

11. However, despite failing to do so, the judge did not  make  a  material
    error.  This is because it is clear from paragraphs 5 to  30  that  the
    judge was aware of the reasons why the Secretary of State  had  refused
    the application and of the consideration of the Rules in that decision.



12. The issue to be determined in terms of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and Section
    117B(1) (6) is whether, in circumstances where the child has resided in
    the UK for longer than seven years, it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Although  the  judge  does  not
    separately consider that issue under that heading, it is clear that the
    evidence considered and the findings made directly consider that issue.
     For example the judge considered the second  Appellant's  relationship
    with her father noting that any contact was by telephone or by  way  of
    birthday cards and financial support [51].  The  judge  considered  the
    circumstances upon return to Nigeria including the fact that the  child
    would be returned with her mother and would have a wider family  circle
    in Nigeria and family and  friends  [56].   The  judge  considered  the
    general circumstances in Nigeria including  healthcare,  education  and
    other services availability [57].  The judge considered the ability  of
    the child to visit the UK.  The judge considered the  child's  Nigerian
    heritage and family links.  The judge also considered  that  the  first
    Appellant would be able to work in Nigeria and that would be beneficial
    to the second Appellant as she would  be  in  a  more  secure  economic
    position.  In considering these matters there is  nothing  to  indicate
    that the judge failed to consider any other matter in assessing whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.   There  is
    no submission that any factor was left  out  of  this  assessment.   In
    these circumstances in my view it is clear that the judge did  in  fact
    consider the issue as to whether it was reasonable to expect the second
    Appellant to leave the UK and reached conclusions open to her  on  that
    evidence.

13. In my view the judge considered all the relevant evidence in  terms  of
    factors in the UK and in Nigeria relevant to determining the  issue  of
    reasonableness.

14. There is no separate ground going to challenge the findings in relation
    to the first Appellant except in terms of  her  relationship  with  the
    child.  In light of the judge's findings in relation  to  the  child  I
    find that there is no sustainable challenge in relation to the findings
    as to the mother.

15. Considering all of these matters in my view the judge made no  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 16th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 16th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
