
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21234/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2015                   |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                         MR CLAUDIUS JOSEPH WAYLAND
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvand of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State taken on 29 April 2014 to refuse  his  application
       for leave to remain on the basis of his private and  family  life  in
       the UK and a decision of 31 March 2014 to remove him under section 10
       of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.




  Background Facts

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Dominica who was born on 1 April  1972.
       He entered the UK on 29 May  2005  with  leave  for  6  months  as  a
       visitor. In 2011 he married Sharon Denise Moore, a  British  citizen.
       On 16 September 2011 he applied for leave to remain as a spouse under
       the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) ('the  Immigration  Rules').
       That application was rejected on 25 October 2011. On 1 November  2011
       a further application for leave to remain as a spouse was made by the
       appellant. On 9 December 2011 that application was also  rejected.  A
       letter   dated   9   December   2011   was    submitted    requesting
       reconsideration. On 24 March 2014 a further letter was  sent  on  the
       appellant's behalf asking for the appellant's case to  be  considered
       under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  The
       Secretary of State refused the application  on  the  basis  that  the
       appellant did not meet the financial and language requirements  under
       the Immigration Rules and that there were no insurmountable obstacles
       to family life continuing outside the UK.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 6 May 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Holder ('the judge') dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   The  First-
       tier Tribunal found that the appellant did  not  meet  the  financial
       requirements of the Immigration Rules. The First-tier  Tribunal  also
       found that the appellant had not  shown  that  there  would  be  very
       significant difficulties faced by him or his  partner  in  continuing
       family life together outside the UK which could not be  overcome.  In
       considering Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  the  First-tier
       Tribunal found that the respondent's decision to remove the appellant
       was proportionate, the balance falling on  the  side  of  the  public
       interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
       14 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy refused  permission  to
       appeal. The appellant made an application to the Upper Tribunal. On 1
       September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  granted  permission  to
       appeal. In granting permission Judge Canavan considered that  it  was
       arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  given  sufficient
       consideration to the reasons why the appellant's wife said she  would
       not leave the UK. Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

    5. The grounds of appeal which are lengthy assert in essence:

       Ground 1

         . The judge applied the wrong  test  (  he  failed  to  take  into
           account the recent case of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090
           (IAC) which was drawn to his  attention)  when  considering  the
           appellant's ties to Dominica and that  there  was  no  objective
           basis on which the Judge could make a decision that his  removal
           would not lead to serious hardship.

       Ground 2

         .  The  judge  erred  when  making  findings  that  there  are  no
           significant difficulties which would be faced by  the  appellant
           or his partner in integrating into Dominica when the reality  is
           the appellant's family are in the UK. The judge erred in law  by
           failing to consider that the UK has  a  positive  obligation  to
           ensure family life flourishes. The judge  failed  to  take  into
           account the effect of  forcing  the  appellant,  his  wife,  her
           children and grandchild and her father to  leave  the  UK  would
           breach the Zambrano principle and  the  principles  set  out  in
           Harrison (Jamaica) v SSHD (2012) EWCA 1710. The judge failed  to
           take account of the important roles the appellant played in  the
           lives of his wife's family.

       Ground 3

         . The judge erred by effectively allowing immigration  control  to
           trump  family  life  without  considering  the  effects  on  the
           appellant's family (Beoku-Betts (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39)  and
           that the judge failed to carry to a proper balancing exercise.

       Ground 4

         . The judge made an error of law when he failed to  consider  that
           the Respondent's decision was unreasonable.  -  MF  (Nigeria)  v
           SSHD (2013) EWCA Civ 1192.

       Ground 5

         . The judge made an error of law in finding that the appellant can
           continue the relationship by visiting and the usual  methods  of
           communicating until such  time  as  the  appellant  is  able  to
           satisfy the Immigration Rules.

       Ground 6

         . The judge failed to take into account the best interests of  the
           child as the primary  consideration  and  failed  to  take  into
           account the pivotal role the appellant  played  in  the  child's
           life.

       Ground 7

         . The judge erred  by  failing  to  take  into  account  that  the
           appellant's wife supports him, that  he speaks  English  and  is
           not a burden in British  taxpayers,  is  fully  integrated  unto
           British society and it is not in the public interest  to  remove
           him.

       Ground 8 - ground (a) in the application to the  Upper  Tribunal  for
       permission to appeal

         . The judge's approach to proportionality  is  flawed.  The  judge
           misconstrued section 117B and erred in law in  attaching  weight
           to considerations stipulated in those  provisions  in  assessing
           the Article 8 appeal. The judge erred in  considering  that  the
           appellant's failure to meet  the  requirements  in  Appendix  FM
           means he could not succeed under Article 8. There  has  been  no
           proper assessment of Article 8 as set out in the case of Razgar.
           No proper consideration was given to Article 8. The judge  ought
           to have considered whether there were exceptional  circumstances
           meriting consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules. The judge
           failed to consider the Human Rights of the appellant's wife.

    6. Mr Fouladvand submitted that the core issue is that  the  appellant's
       wife cannot relocate because of her ties to the UK. She has  children
       and grandchildren in the UK. She is working and has a close bond with
       her family. It  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's
       spouse, a British citizen to relocate. As the documents  demonstrated
       the appellant's wife's mother was  seriously  ill  and  she  now  has
       responsibility for administering the estate. He  submitted  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal did not consider the various factors  that  ought
       to have been taken into account and therefore the decision was flawed
       and the conclusions were flawed.

    7. Although not making an application to amend the grounds of appeal  Mr
       Fouladvand  submitted  that  there  was  ample  evidence   that   the
       appellant's spouse was earning more than �18,600 and in view of  that
       fact the appellant did meet the financial  requirements  of  appendix
       FM.

    8. Mr Fouladvand submitted that in relation to the Immigration Rules the
       provision says family and social ties then as the wording  says  and,
       if one of them is absent then it must be unreasonable to  expect  the
       person to relocate. Both family and social ties must be present. This
       is a loophole of the Immigration Rules. I asked Mr Fouladvand  if  he
       had any authority for this proposition. He could not refer me to any.



    9. Mr Fouladvand also submitted that the judge did  not  find  that  the
       letter from the employer was false. As long as the judge  could  find
       that the payslips etc. were genuine the judge should have  given  due
       weight to the fact that there was no negative effect on the  economic
       well-being of the country. In the absence of  negative  findings  the
       judge's conclusions at paragraph 46 of the decision are flawed.

   10. Mr Fouldavand argued that there was a fundamental error by the judge.
       In essence his argument was that the  judge  having  noted  that  the
       maintenance of effective immigration control is an aspect of the well-
       being of the country then there was a major problem as  the  presence
       of the appellant is not a burden on the economic  well-being  of  the
       country. Article 8(2) does not have immigration control as an aim  so
       it can  only  be  considered  as  part  of  the  economic  well-being
       category. It  is  clear   in  this  case  that  the  judge  erred  by
       concluding that the economic well-being of  the  country  allows  the
       couple to be separated when  there  is  no  negative  affect  on  the
       economic well-being.

   11. Mr Fouldavand also referred to the 10 year and 5 year  partner  route
       to settlement arguing that the  appellant  can  meet  all  the  other
       requirements but was penalised - the appellant can meet the financial
       requirements. He also  argued  that  Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL
       applied. The appellant otherwise meets all the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

   12. Mr Norton submitted the central issue, as identified in  the  grounds
       of appeal, was whether the judge had paid sufficient  regard  to  the
       position of the appellant's wife. The judge at paragraph 14  set  out
       the evidence. This is not a  case  where  the  judge  failed  to  pay
       attention to the evidence. Whilst the test under  the  rules  is  not
       restricted to the  appellant  but  is  primarily  considered  on  the
       appellant's ability to meet the rules. In paragraph 20 the judge  has
       identified what need to be provided and found the appellant does  not
       meet the requirements of the rules as the required evidence  was  not
       provided.

   13. At paragraph 25 the judge  assesses  the  appellant  and  his  wife's
       position in relation to the obstacles they might face and found  that
       there was no evidence that there are  any  significant  difficulties.
       The judge considered the relationship  with  the  appellant's  wife's
       grandchild and found there was no evidence that the appellant  has  a
       parental relationship.  The judge considered private life. The  judge
       then considered the claim outside of the Immigration rules. The judge
       set out the correct approach. At paragraph 45 the judge  acknowledged
       that the appellant's wife stated she would not go with the  appellant
       to Dominica but considered that this was  a  matter  of  choice.  The
       judge has applied the correct tests and taken  all  relevant  factors
       into account. The judge was entitled to come to the findings.

  Legislative Provisions

   14. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new  Part  5A  of  the
       2002 Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires,  in
       legislative form for the first time, the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
       factors into account when determining whether a decision  made  under
       the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private  and  family  life.
       The decision in the  instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

   15. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article  8
       of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:

           117A Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
           to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).

   16. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable to all  cases  and
       are:

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
           the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

           that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life
           established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
           status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                leave the United Kingdom.

   17. Section 117D provides the definition of a number  of  terms  used  in
       Part 5A. A "qualifying child" means a person under the age of 18  who
       is either a British citizen  or  who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
       continuous  period  of  seven  years  or  more.   The  definition  of
       "qualifying partner" is also included.   The  court  or  Tribunal  is
       required to give the new Rules (see Dube (ss.117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT
       90 (IAC) at [47]): "greater weight than as merely  a  starting  point
       for the consideration of the proportionality of an interference  with
       Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA
       Civ 387).

   18. Relevant Immigration Rules

           EX.1. This paragraph applies if

                (a)    (i)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting
                parental relationship with a child who-

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years;

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                      continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

                   (ii)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                   leave the UK; or

                (b)    the applicant has a genuine and subsisting
                relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a
                British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee
                leave or humanitarian protection, and there are
                insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
                continuing outside the UK."

           Paragraph 276ADE (in force from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014)

           The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain
           on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
           application, the applicant:

                (i)    does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1.  in  Appendix
                FM; and

                (ii)   has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                ...

                (vi)   is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in
                the UK for less than 20 years  (discounting  any  period  of
                imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural or
                family) with the country to which he would  have  to  go  if
                required to leave the UK."





Discussion

   19. A large number of cases were cited in the grounds of appeal.  I  have
       not referred to each case cited but I have taken  into  consideration
       the general principles to  be  derived  in  relation  to  the  issues
       raised.

   20. The grounds of appeal contain overlapping issues, I propose  to  deal
       with the judge's  findings  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  then
       consider the findings under Article 8 outside the Rules referring  to
       the relevant parts of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  submissions  as
       appropriate. I will then consider the remaining grounds of appeal.

  The Immigration Rules

  Paragraph EX.1(b) of the Immigration Rules

   21. Ground 2 asserts that the judge erred when making findings that there
       are no significant difficulties which would be faced by the appellant
       or his partner in integrating into Dominica when the reality is  that
       the appellant's family are in the UK.

   22. The issue that the judge had to consider  is  whether  or  not  there
       would be insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside
       the UK. In R (on the application of Agyarko and others)  v  Secretary
       of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440,  (2015)
       ('Agyarko') the Court of appeal held:

           "[21]  The phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  as  used  in  this
           paragraph of the Rules clearly  imposes  a  high  hurdle  to  be
           overcome by an Applicant for leave to remain  under  the  Rules.
           The test is significantly more demanding than  a  mere  test  of
           whether it would be reasonable to expect a  couple  to  continue
           their family life outside the United Kingdom.

           [22]    This  interpretation  is  in  line  with  the   relevant
           Strasbourg jurisprudence. The phrase "insurmountable  obstacles"
           has its origin in the Strasbourg jurisprudence  in  relation  to
           immigration cases in a family context, where it is mentioned  as
           one factor among others to be taken into account in  determining
           whether any right under art 8 exists for family  members  to  be
           granted leave to remain or leave to enter a  Contracting  State:
           see eg Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer v Netherlands (2007)  44
           EHRR  34,  para  39  ("...  whether  there  are   insurmountable
           obstacles in the way  of  the  family  living  together  in  the
           country of origin of one or more of them ...").  The  phrase  as
           used in the Rules is intended to have the same meaning as in the
           Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear that the ECtHR regards  it
           as a formulation imposing a stringent test in  respect  of  that
           factor, as is illustrated by Jeunesse v  Netherlands  (see  para
           117: there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
           settling in Suriname, even though the Applicant and  her  family
           would experience hardship if forced to do so).

           [23]    For  clarity,  two  points  should  be  made  about  the
           "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion.   First,   although   it
           involves a stringent test, it is obviously intended in both  the
           case-law and the Rules to  be  interpreted  in  a  sensible  and
           practical rather than a purely literal way ...

           [25]   ...The mere facts that Mr Benette is a  British  Citizen,
           has lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a job  here
           - and hence might find it difficult and might be reluctant to re-
           locate to Ghana to continue their family life there-  could  not
           constitute insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.'

   23. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640
       (IAC) it  was  held  that  the  term  'insurmountable  obstacles'  in
       provisions  such  as  Section  EX.1  are  not  obstacles  which   are
       impossible to surmount: they concern the practical  possibilities  of
       relocation.

   24. The judge set out at paragraph 25 a number of factors that were taken
       into consideration when deciding if there would be  very  significant
       difficulties to the appellant or his  partner  in  continuing  family
       life outside the UK. The only references to the appellant's  wife  is
       that there was no evidence that the appellant would not  be  able  to
       support her (sub-paragraph (a), there is no  language  barrier  (sub-
       paragraph (c)) and that the appellant will be able to assist his wife
       with integration (sub-paragraph (d)). There is no specific  reference
       to the appellant's wife's responsibilities and relationships  in  the
       UK or to the fact that she is in full time employment here.  Although
       a judge does not have to set out every specific piece of  information
       considered, it is not clear that the  judge  took  all  the  relevant
       factors into account when considering whether or not there  would  be
       insurmountable obstacles to the appellant  and  his  wife  continuing
       family life outside the UK.

   25. However, as held in Agyrako  the  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles
       imposes a high hurdle to be overcome by an  applicant  for  leave  to
       remain under the  Rules.   The  test  is  not  whether  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect a couple to continue their family  life  outside
       the United Kingdom. It is a much more stringent test. The factors  in
       this case are that the appellant's wife has a  job  in  the  UK,  has
       extended family and friends, has never lived outside the UK, that she
       is administering her mother's estate and that her father is ill  with
       prostate cancer. Whilst there may be considerable  hardship  for  the
       appellant's wife in re-locating as she would leave her family and job
       behind, there was no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  amounts  to
       insurmountable obstacles to either  her  or  her  husband  continuing
       family life outside the UK. The appellant's wife indicated  that  she
       would not re-locate. That is a matter of choice and is not  a  factor
       when considering what obstacles there might be.

   26. Set out in ground 1 is an assertion that the  judge  failed  to  take
       into account the explanation of the appellant that  deep  sea  diving
       was unsuitable and dangerous. The judge considered that the  evidence
       was   that   fishing   would   be   difficult   because   his    lung
       capacity/tolerance will not be as good as it was when he was younger.
       The judge found that the appellant had not shown evidentially that he
       would be unable to find work. There is  no  error  of  law  in  these
       findings which were entirely open  to  the  judge  having  heard  and
       considered the evidence in the case. The judge does not find that the
       appellant can resume deep  sea  diving  his  findings  are  that  the
       appellant has not satisfied him on the  evidence  that  he  would  be
       unable to find work.

   27. I find that there was an error of  law  in  the  judge's  failure  to
       consider  the  appellant's  wife's  position  when  considering   the
       insurmountable obstacles test but that it was not  a  material  error
       for the reasons given above.

  Paragraph EX.1(a)

   28. Ground 6 asserts that the judge failed to take into account the  best
       interests of the child as the primary  consideration  and  failed  to
       take into account the  pivotal  role  the  appellant  played  in  the
       child's life and in Ground 2 it is asserted that the judge failed  to
       take into account the effect of forcing the appellant, his wife,  her
       children and grandchild and her father to leave the UK  would  breach
       the Zambrano  principle  and  the  principles  set  out  in  Harrison
       (Jamaica) v SSHD (2012) EWCA

   29. The judge found at paragraph 29 that there is no  evidence  that  the
       appellant has a parental relationship  with  his  wife's  grandchild.
       Further, the judge found that step-grandparent is not included in the
       definition of parent in the Immigration Rules.

   30. There is no challenge  to  these  specific  findings.  The  appellant
       cannot succeed under Paragraph EX.1(a) of the Immigration Rules.  The
       grounds are relevant  however  to  the  consideration  of  Article  8
       outside of the Immigration Rules.

  Paragraph 276ADE

   31. It is asserted in ground 1 that the judge applied the wrong test  (he
       failed to take into account the recent case of Dube which  was  drawn
       to his attention) when considering the appellant's ties  to  Dominica
       and that there was no objective basis on which the Judge could make a
       decision that his removal would not lead to serious hardship.

   32. There was no reference to any specific paragraph in the case of  Dube
       to indicate what the appellant asserts the correct test in respect of
       ties is.  It is asserted that the issue is no longer about  ties  but
       the presumption of family life in the appellant's original country of
       origin unless this can be rebutted. At the time  of  the  application
       and decision the wording of the provision was whether  the  appellant
       has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with  the  country
       to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.  The  judge
       set out, at paragraph 32,  the  incorrect  wording  of  276ADE  which
       contains a test of 'very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
       integration'. This is a more stringent test  than  the  'ties'  test.
       However, it is clear that the judge applied the correct test. Despite
       referring to 'very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration'  at
       Paragraph 33(c) at paragraph 34 the judge cites the interpretation of
       the word 'ties' court in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) (Nigeria) v
       SSHD [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC)  ('Ogundimu')  and  at  paragraph  35
       clearly applies the 'ties' test.

   33. The test is whether  or  not  the  claimant  has  lost  his  ties  to
       Dominica. In YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 the court of appeal approved the construction of
       the concept set out by the Upper Tribunal in the case of Ogundimu. In
       that case the Upper Tribunal stated, at paragraph , that:

           "The natural and ordinary meaning of the words  'ties'  imports,
           we think, a concept involving something more than merely  remote
           and abstract links to the country of  proposed  deportation  and
           removal. It involves there being a continued connection to  life
           in that country; something that ties a claimant to  his  or  her
           country of origin. If this were  not  the  case  then  it  would
           appear that a person's nationality of the  country  of  proposed
           deportation could of itself  lead  to  a  failure  to  meet  the
           requirements of the rule. This would render the  application  of
           the rule, given the context within which it  operates,  entirely
           meaningless".

   34.  The  Upper  Tribunal  decision   in   Bossadi   (paragraph   276ADE;
       suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC) makes  reference  both  to
       the earlier Tribunal decision of  Ogundimu  (Article  8-  new  rules)
       [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) and the  Court  of  Appeal  judgments  in  YM
       (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
       1292 which approved what was said in  Ogundimu.  This  was  that  the
       natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports  a  concept
       involving something more than merely remote and abstract links to the
       country of proposed deportation and removal. It involves there  being
       a continued connection to life in that country.

   35. In R (on the application of Msiza) v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2015] UKUT 00483 (IAC) it was set out that:

           "25.   The Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu also stated that the  test
           of ties was an exacting one that requires a  rounded  assessment
           of all the relevant circumstances and is not confined to social,
           cultural and family issues. That statement was approved  by  the
           Court of Appeal in YM and has been reiterated in Bossadi.

           26.    What we take from this is that the  asserted  absence  of
           family members in the country of nationality of proposed  return
           is in no sense always determinative. In the present  case,  even
           if the applicant has lost touch with  her  stepmother  following
           the death of her father, there is no reason to suppose that  she
           could not re-establish contact once returned  to  South  Africa.
           But, even if  she  could  not,  she  is  relatively  young,  has
           received a good education and in all the circumstances is  quite
           manifestly capable of living independently in South Africa."

   36. The judge noted that the appellant was born in Dominica and has spent
       the vast majority of his life there. He was 43 so had spent 33  years
       in Dominica and nearly 10 years in the UK. It is  asserted  that  the
       appellant's only ties to Dominica are that he is a National  of  that
       country (paragraph 16 of the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal). In his witness statement he  merely  states  that  he  has
       strong roots in the UK 'which outweighs  those  ties  I  had  in  the
       Commonwealth of Dominica' (paragraph 22)

   37. There has been no evidence submitted as to why the claimant, who  has
       lived in Dominica for 33 years and in the UK for just over 10  years,
       has lost his links to Dominica. No evidence as to what  has  happened
       to his family, friends or relations in Dominica  has  been  provided.
       Further there was no evidence as to why such relationships could  not
       be re-established if the appellant had lost touch with his family and
       friends.

   38. The findings of the judge and the conclusion reached were reasonable.
       The judge applied the correct legal test. There is no material  error
       of law in the decision on this issue.

   39.  This is a convenient point to consider Mr Fouladvand's argument that
       in relation to the Immigration Rules if the provision says family and
       social ties then, as the wording says and, if one of the requirements
       is absent then it must be unreasonable to expect the  person  to  re-
       locate.  Both  must  be  present.  It  is  not  clear  what  specific
       provisions of the Immigration Rules that Mr Fouladvand  referred  to.
       The two relevant provisions contain the following tests. In Paragraph
       EX.1(b) the test is 'there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
       life with that partner  continuing  outside  the  UK'.  In  Paragraph
       276ADE the  test  (at  the  relevant  time)  was  'but  has  no  ties
       (including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which  he
       would have to go if required to  leave  the  UK'.  Neither  of  these
       provisions have 'and' as a conjunction.

  Article 8 outside the Rules

   40. The grounds can be summarised into  3  strands.  Firstly,  the  judge
       failed to take into account the best interests of the  child  as  the
       primary consideration, failed to take into account the  pivotal  role
       the appellant played in the child's life  and  failed  to  take  into
       account the effect of forcing the appellant, his wife,  her  children
       and grandchild and her father  to  leave  the  UK  would  breach  the
       Zambrano (C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de l'emploi  [2011]
       ECR I-1177) principle.

   41. Secondly the judge erred in law by failing to consider  that  the  UK
       has a positive obligation to ensure family life flourishes and in not
       considering the effects on the appellant's family and in finding that
       the appellant can continue the relationship by visiting and the usual
       methods of communicating.

   42. Thirdly the judge's approach to proportionality is flawed, the  judge
       misconstrued  section  117B  and  erred  in   attaching   weight   to
       considerations stipulated in those provisions, erred  in  considering
       that the appellant's failure to meet the requirements in Appendix  FM
       means he could not succeed under Article 8. There has been no  proper
       assessment of Article 8 as set out in the case of R v SSHD  ex  parte
       Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 ('Razgar'). The judge ought to have  considered
       whether there were exceptional circumstances  meriting  consideration
       of Article 8 outside the Rules.







  Section 55 - the best interests of the child

   43. In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 the Supreme Court noted that  s
       55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  was  enacted
       to incorporate the UK's obligation under article 3(1) United  Nations
       Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  that,  'In  all  actions
       concerning children, whether undertaken by public or  private  social
       welfare institutions, courts of law,  administrative  authorities  or
       legislative bodies, the best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a
       primary consideration.'

   44. The court held:

           "26.   This did not mean (as it would do in other contexts) that
           identifying their best interests  would  lead  inexorably  to  a
           decision in conformity with those interests. Provided  that  the
           Tribunal did not treat any  other  consideration  as  inherently
           more significant than the best interests  of  the  children,  it
           could conclude that the strength  of  the  other  considerations
           outweighed them. The important thing, therefore, is to  consider
           those best interests first...

           ...

           33.     We  now  have  a  much  greater  understanding  of   the
           importance of these issues in assessing the  overall  well-being
           of the child. In making  the  proportionality  assessment  under
           article 8, the best interests of the child  must  be  a  primary
           consideration. This means that they must  be  considered  first.
           They can, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of
           other  considerations.  In   this   case,   the   countervailing
           considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm   and   fair
           immigration  control,  coupled  with  the   mother's   appalling
           immigration history and the precariousness of her position  when
           family life was created. But, as the  Tribunal  rightly  pointed
           out, the children were not to be blamed for that."

   45. The child in  question  is  the  6  year  old  granddaughter  of  the
       appellant's wife. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered  s55  very
       briefly in paragraph 53 of the decision. The judge, having found that
       the appellant does not have a parental relationship with  the  child,
       considered section 55 and found that it is in the best  interests  of
       the child for her to remain in the  UK  with  one  or  other  of  her
       parents. As stated in Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions  affecting
       children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) it is generally in the
       best interests of a young child to be cared for by her  parents.  The
       judge had found (paragraph 29) that despite the appellant's assertion
       that he has a parental relationship  with  the  child  there  was  no
       evidence from the child's parents to assist that claim and the  judge
       therefore rejected that assertion. The judge was  entitled  to  reach
       the conclusion that he did and clearly considered the evidence of the
       role the appellant played in the child's life. Although consideration
       of the best interests of the child was very brief, on  the  facts  of
       this case and given the findings made by the judge, there was no need
       for any further consideration.

   46. The appellant's reliance on the Zambrano  case  is  misconceived.  In
       this case there is no suggestion that the child  will  be  forced  to
       leave the UK. The child's parents are both in the  UK.  Even  if  the
       appellant had a parental relationship with  the  child  the  Zambrano
       principle would not assist. The test is one of compulsion - would the
       child be forced to leave  the  UK?  In  Sanade  and  others  (British
       children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) in the headnote
       the position was summarised as:

           "6.    Where in the  context  of  Article  8  one  parent  ("the
           remaining parent") of a British citizen child is also a  British
           citizen (or cannot be removed as a family member or in their own
           right), the removal of the  other  parent  does  not  mean  that
           either the child or the remaining parent  will  be  required  to
           leave, thereby infringing the Zambrano principle,  see  C-256/11
           Murat Dereci. The critical question  is  whether  the  child  is
           dependent on the parent being removed for the  exercise  of  his
           Union right of residence and whether removal of that parent will
           deprive the child of the effective exercise of residence in  the
           United Kingdom or elsewhere in the Union."

   47. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       consideration of the best interests of the child.

  Failure to consider the effects on the family

   48. The judge set out at  paragraphs  14  and  15  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant's wife and his uncle. The judge  recorded  the  appellant's
       wife's evidence as to the role that the appellant plays as  a  father
       figure and grandfather and that the appellant's  wife  had  indicated
       that she would not visit the appellant in  Dominica  because  of  her
       family responsibilities in the UK. The judge found that the appellant
       has a family and private life in the UK which will be interfered with
       (paragraph 44). At paragraph 45 the judge found  that  returning  the
       appellant to Dominica amounts  to  a  real  interference  with  their
       family and private life. At paragraph 54 the judge found that it  was
       open to the appellant's wife to travel to Dominica but  that  if  she
       chose not to it is open  to  her  to  continue  the  relationship  by
       visiting and the usual methods of communicating. At paragraph 55  the
       judge found that there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that  the
       appellant's uncle's illness was a significant factor.

   49. It is clear that the judge has taken into account the effect  on  the
       appellant's family. The judge's finding  that  the  relationship  can
       continue by visiting and usual methods of communication  was  in  the
       context of the appellant's wife choosing not to go with the appellant
       to Dominica. Although there is a duty on States to facilitate  family
       life there is no obligation to respect the choice of residence  of  a
       married couple - see R (on the application of Mahmood) v Secretary of
       State for the Home Department [2001] INLR. There is no error  of  law
       in the approach  taken  by  the  judge.  All  relevant  factors  were
       considered.

  Flawed approach to proportionality and Section 117

   50.  It  is  asserted  that  the  judge  erred  in  attaching  weight  to
       considerations  stipulated  in  s117   and   in   his   approach   to
       proportionality. The judge was mandated by Parliament to give  effect
       to the provisions in section 117 of the 2002 Act when undertaking the
       balancing exercise. The Tribunal is required to give  the  new  Rules
       (see Dube (ss.117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)  at  [47]):  "greater
       weight than as merely a starting point for the consideration  of  the
       proportionality of an interference with Article 8 rights"  (see  also
       SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387).

   51. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  adopted  a  structured  approach.  He
       considered each of the relevant sub sections of 117B in paragraph  52
       of the decision. He was required to attach sufficient weight  to  the
       public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration  control
       (paragraph 56). He was  required  to  attach  little  weight  to  the
       appellant's family and private life. In the  balancing  exercise  the
       scales clearly, in a case such as this, are heavily weighted  against
       the appellant. He has been in the UK unlawfully for 9  1/2  years  of
       the 10 years he has been here. His family and private life have  been
       established whilst he has been in the UK unlawfully. He does not have
       a parental relationship with a qualifying child. There is no error of
       law in the judge's approach to the proportionality exercise.

   52. It  is  asserted  that  the  judge  erred  in  considering  that  the
       appellant's failure to meet the requirements in Appendix FM means  he
       could not succeed under Article 8, that  there  has  been  no  proper
       assessment of Article 8 as set out in the case of Razgar and that the
       judge  ought  to  have  considered  whether  there  were  exceptional
       circumstances meriting consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

   53. There is no basis for these assertions. The judge  did  not  consider
       that the appellant's failure to meet the requirements in appendix  FM
       meant that he could not succeed under Article 8.  The  judge  clearly
       considered Article outside of the Immigration Rules  (paragraph  42).
       The requirements set out in the case of R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar
       [2004] UKHL 27 were set out and the judge considered each requirement
       in detail at paragraphs 43 - 56.

  Remaining Grounds of appeal

   54. It is asserted at ground 4 that the judge made an error of  law  when
       he  failed  to  consider   that   the   Respondent's   decision   was
       unreasonable. Reference was made to the case of MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
       (2013) EWCA Civ 1192. This ground is  unparticularised  and  was  not
       referred to in oral submissions.  There was no specific detail of the
       principle relied on in the case cited. In the absence of any detail I
       am unable to discern what the error is alleged to be in  this  ground
       of appeal. I cannot address this issue.

   55. It is asserted that the judge erred by failing to take  into  account
       the fact that the appellant's  wife  supports  him,  that  he  speaks
       English and is not a burden on British taxpayers, is fully integrated
       into British society and it is not in the public interest  to  remove
       him. Mr Fouladvand also submitted that the judge, having  noted  that
       the maintenance of effective immigration control is an aspect of  the
       economic well-being of the country,  erred  by  concluding  that  the
       balance falls on  the  side  of  the  public  interest  in  effective
       immigration control because the  appellant's  wife  supports  him  so
       there is no  negative  impact  on  the  economic  well-being  of  the
       country.

   56. The Appellant cannot obtain a positive right to a grant of  leave  to
       remain because he can speak English and his wife supports him  so  he
       is not a financial burden on the taxpayers. In  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
       [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held:

           "14.   Whilst we heard extensive argument upon the  purpose  and
           effect  of  s117B(2)  and  s117B(3),  we  are   satisfied   that
           ultimately the  matter  is  quite  straightforward.  Upon  their
           proper construction neither s117B(2), nor s117B(3),  grants  any
           form of  immigration  status  to  an  individual  who  does  not
           otherwise qualify for that status, because they have  failed  to
           meet the requirements set out in the Immigration Rules  for  the
           grant of that status. If it was the intention of Parliament that
           the requirements of the Immigration Rules should be over-ridden,
           merely because an individual could establish that they were able
           to speak English,  or  were  financially  independent,  to  some
           degree, then we are satisfied that Parliament would have said so
           in the clearest terms. In addition we consider  that  Parliament
           would have considered it necessary to set  out  what  degree  of
           fluency, or, level of financial independence was required of the
           individual, and the immigration status that the individual would
           be entitled to once it  had  been  demonstrated.  Plainly  these
           statutory provisions do no such thing. One must continue to look
           to the Immigration Rules to discern  what  Parliament  considers
           are the requirements to be met by a claimant, and the length  of
           the period of leave to be granted to them if those  requirements
           are met.

           15.    What  then  is  their  purpose?  We  are  satisfied  that
           s117B(2), and s117B(3), were intended by Parliament to meet, and
           to finally dispose of, the arguments that have from time to time
           been advanced  to  the  effect  that  the  language  and/or  the
           financial requirements of the Immigration Rules should either be
           ignored altogether, or, should carry  little  weight,  when  the
           Tribunal is weighing the proportionality of a decision to remove
           in the context of the consideration of an individual's Article 8
           rights..."

   57. The argument that, because effective immigration control is an aspect
       of the economic well-being of the country, where there is no negative
       impact on the economic well-being the balance cannot fall  in  favour
       of removal is  misconceived.  Maintenance  of  effective  immigration
       control is in the public interest whether  or  not  an  applicant  is
       financially independent. As set out in the headnote in Forman (s117A-
       C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)

           "(i)   The public interest in firm immigration  control  is  not
           diluted by the consideration that  a  person  pursuing  a  claim
           under Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial  burden  on
           the state or is  self-sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so
           indefinitely. The significance of these factors  is  that  where
           they are not present the public interest is fortified."

   58. The appellant has been in the UK unlawfully for 9 �  years.  He  does
       not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The judge did not
       err in finding that the balance  fell  on  the  side  of  the  public
       interest in effective immigration control.

   59. Reliance was also placed on the case of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL.
       In Hayat (nature of Chikwamba  principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT  00444
       (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held:

           "The significance of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 is to  make
           it plain that, in appeals where the only matter weighing on  the
           respondent's side of an Article 8 proportionality balance is the
           public policy of requiring an application to be made  under  the
           immigration rules from abroad, that  legitimate  objective  will
           usually be outweighed by factors resting on the appellant's side
           of the balance. The Chikwamba principle is not confined to cases
           where children are involved or where the person  with  whom  the
           appellant is seeking to remain has settled status in the  United
           Kingdom."

   60. In R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department)  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
       proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC),  albeit  a  judicial
       review, the Upper Tribunal held:

           "Appendix FM does not  include  consideration  of  the  question
           whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to
           return  to  his  home  country  to  make  an   entry   clearance
           application to re-join family members in the U.K. There  may  be
           cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family
           life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where   temporary
           separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for
           entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases,  it  will
           be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of  State
           evidence  that  such   temporary   separation   will   interfere
           disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be  enough
           to rely solely upon the case-law  concerning  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
           [2008] UKHL 40."

   61. It is not clear that in  this  case  that  the  appellant  meets  the
       Immigration Rules but for  the  need  to  made  an  application  from
       outside of the UK. Further, no evidence that any temporary separation
       is disproportionate has been advanced.

Decision

   62. There were no material errors  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. The appeal is dismissed.

   63. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 29 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

