
[pic]
IAC-fH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Judgment given orally at hearing     |On 27 November 2015                  |
|On 29 October 2015                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ALEKSANDR VLADIMIROVIC TURKIN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Asylum Aid


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the  proceeding  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  the
    Secretary of State. However, for the sake  of  clarity  I  continue  to
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was born on 11 April 1978.  He is said  to  be  stateless
    but was born in Lithuania.  He is understood to  have  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 19 November 2005 as a visitor.   He  must  have  left
    because he re-entered on 19 May 2006 on  an  EEA  family  permit,  this
    information being taken from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    On 17 January 2012 a decision was made  to  deport  him.   That  is  an
    important feature of the background circumstances because it  feeds  in
    to what follows.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against that decision
    and his appeal was allowed on the basis that the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because there appeared to be a conflict in  the
    policy of the  respondent  with  regard  to  the  conditions  in  which
    deportation proceedings  could  be  instituted  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations").  I
    take this from [2]  of  the  First-tier  judge's  determination  as  an
    accurate summary, but it  is  in  any  event  reflected  in  the  other
    documents before me.  Mr Eaton reminds me that there  was  in  fact  no
    further deportation decision by the respondent.

 4. On 10 January 2014 the appellant made an application  for  a  residence
    card.  That application was refused.  The application was on the  basis
    that he was  a  dependent  relative  under  regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The decision was refused on 28  April  2014  because  the
    respondent, amongst other things, invoked reg  20.   It  was  concluded
    that the applicant's presence in the UK posed a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental  interests  of  society.
    Thus, the application was refused with reference to reg 20; a  decision
    that at least in principle the Secretary of State was entitled to make.

 5. The appellant's appeal against that decision, which is the  subject  of
    these proceedings, came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Afako  at  a
    hearing on 14 May 2015, whereby he allowed the appeal.  It was part  of
    the decision to refuse the  application  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated that he was the family member of an EEA national  and  had
    not adduced sufficient evidence to support  his  claim  for  dependency
    under reg 7.  That  regulation  defines  family  members  and  includes
    direct descendants of an EEA  national  who  are  that  EEA  national's
    dependants.

 6. The grounds of appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  at  1a-d,  assert
    firstly that the judge fell into error in the application of reg 8.  In
    fact, on behalf of the respondent before me it was accepted that reg  8
    had no part  to  play  in  the  judge's  decision,  or  indeed  in  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the application, as I think is  obvious
    from a reading of both.  That aspect of the grounds is not relied on.

 7. It is further argued in the  grounds,  in  summary,  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the risk of the appellant re-offending is flawed in  that
    the judge decided that the burden was on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate such a risk.  It is also said that the seriousness  of  the
    offences for which he was convicted were  not  taken  into  account  in
    whatever assessment the judge made.  Furthermore, it  is  said  that  a
    relevant factor on the question of risk  is  the  appellant's  apparent
    unwillingness to provide details of his conviction  or  convictions  in
    Lithuania.  It is argued that the judge was wrong to conclude that  the
    appellant did not make any  attempt  to  deceive  in  relation  to  his
    criminal convictions.  It was incumbent on the appellant to provide all
    relevant and accurate particulars.

 8. Additionally, the grounds assert  that  the  judge  wrongly  took  into
    account the apparent relationship between the  appellant  and  his  EEA
    national partner who is a Lithuanian citizen.  It is argued that  there
    are relevant provisions for the appellant to be issued with a residence
    card on the basis of such a relationship, that is to say reg 8,  as  an
    extended family member (presumably) in a durable relationship.

 9. The grounds also contend that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the
    possibility of Ms Trosina, the appellant's partner, returning with  him
    to Lithuania. Insofar as  the  judge  took  into  account  any  medical
    conditions that the appellant may have, as  set  out  at  [35]  of  the
    determination, there was a failure to  explore  whether  the  appellant
    could receive treatment for those conditions in Lithuania.

10. The appellant's 'rule 24' response seeks to rebut, point by point,  the
    arguments advanced in the grounds.  In submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the grounds and with
    reference to the determination sought to demonstrate the areas in which
    the First-tier Judge had erred in law.  I was reminded that the  latest
    offence, described as the index offence, was one in which the appellant
    received a sentence of fifteen months' imprisonment for an  offence  of
    having an offensive weapon.  The judge, it is argued, did not look into
    the particular circumstances  of  the  appellant's  offending  and  his
    convictions in order to determine what the risk is. The  other  grounds
    in relation to proportionality, it was said, are in a  sense  parasitic
    on the first argument about risk.

11. On behalf of the appellant Mr Eaton,  initially  responding  to  issues
    that I raised with him, argued in line with the rule 24  response  that
    there was no error of law on the part of the First-tier Judge in any of
    the respects advanced.

12. Judge Afako's determination at [17] starts by recapping the  background
    to the case, namely that in May 2012 the respondent made a decision  to
    deport the appellant but that decision was overturned (for the  reasons
    already  explained  above).  He  noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    apparently  in  that  decision  left  open  the  possibility   that   a
    deportation decision would be remade, but in the event  the  respondent
    elected not to make such a decision but instead made the decision under
    reg 20. The fact that there has not been a further deportation decision
    is a matter relied on on behalf of the appellant.

13. In considering reg 7 Judge Afako concluded that he was  satisfied  that
    the appellant is the son of Elina  Turkina,  a  national  of  Lithuania
    exercising Treaty rights as a worker.  Details of  her  employment  are
    set out in the determination, and are reflected in the documents before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The judge was satisfied that the appellant was
    living  with  his  mother  at  the  same  address,  citing  the   ample
    documentary evidence to that effect and giving examples of it.

14. He gave legally sustainable reasons for finding that the  appellant  is
    not economically active or otherwise  self-sufficient.   His  partner's
    part-time employment was not sufficient to remove his dependency on his
    mother, on whom it was concluded he  was  also  emotionally  dependent.
    There is reference in  [21]  to  her  helping  him  overcome  his  drug
    dependency and "other challenges" that he faced.

15. At [22] it was concluded that the appellant was a direct descendent  of
    his mother  who  is  exercising  Treaty  rights  and  that  he  is  her
    dependant, she providing financial, practical and emotional support, as
    well as accommodation.  The conclusion in [23] is that the appellant is
    a family member of an EEA national within the meaning of reg 7.

16. The judge then conducted a detailed assessment of  the  application  of
    reg 20.  He referred in general terms to the  appellant's  convictions.
    He said that  the  respondent  must  establish  the  necessity  of  the
    restrictive measure by demonstrating that the circumstances which  gave
    rise to the convictions are evidence of personal conduct constituting a
    present threat to particular  interests.   Thus  he  concluded  that  a
    credible assessment of future risk must inform the first  step  of  the
    decision before conclusions as to proportionality.

17. At [26] there is reference to the respondent's reliance on the  remarks
    of the sentencing judge who referred to the potential danger  that  the
    appellant posed.  There is reference in  that  same  paragraph  to  the
    allegation by the respondent of deception.

18. At [27] there is  an  assessment  of  the  issue  of  deception.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge was entitled to conclude that  the  respondent
    had not established that the appellant had attempted to conceal in  his
    application his criminal convictions.  He noted that the appellant  was
    legally represented and apparently it had  not  been  denied  that  his
    representative did send a list  of  convictions  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  I pause there to mention that this was an issue that I asked Mr
    Eaton about.  It is still not entirely clear, to me at least, where the
    list of his convictions that was apparently provided to  the  Secretary
    of State by his  representatives  is  to  found.  Nevertheless,  it  is
    abundantly clear that the Secretary of State was fully apprised of  the
    appellant's criminal history, and for my part,  having  looked  at  the
    application form at section 10.2 and 10.10, it  is  apparent  that  the
    appellant referred to "an attached list" of convictions and also  asked
    that a covering letter be considered.  The covering letter was a letter
    of  representations  in  support  of  the  application  by  his   legal
    representatives.

19. To return to Judge Afako's determination, at [27] he noted that in  any
    event these offences had previously been the subject of discussion with
    the Secretary of State. He concluded that from the way  the  respondent
    put her case, the issue of deception seems to have arisen from  missing
    particulars (of offences) rather than the fact of the existence of  the
    offences.  He concluded that he was unable to make a  positive  finding
    that dishonesty had been employed in making the application.

20. He then turned to the question of the risk of reoffending which  was  a
    necessary feature of his assessment of the reg 20 issue (because of reg
    21).  He concluded at [28]  that  the  respondent  needed  to  make  an
    assessment of the risk that the appellant posed to the  UK's  "relevant
    interests".  That required the conduct of the appellant since  he  left
    custody to be taken into account.  He noted that there does not  appear
    to have been a professional assessment of the risk that  the  appellant
    poses, or the nature of his engagement with rehabilitative processes in
    the country.

21. I move on, omitting for the moment [29], to [30].  There the judge said
    that there was no dispute but that the offences in Lithuania were  very
    serious as indeed they were.  One of them was an offence of rape.   The
    respondent, the judge said, was now in  possession  of  all  the  facts
    relevant to the offences which  she  had  obtained  from  the  national
    authorities.  He then said as follows:

         "The respondent is thus best placed (indeed bears  the  burden)  to
         present cogent evidence about how those offences  impact  upon  the
         contemporary  assessment  of  the  future   risk   this   appellant
         represents.  This has not been forthcoming, and in the  absence  of
         an objective risk assessment, it seems to me that there is no sound
         basis for drawing adverse inferences about his future conduct  from
         the existence of his past offences in themselves."

22. Judge Afako did conclude at that point  that  the  burden  was  on  the
    respondent to provide evidence about the future risk that the appellant
    represented. I am inclined to think that if that was his  view  it  was
    probably an error of law if he meant to say that there needed to  be  a
    formal risk assessment.  On the other hand even if the judge did err in
    law in that respect I am not satisfied that the error  is  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal. Returning to [29], the judge concluded  that
    there was evidence that the appellant complied with bail conditions and
    had  been  engaging  positively  in  drug  and  alcohol  rehabilitation
    programmes to which he had signed up.  He concluded there was thus more
    than the word of his mother to look to for evidence of the  steps  that
    the appellant had taken in rehabilitation.   He  noted  that  the  last
    criminal offence by the appellant was about five years ago and  he  had
    spent almost three years out of detention since  that  time,  a  matter
    which he concluded must weigh in the evaluation of the risk he poses.

23. Returning to [30], the judge was correct to conclude that a presumption
    of risk cannot arise solely from the existence of  past  offending.  He
    went on to state such would not be the  case  in  particular  where  an
    individual  had  engaged  successfully  with  rehabilitation   efforts.
    Earlier on in that paragraph he correctly stated that past  convictions
    in themselves are not sufficient.

24. Although there is an issue about whether the judge had erred in law  in
    terms of there being a burden of proof on the respondent  to  establish
    that there was the relevant risk, it is important to remember also that
    at [31], under the sub-heading "proportionality", the judge stated that
    even  if  the  respondent  could  by  legitimate  inference  derive  an
    assessment of risk capable of justifying the decision from his previous
    offending,  it  would  have  to  be  shown  that   the   decision   was
    proportionate taking into account all the circumstances.  Again in that
    the judge was correct.

25. He went on to state that  he  found  it  "difficult"  to  carry  out  a
    proportionality assessment without a credible evaluation of the  degree
    of risk as it is not clear what any factors in the  appellant's  favour
    are  being  balanced  against.  Nevertheless,  in  his  proportionality
    assessment the judge expressly stated that  he  would  assume  for  the
    purposes of the exercise that the appellant did pose a risk  sufficient
    to "trigger" a reg 20 decision.

26. In  the  proportionality  assessment  there  is  consideration  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his partner with whom  he  concluded  the
    appellant was in a durable  relationship.   He  also  noted  again  the
    important role that the appellant's mother plays in his life.

27. At [33], although noting  that  his  partner  is  not  his  spouse,  he
    concluded that the couple had decided to build their lives together and
    had  hoped  to  start  a  family  life.   He   noted   the   particular
    circumstances relevant to their relationship recorded at  [33],  namely
    the fact of the appellant's partner having suffered a  miscarriage  and
    the considerable impact it had had on them both.

28. The respondent asserts that there were relevant avenues (under the  EEA
    Regulations) whereby the appellant could establish his entitlement to a
    residence card  as  a  durable  partner.  It  is  argued  that  it  was
    illegitimate for the judge to take the  relationship  into  account  in
    assessing proportionality.

29. I do not agree with that suggestion.  The judge  was  entitled,  indeed
    bound, in the proportionality  assessment  to  take  into  account  all
    relevant circumstances. It seems to me that it must surely be  relevant
    that he has been found to be in a relationship  with  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights.

30. The judge went on at [34] to consider that matter further, including in
    terms of the exercise of Treaty rights of the appellant's partner.   At
    [36] he returned to the issue of the appellant's offences, noting  that
    he had committed a string of offences in the UK and that any risk of re-
    offending would  harm  the  interests  of  the  UK  society  which  the
    respondent has a duty to protect. He noted that the decision under  the
    EEA Regulations required an assessment made on a correct footing, which
    should not be based on past conduct alone.

31. In his final conclusions he stated that in the  light  of  the  adverse
    impact of the decision, the undoubted progress the appellant has  made,
    his domestic circumstances and health problems, the  refusal  to  issue
    him with a residence card is a  disproportionate  response  even  if  a
    credible risk  assessment  had  been  made.  Importantly,  at  [38]  he
    concluded that he would have  reached  the  same  conclusions  had  the
    decision entailed the expulsion of the appellant.

32. On the question of whether the judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    possibility of the appellant's partner returning to Lithuania with him,
    even if the judge was in error in that regard, and I  do  not  consider
    that he was,  he  was  bound  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner.  So far as medical issues are concerned,
    although the judge did not go on to make an assessment of the extent to
    which the appellant could receive treatment in  Lithuania,  in  reality
    the references to the appellant's health were more concerned  with  his
    circumstances in the UK and the proportionality assessment in terms  of
    the progress that he has been making and the dependency on his mother.

33. In all these circumstances I am not satisfied that there is  any  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, whose assessment  of
    all the facts was informed  by  a  correct  appreciation  of  the  law.
    Insofar as my decision identifies any possible error of law, such  does
    not require the decision to be set aside.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  26/11/15
