
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21558/2012
                                                               IA/21562/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 March 2014                               |On 6 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                DEEPA VIGISH
                         VIGISH PALATHUNKAL VIJAYAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussein, Syed Law Office Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For the purposes of this  decision,  I  refer  to  Mrs  Vigish  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as  the
    respondent. The second appellant is Mrs Vigish's husband. His claim  is
    entirely dependent on hers and for the purposes of this determination I
    refer only to the appeal brough by Mrs Vigish.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of India, born on 15 July  1980,  was  granted
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) student on 3 August 2011 until  17
    May 2012.

 3. On 3 April 2012 she made an application for further leave to remain  in
    the Tier 1 (Post Study Work) category.

 4. That application was refused on 26 September 2012. The material  reason
    for the refusal was that the appellant had not been awarded an eligible
    qualification in the 12 months prior to the date  of  the  application.
    She therefore did not meet paragraph 245FD(c) or paragraph 245FD(d)  of
    HC 395 (the Immigration Rules).

 5. The appellant's appeal against the refusal under the Immigration  Rules
    and on Article 8 grounds was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holt in a determination dated 3 December 2012.

 6. The appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and,  following  the
    reported case  of  Khatel  and  others  (s.85A;  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC), in a determination dated 2  April
    2013, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss found an error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, set it aside and allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules. In simple terms, Khatel found  that
    the "date of application" should be construed as  continuing  up  until
    the date of the decision by which time it is accepted the appellant had
    obtained the required qualification.

 7. The Court of Appeal did not agree with the ratio  of  Khatel,  however,
    and overturned it in the case of Prasad Raju and others v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 754. Raju found that the "date of application" is simply that,
    the date on which the appellant applied to the respondent  for  further
    leave and the  appellant  must  show  that  he  obtained  the  required
    qualification in the 12 months prior to that date. As above, it is  not
    disputed that this appellant cannot do so. Raju represents the  current
    law on this matter, regardless of  any  outstanding  challenge  to  the
    Supreme Court.

 8. When, on 16 April 2013, the respondent applied to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, in the light of  Raju,
    the Upper Tribunal issued a direction dated 8 July 2013 indicating that
    it was minded to set aside the Upper  Tribunal  decision  allowing  the
    appeal under rule 45 (1) (b) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008. The direction also proposed that  a  fresh  decision  would
    then be substituted dismissing the appeal to the Upper Tribunal so that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision stood.

 9. The direction invited any objections from the parties to this course of
    action proceeding without the need for an oral hearing.  The  appellant
    did object and so the matter came before me.

10. A further direction was issued drawing the attention of the parties  to
    the reported case of Nasim and others (Raju; reasons  not  to  follow?)
    [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC).

Decision to Set Aside

11. The first matter I must decide is whether I can and  should  set  aside
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

12. Section 10 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007)
    states:

        10. Review of decision of Upper TribunalE+W+S+N.I.



        (1)The Upper Tribunal may review a decision made by it on a matter
        in a case, other than a decision that is an excluded decision for
        the purposes of section 13(1) (but see subsection (7)).

        (2) The Upper Tribunal's power under subsection (1) in relation to
        a decision is exercisable-

          (a) of its own initiative, or

          (b) on application by a person who for the purposes of section
          13(2) has a right of appeal in respect of the decision.

        ...

        (4) Where the Upper Tribunal has under subsection (1) reviewed a
        decision, the Upper Tribunal may in the light of the review do any
        of the following-

        ...

           (c) set the decision aside.

        (5) Where under subsection (4)(c) the Upper Tribunal sets a
        decision aside, the Upper Tribunal must re-decide the matter
        concerned.

        (6) Where the Upper Tribunal is acting under subsection (5), it may
        make such findings of fact as it considers appropriate... .


13. Section 11 of the TCE 2007 therefore allows me to review  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal of my own initiative. Section 11 also  allows  me
    to set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal. When deciding  whether
    to do so I referred to rule 45 (1) (b) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 which states:

        45.-(1) On receiving an application for permission to appeal the
        Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance with rule 46
        (review of a decision), but may only do so if-
        ...
        (b) since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made a
        decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and which, had it
        been made before the Upper Tribunal's decision, could have had a
        material effect on the decision.

14. In this case, the respondent has applied for permission to  appeal  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal to the Court of Appeal.  Raju is binding
    on the Upper Tribunal and, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision, would have had a material effect on that decision.

15. It is my conclusion that I should review the decision of Upper Tribunal
    and set it aside given the significant  materiality  of  Raju.  I  must
    therefore re-make the decision on the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

16. Mr Mahmood made a number of arguments against my taking this course  of
    action, set out in his helpful skeleton argument  and  extended  before
    me. Suffice to say that the statute set out  above  clearly  makes  the
    rule 45 set aside available to me regardless of Mr Mahmood's  arguments
    on  why  binding  and  material  case  law  should   not   be   applied
    retrospectively. Nor  did  was  it  my  conclusion  that  Mr  Mahmood's
    submission on the legitimate expectation  that  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Juss' decision would stand  were  sustainable  in  light  of  the
    statutory provisions and materiality of Raju to this case.

Re-Making the Decision

17. In re-making the appeal I referred to the  case  of  Nasim  and  others
    (Raju; reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC). The  head  note
    of that case is as follows:


        "(1)  It is not legally possible for the First-tier Tribunal or the
        Upper Tribunal to decline to follow the judgment in Raju and others
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754 on
        the basis that the Secretary of State's Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
        policy of July 2010 (concerning the approach to be taken to  "late"
        submission of certain educational awards)  continued  to  apply  in
        respect of decisions taken by the Secretary of State on or after  6
        April 2012, when the Immigration Rules were changed  by  abolishing
        the Tier 1 PSW route.


        (2) The Secretary of State was under  no  duty  to  determine  Post
        Study Work applications made before that date by reference to  that
        policy,  the  rationale  for  which  disappeared  on  6  April.  In
        particular:


          (a)  a person making such an application had no  vested  right  or
          legitimate  expectation  to  have  his  or  her   application   so
          determined;


          (b) it was not legally unfair of the Secretary of State to proceed
          as she did;


          (c) the de minimis principle cannot  be  invoked  to  counter  the
          failure of  applications  that  were  unaccompanied  by  requisite
          evidence regarding the award;


          (d)  the Secretary of State's May 2012  Casework  Instruction  did
          not  gloss  or  modify  the  Immigration  Rules  but  merely  told
          caseworkers to apply those Rules;


          (e)  evidential flexibility has no bearing on the matter;


          (f)  an application was not varied by the submission  of  evidence
          of the conferring of an award on or after 6 April 2012;  but  even
          if it were, the application would fail on the basis that it  would
          have to have been decided under the Rules in force at the date  of
          the variation; and


          (g) an  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  falls  to  be
          determined by reference to  policies  in  force  at  the  date  of
          decision, not those in force at the date of application.


        (3)  The date of "obtaining the  relevant  qualification"  for  the
        purposes of Table 10 of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules  as  in
        force immediately before 6 April 2012 is  the  date  on  which  the
        University or other  institution  responsible  for  conferring  the
        award (not the institution where the applicant physically  studied,
        if different) actually conferred that award, whether in  person  or
        in absentia.


        (4)  As held in Khatel  and  others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
        application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC),  section   85A   of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 precludes a  tribunal,
        in  a  points-based  appeal,  from  considering  evidence   as   to
        compliance with points-based Rules, where  that  evidence  was  not
        before the Secretary of State when she took her decision;  but  the
        section does not prevent a tribunal from considering evidence  that
        was before the Secretary of  State  when  she  took  the  decision,
        whether or not that evidence reached her only  after  the  date  of
        application for the purposes of paragraph 34F  of  the  Immigration
        Rules."

18. The appellant has not shown that she was awarded her  degree  prior  to
    the date of application. The letter dated 1 March 2012 stating she  had
    completed her studies did not show that her  degree  had  been  awarded
    merely that it would be  awarded  at  some  time  in  the  future.  The
    appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules  following  Raju.
    Any challenge brought in terms of what was argued in  Nasim  must  also
    fail.

19. For these reasons, in re-making the appeal, I therefore find  no  error
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  refused  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules.

20. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt also refused the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds. There was no  challenge  to  that  aspect  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  decision before me. It therefore stands and  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim as articulated before Judge Holt remains refused.

21. Mr Smart withdrew the outstanding s.47 removal decision  in  line  with
    SSHD v Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512

Decision

22. The decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss dated 2 April 2013  is
    set aside.

23. I re-make the decision as follows:

      a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error
         on a point of law  in  the  dismissal  of  the  appeals  under  the
         Immigration Rules or Article 8 of the ECHR.

      b. The respondent's s.47 removal decision is withdrawn.

Signed [pic]                                 Date: 4 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

