


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/21511/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at : Field House                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 17 April 2013                            |On : 19 April 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            AMIT RAJ THENNANDIYIL
                                  Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 23 April 1983.  On  3  April
2012 he made an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.  His  application  was  refused  on  26
September 2012 on the basis that he was unable to meet the  requirements  to
be awarded a minimum of 75  points  under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
Rules. He was awarded zero points for the  date  of  his  award  as  he  had
failed to show that he had been awarded his  eligible  qualification  before
the date of his application. That in turn led to the award  of  zero  points
for English language under  Appendix  B.  His  application  was  accordingly
refused under paragraphs 245FD(c) and 245FD(d) of HC 395.

2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed on  the  basis
of findings that his MBA degree had been awarded  to  him  on  2  May  2012,
after the date of his application, albeit prior to the date of  the  refusal
of his application. The appellant then applied for permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal.

4. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  21  December  2012
and on 4 February 2013 I issued the following directions:

   " Having regard to the issue in this case, and in the light of the recent
   decision in Khatel and others (s85A; effect  of  continuing  application)
   [2013] UKUT 00044, as consistent with the Court of Appeal judgement in AQ
   (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833, the Tribunal is minded under  rule
   34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (and  compatibly
   with Practice Statement 7) to set aside the determination of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal judge and to substitute a decision allowing the appeal.


   Any objection to this proposed course must be made to the Upper  Tribunal
   in writing, giving reasons, not later than 7 days  from  the  date  these
   directions are sent out. In  the  absence  of  any  reasonable  response,
   within that time, the Upper Tribunal may then proceed to  set  aside  the
   First-tier Tribunal's decision and allow the appeal."

6. No response has been received by the appellant. However, there  has  been
a written objection by the respondent to the proposed course,  in  a  letter
dated 21 February 2013, in the following terms:

    "The Secretary of State for the Home Office does  not  agree  with  the
    judgement  in  Khatel  and    others  (s85A;   effect   of   continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044 and has made an application to challenge
    the decision to the Court of Appeal.

    It is respectfully requested  that  consideration  of  this  appeal  be
    adjourned until the result of the appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  is
    known."

7.  The respondent's only response,  therefore,  is  disagreement  with  the
reported decision in Khatel. No other reasons have been given for  upholding
the judge's decision. Khatel is a reported decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal
made by the President and I see no reason why I should not  follow  it.  Nor
do I consider there to be any reason why the appellant's  appeal  should  be
adjourned to await the outcome of the respondent's challenge  to  the  Court
of Appeal, given that there is no indication in the respondent's  letter  as
to whether permission has even been  granted  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
Appeal, or of the likely  time-frame  for  such  a  challenge.  Accordingly,
unless and until such  time  as  the  decision  in  Khatel  is  successfully
challenged and  overturned,  I  consider  that  it  sets  out  the  relevant
principles in circumstances such as those of the appellant.

8. As such, and for the reasons set out in the directions dated  4  February
2013, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  substitute  a
decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

9. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside. I re-
make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




                               Signed                                  Date

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
