
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21402/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th April 2013                              |On 3rd May 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Sumair Jahangir
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel, instructed by 786 Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Judge
    Bennett made following a hearing at Taylor House on 14th December 2012.







Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  19th  April  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on 21st August 2009 with  entry  clearance  entitling
    him to enter as a Tier 4 General Student valid until 30th June 2012.

 3. On 2nd April 2012 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain  as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant but was refused on the grounds  that
    he did not meet the requirements of paragraph 245FD of the  Immigration
    Rules because he did not qualify for the relevant points in respect  of
    the date of obtaining the eligible award.  The award in this case was a
    Master's degree in Business  Administration  from  the  Liverpool  John
    Moores University.  The award date was 11th April 2012, some nine  days
    after the application.

 4. In a comprehensive determination the judge reviewed the  relevant  case
    law and said that he would follow the case of Ali (Section 120  -  PBS)
    [2012] UKUT 00368. On that basis he concluded that the Appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Rules since he had  not  obtained  his
    award on 2nd April 2012, the date on which he made his application.  He
    therefore  did  not  make  the  application  within  twelve  months  of
    obtaining the relevant  qualification  and  did  not  qualify  for  the
    relevant points.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal in equally full  grounds  and
    relied on the judgment in Khatel and  Others  (Section  85A  effect  of
    continuing application) Nepal [2013] UKUT 44 where it was held that  an
    application for  further  leave  to  remain  is  to  be  treated  as  a
    continuing application, starting  with  the  date  when  it  was  first
    submitted and ending on the date when it is decided.  An  Appellant  is
    therefore  not  precluded  by  Section  85(5)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended from relying  in  an  appeal
    upon evidence that was notified to the Secretary of  State  before  the
    date of her decision.  Where, in an application for leave  as  a  Post-
    Study Work Migrant, the obtaining of the academic award needed to  gain
    the requisite points is notified to the Secretary of  State  after  the
    date when the application was first submitted but before a decision  is
    made on the application the requirement of Table 10, the  qualification
    is  obtained  within  twelve  months  of  making  the  application   is
    satisfied, because the application is a continuing one until a decision
    upon it has been made.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Bowen  on  12th
    March 2013 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 7. Mr Yeo submitted that the decision in Khatel was determinative of  this
    appeal.  This is not an issue  where  there  can  be  multiple  correct
    interpretations of the statutory position.  The Immigration Judge  took
    a different position from the Tribunal in  Khatel  which  ought  to  be
    followed as a more authoritative statement of what  the  interpretation
    of the statute should be.

 8. Mr Bramble relied on his Reply which states  that  the  Respondent  has
    been granted permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  in  Khatel  .
    The case had been set down  for  a  date  in  mid-June  and  there  was
    therefore a realistic timeframe for the resolution of this matter which
    he accepted was absolutely on all fours with the decision in Khatel. He
    submitted that the decision is not declaratory law and it cannot be  an
    error for the judge not  to  have  considered  the  case  when  it  was
    promulgated after his decision. The judge had considered the  competing
    case law carefully and appropriately and reached a decision open to him
    to follow the case of Ali. The decision should stand, or alternatively,
    the case should be adjourned to wait behind  the  final  resolution  of
    Khatel.

 9. By way of reply, Mr Yeo said that in effect Mr Bramble  was  submitting
    that Khatel was wrongly decided but it was a reported decision  of  the
    Tribunal which ought to carry considerable weight.  He  said  that  his
    client was paying privately for the appeal and certainly did  not  want
    his case to be adjourned.

Findings and Conclusions

10.  Khatel is a reported decision of the President of the Upper  Tribunal,
    a statement of the law as it should have been applied by the Judge  and
    had it been before him there is no doubt that he  would  have  followed
    it. I proceed on the assumption that Khatel is rightly  decided  unless
    the Court of Appeal finds otherwise, and on that  basis,  I  treat  the
    application as a continuing one until a  decision  has  been  made  and
    therefore the Appellant can  meet  the  relevant  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Decision

11. The judge erred in law and his decision is set  aside.   The  following
    decision  is  substituted.   The   Appellant's   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse his application for  further  leave  to
    remain is allowed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

