
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21314/2014
     IA/12478/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 April 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    MISS RAZIA MARZIA (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                MR MOHAMAD YASIN NUJEEBUN (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Symes, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent Miss Razia Marzia is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  and  her
    date of birth is 25 July  1982.   She  is  married  to  the  respondent
    Mohamad Yasin Nujeebun who is a citizen of Mauritius and  his  date  of
    birth is 28 December 1982.  I shall refer to  the  respondents  as  the
    appellants as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   Mr Nujeebun arrived lawfully in the  country  on  2  March  2003  as  a
    student. He made an application on 2 September  2013  for  ILR  on  the
    basis of ten years' residence in the UK.  This application was  refused
    by the Secretary of State in a decision of 17 February  2014.   It  was
    refused because Mr Nujeebun did not have continuous  residence  between
    17 February 2007 and 31 May 2007 and thus was  without  leave  for  104
    days. Miss Marzia came to the UK lawfully in 2002  as  a  student.   On
    14 November 2012 she was granted limited leave to enter the UK until 2
    September 2013 as a Tier 1 post-study partner.  She made an application
    on 2 September 2013 for leave to remain.  Her application  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State in a decision of  29  April  2014  under  the
    Immigration Rules  and  Article  8.   Removal  directions  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the 2006 Act  were  made  against  both  appellants.  The
    decision maker considered whether or not the application contained  any
    exceptional circumstances and decided that it did not.   Mr  Nujeebun's
    application  was  refused  under  the  long  residence  Rules  and  the
    Immigration  Rules  relating  to  private  and  family  life.   It  was
    considered by the  decision  maker  that  there  were  no  "factors  of
    sufficiently compelling or compassionate nature to warrant granting you
    any period of leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  exceptionally
    outside the Immigration Rules".

3.   The appellants appealed against the decisions and  their  appeals  were
    allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Trevaskis  in  a  decision
    that was promulgated on 26 November 2014 following  a  hearing  on  19
    November 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Shimmin on 12 January 2015.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   Judge Trevaskis heard evidence from the appellants and  he  found  them
    both to be credible.  He found that  neither  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to family or  private
    life.

5.   He made the following findings:

         "34.     Regarding the second appellant [Mr Nujeebun], his evidence
             is that he has family members living in Mauritius with whom he
             maintains contact, and he still speaks French and Creole.   He
             has not claimed  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to
             relocate to Mauritius, and I do not find any evidence that  it
             would be impossible.


         35.  Both appellants have claimed that it would be  impossible  for
             them to relocate in either country as a couple;  those  claims
             are based upon alleged disapproval of their marriage by  their
             respective families, and  neither  has  suggested  that  their
             partner would be unable to obtain leave to enter their country
             as their spouse.  I am not satisfied that the length  of  time
             that they have each spent away from their country of origin is
             sufficient to demonstrate that no ties to that country remain,
             bearing in mind the number and duration of return visits  that
             each appellant has made to their respective  countries  during
             that period, and the level of maintained contact  with  family
             members there.


         37.  I have gone on to consider whether the appeal requires  to  be
             considered according to the provisions of  Article  8  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights.  In MM  and  SSHD  [2014]
             EWCA Civ 985 the Court of Appeal has stated 'if the  applicant
             cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is  not
             a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined by
             the relevant decision maker.'  There must be a good reason  to
             consider Article  8  directly,  meaning  either  one  that  is
             compelling or because  there  are  exceptional  circumstances.
             There is no test of exceptionality; there does not have to  be
             anything extreme to move to Article 8 directly.  A good reason
             may be  present  if  the  Immigration  Rules  do  not  provide
             discretion to examine  whether  the  immigration  decision  is
             proportionate in light of all the  appellants'  circumstances,
             but only if the consequences of the immigration  decision  are
             likely to have a significant impact on the private  or  family
             life continuing.


         38.  I find that the immigration decisions are  likely  to  have  a
             significant impact on the private or family  life  continuing.
             The appellants came to the United Kingdom  as  students;  they
             came from different countries, and formed  their  relationship
             after they met in the United Kingdom; should they be  required
             to leave, it is likely that, at  least  initially,  they  will
             have to return to their respective countries, and one of  them
             will have to seek leave to enter the other's country  if  they
             are able to resume living together.


         39.  I find that the Immigration Rules do not provide discretion to
             examine whether the immigration decision is  proportionate  in
             light of all the  appellants'  circumstances.   The  decisions
             made by the respondent have been based simply  on  the  second
             appellant not having completed ten  years'  continuous  lawful
             residence, neither appellant having a partner who is a British
             citizen, settled in the United Kingdom or  here  with  refugee
             leave or humanitarian protection, and neither appellant having
             shown that they have no ties to their home  countries.   Since
             neither of them qualifies for consideration under EX.1,  there
             has been no consideration of obstacles to  their  private  and
             family life continuing outside the United Kingdom".

6.   The First-tier Tribunal went on to consider  Article  8  in  accordance
    with R (Razgar) and SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and stated as follows:-

         "43.      Regarding  the  second  question,   I   find   that   the
             interference  will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity   as
             potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8;  it  will
             involve  the  appellants  in  relocating  to  Bangladesh   and
             Mauritius  respectively,  where  they  will   be   potentially
             homeless and without means of support".

    The judge went on to find that the decision was not proportionate after
    having conducted a balancing exercise at paragraphs 47-50.   The  Judge
    found as follows:-


         "47.     The  factors  in  favour  of  the  interference  are:  the
             appellants came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  students,  with
             limited leave granted on  that  basis;  they  entered  into  a
             relationship knowing that their immigration  status  has  been
             precarious; regarding Section 117A and B of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  their  private  life  should
             only be given little weight as it has been  established  while
             their status was precarious.


         48.  The factors against the interference are: the appellants  have
             been living in the United Kingdom since 2002  and  2003;  they
             have not committed any  crime;  they  have  lived  industrious
             lives, successfully pursuing  their  studies  and  working  in
             accordance with their leave; they have  registered  their  own
             company to enhance their earning  capability,  and  have  paid
             income  tax  and  national  insurance  appropriate  to   their
             respective incomes; they have established a  large  circle  of
             friends  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom;  they  have  become
             integrated within a strong community in mosques in London  and
             Northampton; they have contributed to  the  welfare  of  their
             community by improving themselves  in  charitable  activities;
             they have become financially self-sufficient as  a  result  of
             their efforts;  they  have  acquired  and  maintained  several
             addresses during their time in the United Kingdom;  they  have
             established a strong personal relationship,  which  they  have
             acknowledged by marriage, and which has existed for  over  ten
             years, and which it is unlikely that  they  will  be  able  to
             sustain if they are required to leave the United Kingdom; they
             both speak English to the extent  necessary  to  minimise  the
             extent of any burden on taxpayers, and to enable  them  better
             to integrate into  society;  they  have  come  to  the  United
             Kingdom to embark upon a path towards  settlement  based  upon
             long residence, and therefore their immigration status  during
             that  qualifying  period  cannot  truly  be  said  to  be   as
             precarious as the status of migrants who are not pursuing such
             a path towards settlement; the private and family  life  which
             they have established during  their  presence  in  the  United
             Kingdom should therefore be given appropriate weight, and  not
             little weight.


         49.  I have undertaken a balancing exercise  in  respect  of  these
             competing factors, in order to assess the  proportionality  of
             the respondent's decision.  I find that the factors supporting
             the refusal decisions are outweighed by  those  against  them.
             At the date of this hearing, both appellants have been living,
             studying and working in the United Kingdom  for  twelve  years
             and eleven years respectively, and have shown their  intention
             to settle here and contribute positively to the economy and to
             the community of the United Kingdom.  The technical deficiency
             in the application of  the  second  appellant  [Mr  Nujeebun],
             relating to the lack of leave while  confusion  regarding  his
             application was resolved, is a minimal period of time,  having
             regard to the overall length of  residence.   He  remained  in
             contact with the respondent throughout that  period,  and  did
             not seek to disengage from the official process  for  renewing
             leave;  his  leave  was  indeed  renewed  once  the   relevant
             paperwork had been sorted  out,  and  his  presence  has  been
             lawful throughout the subsequent period.  Having regard to the
             various family problems which he was experiencing at or  about
             the time when the  application  was  first  submitted,  it  is
             understandable that he encountered difficulties regarding  the
             payment of the fee and the  correct  form  of  application  to
             submit; however, this was not a first application for  further
             leave, and it was clear from  past  information  held  by  the
             respondent that the second appellant was a genuine  applicant.




         50.   It  has  not  been  suggested  by  the  respondent  that  the
             relationship of  the  appellants  is  anything  other  than  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship, and I am  satisfied  that
             it is.  Although either party is free to return to  their  own
             country of origin, it is by no means clear that  their  spouse
             will be able to accompany them, or, if they  can,  that  there
             will be an adequate support system available to them  in  that
             country,  to  assist  them  in   finding   accommodation   and
             employment as a means to  self-sufficiency.   I  am  satisfied
             that, in those circumstances,  they  will  be  prevented  from
             maintaining their family life together  in  whichever  country
             they chose.  On the contrary, in  this  country  they  have  a
             home, employment .. ............ a social  context  for  their
             lives, and I find  no  good  reason,  nor  any  strong  public
             interest, for  depriving  them  of  these  advantages  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom.
             The maintenance of effective immigration control requires  the
             proper application of the law,  including  the  provisions  of
             Article 8, and not simply a literal application of the Rules."




The Ground Seeking Permission and Oral Submissions

7.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal maintain that  the  judge  was
    wrong at [39] when he found that the Immigration Rules do  not  provide
    discretion to examine whether the immigration decision is proportionate
    in all the appellants' circumstances.  It is contrary to  Nagre  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin), specifically at [42] which reads as follows:

         "In order to  show  that,  despite  the  practical  possibility  of
         relocation (i.e. the absence of insurmountable  obstacles  to  it),
         removal in such a case would nonetheless be  disproportionate,  one
         would need to identify other nonstandard and particular features of
         the case of a compelling nature  to  show  that  removal  would  be
         unjustifiably harsh".

8.   The grounds maintain that  the   judge  failed  to  direct  himself  in
    relation to the test in Nagre and conducted a "freewheeling  Article  8
    analysis, unencumbered by  the  Rules"  of  the  kind  referred  to  by
    Cranston J in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]
    UKUT 640 (IAC).

9.   The grounds refer to [50] of the determination and  attach  significant
    weight to the finding that "although either party is free to return  to
    their own country of origin it is by no means clear that  their  spouse
    would be able to accompany them".   The  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    appellants to show that their relocation would be  impossible  or  that
    removal would be unjustifiably harsh and it was  insufficient  for  the
    judge to speculate that it might be impossible.

10.  I heard oral submissions from both Mr Tufan and  Mr  Symes.   Mr  Tufan
    referred me to the case of Singh and  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  with
    specific reference to [61], [64] and [67].  It was submitted  that  the
    finding at [43] of the Judge's determination was not  grounded  in  the
    evidence.  There was no clear evidential basis for the findings at [50]
    which in any event contradicts those at  [35].   The  judge  considered
    Section 117 of the 2002 Act and agreed that  little  weight  should  be
    given to the appellants' private lives, but  then  did  not  apply  the
    direction.

11.  Mr Symes relied on the Rule 24 response and  made  submissions  in  the
    context of it. He maintained that the grounds of appeal  are  not  made
    out,  the  judge  properly  directed   himself   and   understood   the
    relationship between appeals inside  and  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in accordance with MM and Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 985.   The  judge's
    reference to  discretion  at  [37]  and  [39]  is  in  the  context  of
    determining whether there is  a  meaningful  inquiry  to  be  conducted
    outside the Rules and does not amount to an error of law.

12.   The  judge  carried  out  a  balancing  exercise  and  considered  the
    appellants' private and family life here, the lengthy residence and the
    difficulties as a result of them being from different countries neither
    having a connection with the country  of  the  other.  In  relation  to
    proportionality  the  judge  properly  considered  part   5A   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 taking  into  account  the
    small break in Mr Nujeebun's leave and the uncertainty in  relation  to
    the ability to enter the other one's  country  where  they  would  face
    difficulties in making  lives  together.   The  judge  was  principally
    concerned with the strength of the connections that the appellants have
    to the UK as opposed to the relatively sparse lives that  awaited  them
    abroad.

13.  Mr Symes argued that the  decision  is  not  irrational  and  that  the
    grounds of appeal amount to a quarrel with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the evidence.


Conclusions

14.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the judge's approach to Article 8 is flawed but no reason for  this  is
    given by the judge granting permission.

15.  The judge at  [39]  found  that,  in  this  case,  in  the  appellants'
    circumstances, it was  necessary  to  conduct  a  full  examination  of
    Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.   This  decision  was  well
    within the remit of the judge and it was a rational decision which  was
    adequately reasoned.  It was not contrary to the judgment in Singh  and
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and generally consistent with case law  (see  R
    (Oludoyi) v SSHD (Article 8 -MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) [2014] UKUT 00539)
    on this particular issue (in relation to article 8  and  the  interplay
    with the rules).

16.  The grounds at [6] challenge the  assessment  of  proportionality  with
    specific reference to [50] of the determination.  In my view, the judge
    conducted a holistic assessment of  the  appellants'  circumstances  in
    concluding that it would  not  be  proportionate  to  remove  them  (to
    Bangladesh or Mauritius). The decision is reasoned. He found  that  the
    appellants were credible and accepted their evidence in relation to the
    difficulties that they would  face  in  relation  to  return  to  their
    respective countries. The judge found at [43] that the appellants would
    be potentially homeless and without the means of support in  Bangladesh
    or Mauritius, but he explained this  in  more  detail  at  [50].  I  am
    satisfied that the  findings  are  grounded  in  the  evidence  of  the
    appellants which the judge accepted.  It  is  clear  that  the  overall
    assessment of proportionality was made on the basis that the appellants
    would be returning together to Mauritius or Bangladesh and not  on  the
    basis that relocation would be impossible.  It is obvious in this  case
    that the judge attached considerable weight to the period of  time  the
    parties had been here and he was entitled to.

17.  In oral submissions before me Mr Tufan  raised  section  117B(5)  which
    states that little weight should be given to a private life established
    by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious.  It was not a matter that  was  raised  in  the  permission
    application, but it relates to the proportionality assessment which  is
    challenged.  However there is no merit  in  the  assertion.  The  judge
    properly had regard to section 117B (5) at [47] and again at [48].   He
    explained at [49] why he found, on the facts of this  particular  case,
    that "the factors supporting the refusal decisions  are  outweighed  by
    those against them." The judge had regard to section 117B of  the  2002
    Act (Dube (ss 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT  00090  (IAC)  in  regard  to  the
    precarious nature of each of the appellant's status here in the context
    of private life and he and weighed this against the period of time they
    had been here and other factors which  he  considered  to  relevant  in
    conducting the balancing exercise.

18.  Whilst the decision was generous, it was by  no  means  irrational.  It
    has not been made out that he took into account irrelevant evidence  or
    failed to take into account relevant evidence.  The balancing  exercise
    conducted by the judge was adequately reasoned,  rational  and  lawful.
    The findings are grounded in the evidence and regard was has to article
    8 jurisprudence and section 117 of the 2002 Act.

19.   The application by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeals under  Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights is maintained.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 1 May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


