
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21354/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th March 2016                     |On 5th April 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                          mr. sajeevan athmanathan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. V Lingajothy, of Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Carlin on 10th March  2015,  in  which  he
       dismissed an appeal against the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department on 6th May 2014 to issue a "Residence  Card"
       to the appellant as confirmation of a right  to  reside  in  the  UK
       under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
       ("the 2006 Regulations").


 Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who was born on 9th January
       1986. He came to the UK on 1st March  2007  having  been  granted  a
       student visa.  His immigration history is not entirely clear but  on
       10th March 2014, he applied for a residence card as confirmation  of
       a right of residence in the UK.  The appellant applied as  the  non-
       EEA national family member of Sukumar Vaithilingam (the  appellant's
       maternal uncle), a national of Norway exercising  treaty  rights  in
       the UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulations. It was the  decision
       refusing that application, which gave  rise  to  the  appeal  before
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Carlin.


    3. At paragraphs [1] and [2] of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Carlin identifies the two issues that were to be determined  by  the
       Tribunal.


    4. At paragraph [1] of his decision, the  Judge  identifies  the  first
       issue. That is, whether the appellant is  entitled  to  a  residence
       card. The Judge's findings of fact, his  analysis  of  the  relevant
       legal framework, the relevant authorities and his  analysis  of  the
       evidence before him, is to be found at paragraphs [3] to [42] of the
       decision.


    5. The Judge notes at paragraph [14] of his decision  that  the  appeal
       turns on whether  the  appellant  falls  within  the  definition  of
       'extended family member' as set out in Regulation 8(2) of  the  2006
       Regulations.   The  appellant's  case  was  that  he  satisfied  the
       requirements of Regulation  8(2)(a).   That  is,  the  appellant  is
       "dependant upon the EEA national or is a member of his household."


    6. At paragraph [18] of the decision,  the  Judge  noted  the  reliance
       placed by the appellant upon the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
       Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2))[2012]  UKUT  79.   At  paragraph
       [20] he refers  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  "membership  of  a
       household" as set out in the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  KG
       (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ 13.   Finally,  at  paragraph  [40]  the
       Judge refers to the meaning of the word "dependency" as set  out  in
       Jia Migrationsverket  Case  C-1/05  and  Moneke  (EEA-OFMs  Nigeria)
       [2011] UKUT 00341.


    7. At paragraph [42] of his decision, the judge concluded overall  that
       the appellant had neither established that he was dependant upon the
       EEA national nor that he is a member of his household.


    8. At paragraph [2],  the  Judge  states  that  the  second  issue  was
       "whether the appeal invokes the right to a private and  family  life
       under Article 8 and whether there has been a  violation  of  Article
       8."   The Judge deals with that second issue at paragraphs  [43]  to
       [47] of his decision.   At paragraph [47], the Judge states:


             "I was of the view that Article  8  was  not  engaged  in  the
             present case, broadly  for  the  reasons  put  forward  by  Mr
             Hammonds. The appellant does not have to leave  the  UK  as  a
             result of the decision that I have made. As  such,  there  has
             been no interference with the right to respect for private  or
             family life. If and  when  such  a  decision  has  been  made,
             Article 8 may be relevant then."


 The grounds of appeal


    9. The appellant advanced four grounds of  appeal  in  support  of  the
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal;


          a. The Judge arrives at findings of fact without any reference  to
             the correct standard and burden of proof;


          b. The Judge erred in law in  assessing  whether  the  appellant's
             sponsor sent him money in order to meet his essential needs;


          c. The Judge erred in law in his assessment of the evidence of  Mr
             Premachandran MP;


          d. The Judge erred in law in failing to consider whether there  is
             any potential breach of the appellant's rights under Article  8
             ECHR


   10. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Chamberlain on 23rd July 2015.  In doing so, she noted:


             "I have carefully considered the grounds and the decision. The
             Appellant's central claim was under the  EEA  Regulations.  He
             also submitted that the decision was a breach  of  his  rights
             under Article 8. The judge did not  consider  the  Appellant's
             claim under Article 8 on the grounds that  the  Appellant  did
             not need to leave the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  the
             decision. This ground is arguable  and  merits  the  grant  of
             permission to appeal. I am disinclined  to  reject  the  other
             grounds."


The hearing before me


   11. It is convenient to deal with the fourth of the appellant's  grounds
       of appeal that I have identified  at  paragraph  [9]  above,  first.
       Although  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  Article  8  ground  was
       maintained in the appellant's skeleton argument relied  upon  by  Mr
       Lingajothy, Mr Lingajothy in my view rightly, abandoned that  ground
       at the hearing of the appeal before me.  In Amirteymour  and  others
       (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  466  (IAC),  the  Upper
       Tribunal held that where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act
       has been served and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,
       an appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in  an
       appeal under the EEA Regulations.


   12. As to the remaining three grounds of appeal, Mr Lingajothy initially
       submitted that the Judge fails to identify  the  standard  of  proof
       that he has applied in reaching his decision. He submitted that  the
       appellant is therefore unable to know whether the Judge adopted  the
       correct burden and standard of  proof  in  determining  the  appeal.
       However during the course of the hearing before  me,  Mr  Lingajothy
       accepted that the Judge appears to have applied the  civil  standard
       of proof, and considered whether the appellant has established, on a
       balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  requirements  of  Regulation
       8(2)(a) of the 2006 Regulations are met.


   13. As to the second ground of appeal, Mr Lingajothy submitted  that  in
       finding that money sent by the sponsor  to  the  appellant  and  his
       family, was not used exclusively for essential items, but was in the
       main, used to make life easier for the appellant and his family, the
       Judge fails to identify the information that leads to that  finding.
        Mr Lingajothy submitted that the  appellant  was  not  required  to
       establish that the money provided by the sponsor to the family,  was
       exclusively  for  essential  items.   It  was  sufficient  for   the
       appellant to establish that the funds were used for essential  items
       and for other uses. Furthermore, he submitted that it is  not  clear
       whether the Judge has considered the Appellant's   evidence  as  set
       out in paragraph [30] of the appellant's witness statement.  If  the
       evidence of the appellant is  rejected,  the  Judge  has  failed  to
       provide any reasons for rejecting that evidence and  has  failed  to
       make any findings as to the credibility  of  the  Appellant  or  his
       Sponsor.


   14. Finally, as to the third ground of  appeal,  Mr  Lingajothy  submits
       that the finding at paragraph [33] that the evidence of  Mr.  Suresh
       Premachandran MP could not be relied  upon,  is  based  solely  upon
       speculation by the Judge and it was open to the Judge to  raise  any
       concerns  about  that   evidence   with   the   appellant   or   his
       representative at the hearing, in order to clarify matters.


   15. In reply, Mr  Kingham  submitted  that  a  careful  reading  of  the
       decision demonstrates that the Judge has  correctly  identified  the
       legal framework, and has properly addressed the correct test in  his
       assessment of whether the requirements of Regulation 8(2)(a) of  the
       2006 Regulations are met by the appellant.    He  submits  that  the
       grounds advanced by the appellant amount  to  nothing  more  than  a
       disagreement with the findings that were properly open to the Judge.


Discussion


   16. It is unfortunate that the Judge failed to expressly set out  in  his
       decision, upon whom the burden of proof rests, and  the  standard  of
       proof that he has applied in his assessment of the evidence.  However
       it is plain from a proper reading of  the  decision  that  the  Judge
       proceeds upon the premise that it is for the appellant to  establish,
       on a balance of probabilities, that the  requirements  of  Regulation
       8(2)(a) of the  2006  Regulations  are  met.   In  my  judgement,  Mr
       Lingajothy was right  to  accept  that  the  Judge  appears  to  have
       correctly applied the civil standard of proof to  his  assessment  of
       the evidence.  That he has done so, is in any event  plain  when  one
       turns to the Judge's assessment of the  evidence.   For  example,  at
       paragraph [26], the Judge states "...I found it more  likely[1]  that
       the appellant's sponsor was a  member  of  the  appellant's  parent's
       household.".   In  assessing  the  weight  to  be  attached  to   the
       statements adduced by the appellant, at  paragraph  [33],  the  Judge
       states "..So far as these four statements are concerned, I was of the
       view that they support the assertion that the sponsor was helping out
       financially but I felt that it is unlikely that the [sic]  makers  of
       the statements had first hand knowledge  of  the  use  to  which  the
       monies sent were put.".  At paragraph [39], the Judge  states  "Given
       that the appellant's father was in employment, I was of the view,  on
       a balance of probabilities that he did contribute to the cost of  the
       appellant's education.".   In my judgment, it is plain that the Judge
       applied the correct burden and standard of proof and that there is no
       substance to the first of the appellant's grounds of appeal.


   17. Before addressing the two  remaining  grounds  of  appeal,  I  remind
       myself that in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  the  Court
       of Appeal held that before the Tribunal can set aside a decision of a
       Judge on the grounds of error of law, it has to be satisfied that the
       correction of the error would have made a material difference to  the
       outcome, or to the fairness of the proceedings. A finding might  only
       be set aside for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it  was
       irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one  that  was
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   18. At paragraph [18] of his decision, the Judge refers to  the  decision
       of the Upper Tribunal in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations  -  Reg  8(2))[2012]
       UKUT 79 and at paragraph [19] sets out the principle to  be  derived.
       At paragraph [20] the Judge refers to the decision of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in KG (Sri  Lanka)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  13.   Having  correctly
       directed himself to the relevant authorities, the Judge turned to the
       evidence and found at paragraph [20] that:


             "..the appellant has never been  a  member  of  the  sponsor's
             household whilst in Sri Lanka..."


       The Judge sets out at paragraphs [22] to [26], his reasons  for  that
       finding.  In my judgment that was a finding  that  was  open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence before him.  It is a  finding  that  cannot  be
       said to be perverse, irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   19. Having found that the appellant  has  never  been  a  member  of  the
       sponsor's household whilst  in  Sri  Lanka,  the  Judge  went  on  at
       paragraphs [27] to [41] to consider  the  evidence  of  'dependency'.
       Importantly, the Judge found;


             "27. There were a number of examples where it was possible  to
             follow the paper trail and see that money had been transferred
             from the sponsor to the appellant and the rest of the family.


             30.  Equally,  there  is  evidence  of  sums  of  money  being
             transferred from the sponsor into the appellant's account....


             35.  I was of the view that the money was not used exclusively
             for essential items and was, in the main, used  to  make  life
             easier for the appellant and his family. I was  of  this  view
             for the following reasons.


       At paragraphs [36] to [39] the Judge sets out  his  reasons  for  the
       finding that the money transferred by  the  sponsor  to  the  family,
       including  transfers  of  money  to  the  appellant  was   not   used
       exclusively for essential items, and was used, in the main,  to  make
       life easier for the appellant and his family.  In  my  judgment  that
       was again a finding that was open to the Judge on the evidence before
       him.  In my judgment, it is a finding  that  cannot  be  said  to  be
       perverse, irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or  one
       that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   20. In considering the grounds of appeal advanced  by  the  appellant,  I
       have considered the evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge.  The evidence of the sponsor in his  witness  statement  dated
       29th September 2014 is as follows:


             "9.  I went back to Sri Lanka  to  visit  my  sister  and  her
             family. Sajeevan was 11 years old then. I was really happy  to
             see him, as he was the next boy in the family, after me.


             10.  I got to spend some time with young Sajeevan. I took  him
             out with me everywhere  I  went,  and  bought  him  a  lot  of
             gifts[2]. I  gave  my  sister  money  for  Sajeevan's  private
             schooling, as I wanted for  him  to  get  the  best  education
             possible, so that he may progress in his life. I did not  want
             him to miss out on these opportunities, as he was capable  and
             I wanted him to be happy and successful.


             11.  In 2002, I again travelled to Sri Lanka, and  I  went  to
             Jaffna this time. I also brought my son with me, who was 7, so
             that he could meet Sajeevan, who was 16 at the time. I  bought
             him  a  new  motorcycle,  a  computer  and  study   materials;
             something his parent's were not able to afford for him. I paid
             for his college fees in Colombo, and also funded  towards  his
             driver's license.


             12.  I bought furniture for the house, since it was  my  house
             as well.  I wanted to  make  sure  that  everyone  was  living
             comfortably.


             ...


             24.  My sister and her husband were not very well off, as  her
             husband worked as an irrigator, in the  irrigation  department
             of the government and my sister was a housewife. They had  two
             children who needed support for their day to day  care,  their
             sustenance and schooling etc.


             25.  Traditionally, I as a brother, I had to make sure that my
             sister was being supported adequately and  I  was  responsible
             for her maintenance, while she was financially unstable due to
             her husband's insufficient salary, which he was unable to  run
             his house, maintain  his  family  properly  and  risked  being
             unable to pay for the essentials, such  as,  household  goods,
             grocery and the children's schooling.


             27.  I was in constant contact with my family  in  Sri  Lanka,
             that being my sister especially. I made regular fund transfers
             for my  sister  and  her  family,  so  that  they  could  live
             comfortably with the children having enough to eat and  paying
             for their tuition and maintenance. They were dependent  on  my
             monthly support. "


   21. At paragraph [40] of his decision, the Judge refers to the meaning of
       the word "dependency" as set out in Jia Migrationsverket Case  C-1/05
       and Moneke (EEA-OFMs Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00341.   In   Moneke  (EEA-
       OFM's Nigeria), the Upper Tribunal held;


             "41. Nevertheless dependency is not the same as  mere  receipt
             of some financial assistance from the sponsor. As the Court of
             Appeal made plain  in  SM  (India)  (above)  dependency  means
             dependency in the sense used by the Court of  Justice  in  the
             case of Lebon [1987] ECR 2811. For present purposes we  accept
             that the definition of dependency is  accurately  captured  by
             the current UKBA ECIs which read as follows at ch.5.12:


                  "In determining if a  family  member  or  extended  family
                  member is dependent (i.e. financially  dependent)  on  the
                  relevant  EEA  national  for  the  purposes  of  the   EEA
                  Regulations:


                  Financial dependency should be interpreted as meaning that
                  the person needs financial support from the  EEA  national
                  or his/ her spouse/civil partner in order to meet  his/her
                  essential needs - not in order to have a certain level  of
                  income.


                  Provided a person  would  not  be  able  to  meet  his/her
                  essential living needs without the  financial  support  of
                  the EEA national, s/he should be considered  dependent  on
                  that national. In those circumstances, it does not  matter
                  that the  applicant  may  in  addition  receive  financial
                  support / income from other sources.


                  There is no need to determine the reasons for recourse  to
                  the financial support provided by the EEA national  or  to
                  consider  whether  the  applicant  is  able   to   support
                  him/herself by taking up paid employment.


                  The person does not need to be living or have lived in  an
                  EEA state which the EEA national sponsor also lives or has
                  lived."


             42.   We of course accept  (and  as  the  ECIs  reflect)  that
             dependency does not have to be "necessary" in the sense of the
             Immigration Rules, that is to say an able  bodied  person  who
             chooses to rely for his essential needs on material support of
             the sponsor may be entitled to do so even  if  he  could  meet
             those needs from his or her economic activity: see SM (India).
             Nevertheless where, as in these cases, able bodied  people  of
             mature  years  claim  to  have  always  been  dependent   upon
             remittances from a sponsor, that may invite  particular  close
             scrutiny as to why this should be the case.  We  note  further
             that Article 10(2)(e) of the Citizens  Directive  contemplates
             documentary evidence. Whether dependency can ever be proved by
             oral testimony alone is not something that we have  to  decide
             in this case, but  Article  10(2)(e)  does  suggest  that  the
             responsibility is on the applicant  to  satisfy  Secretary  of
             State by cogent evidence that is in part documented and can be
             tested as to  whether  the  level  of  material  support,  its
             duration and its impact upon the applicant  combined  together
             meet the material definition of dependency.


             43 Where there is a dispute as to dependency (as there was  in
             the  present  case)  immigration   judges   should   therefore
             carefully  evaluate  all  the  material  to  see  whether  the
             applicant has satisfied them of these matters."


   22. The Judge found at paragraph [40]:


             "..... In the present case, because the appellant's father was
             working, it cannot be said that this test is met."


       I reject the submission made by Mr Lingajothy that the appellant  was
       not required to establish that the money provided by the  sponsor  to
       the family, was  exclusively  for  essential  items.   As  the  Upper
       Tribunal confirmed in Moneke (EEA OFM's Nigeria), dependency  is  not
       the same as mere  receipt  of  some  financial  assistance  from  the
       sponsor.  In my judgment, it was open to the Judge to find  that  the
       money was, in the main, used to make life easier  for  the  appellant
       and his family for the reasons identified by the Judge.  The  finding
       is again one that cannot  be  said  to  be  perverse,  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.


   23. Finally, I turn to the remaining ground relied upon by the appellant.
        That is, the Judge erred in law in his assessment of the evidence of
       Mr Premachandran MP.  At paragraph [33], the Judge states;


             "I noted that there was documentary  evidence  supporting  the
             appellant's assertion that money was sent by his sponsor.  For
             example the sworn statements of various dates at pages 1- 4 of
             the bundle submitted on 30th September 2014 indicate that this
             is the case. Mr Premachandran, in  the  statement  dated  19th
             September 2014 indicates that the sponsor paid the appellant's
             day-to-day expenses whilst the appellant  was  in  Jaffna  and
             Columbo. I  was  not  told  where  this  person  obtained  his
             evidence. I was of the view that the information could not  be
             relied on. The information is contained in a  statement  sworn
             in 2014 and  relates  to  the  situation  a  number  of  years
             earlier. The information is  likely  to  have  come  from  the
             appellant or his sponsor and thus is not independent..."


   24. The weight to be attached to  the  evidence  set  out  in  the  sworn
       statements was a matter for the Judge, and in my judgment it was open
       to the Judge to have concerns about some of the evidence set  out  in
       the statements.  The Judge did not take the view that  he  could  not
       attach any weight to the statements.  He plainly considered them  and
       found, at paragraph [38] that the statements  support  the  assertion
       that the sponsor was helping out financially.  In my judgement it was
       open to the Judge to find that it was unlikely  that  the  makers  of
       those statements had first hand knowledge of the  use  to  which  the
       monies  sent,  were  put  and  that  this  information  within  their
       statements could not be relied upon.


   25. In my judgement,  the  grounds  advanced  by  the  appellant  do  not
       disclose an error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of law and
       stands.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appellant's appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
-----------------------
[1] My emphasis
[2] My emphasis

