
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21400/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             amer shahzad gondal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 29th October 2014 dismissing his appeal against
    a refusal to issue him a residence card on the basis of his marriage to
    an EEA national. The judge found  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    establish he was a spouse of an EEA national because the  marriage  was
    one of convenience.

 2. The challenge is brought on  the  basis  that  the  judge  reached  his
    conclusion placing a heavy  reliance  on  a  summary  of  an  interview
    conducted by an Immigration officer despite the Respondent's failure to
    adduce the transcript.

 3. I am satisfied that the decision reveals a material error of law making
    it appropriate to set the decision aside and remit it to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing de novo.

 4. I do so because the Appellant has not had a fair opportunity  to  argue
    his case.  The unfairness arises because of the Respondent's failure to
    serve the record of interview. That is the  evidence  which  forms  the
    basis of the case  that  there  is  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
    marriage is not a marriage at all, being  one  of  convenience  in  the
    context of regulation 2 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 5. The judge is plainly uncomfortable about the  Respondent's  failure  to
    provide more than the interview  summary.  He  indicates  that  if  the
    previously issued directions had been in mandatory terms he would  have
    held that the document was not produced in compliance  with  directions
    and excluded it all together. Whilst it is not clear on what  basis  he
    would have done so, it is clear that he would have given it  little  or
    no weight. In the  event  he  considered  that  as  the  direction  was
    expressed in general  terms  sufficient  to  encompass  a  summary  but
    insufficient to require the transcript he did not think  the  direction
    breached.

 6. It is unfortunate  that  no  one  drew  attention  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, appertaining at  the  time
    of hearing, because rule 13(1)(b)(ii), in mandatory terms, requires the
    Respondent to file a record of any interview with the  Appellant.   The
    current version of the Procedure Rules carry the same rule set  out  at
    rule 24(1)(c).   It  is  trite  law  that  absent  the  transcript  the
    Appellant is unfairly  deprived  the  opportunity  of  any  exculpatory
    evidence.

 7. Whilst the position may be amenable to amelioration through weight,  as
    the judge identified, the issue of weight needs to be assessed in light
    of whether it is a requirement to produce the interview  or  not.  Here
    the judge erroneously concluded that it was not, and so  the  issue  of
    weight started off on the  wrong  footing,  and  it  follows  that  the
    assessment of weight is infected by error.

 8. I was invited by the Appellant's representative, in the  event  that  I
    found a material error of law, to set aside the decision and remake  it
    allowing the appeal outright.  I decline to do so.  The issue here is a
    question of fairness. The Appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing
    at the First Tier so that the appropriate  remedy  is  to  provide  the
    Appellant with such an opportunity now.

 9. Mr Tarlow sought to persuade me that the error was not material on  the
    basis that there were other matters including  discrepant  evidence  at
    the hearing which sustained the dismissal of the appeal.  However  that
    submission does not adequately answer an error of law arising  from  an
    unfair process where the correction must be to afford a fair process.



Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it is set aside and the case remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing de novo.

11. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

