
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/21933/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2015                            |On 27 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              mrs Cathreen Anum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Baruah, Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maciel sitting at Columbus House, Newport on
    3 February 2015) dismissing  her  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to  refuse  to  vary  her  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrant,  and  against   the   Secretary   of   State's
    concomitant decision to make directions for her removal  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that  the  appellant  requires  to  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Factual Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose  date  of  birth  is  27
    August 1978.  On 3 February 2014 she applied for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system.   She  was
    interviewed about her application at  Vulcan  House,  Sheffield  on  29
    March 2014.  On 29 April 2014 the Secretary  of  State  gave  non-point
    scoring reasons for refusing her application.  She was not satisfied on
    the balance of probabilities that the appellant genuinely intended  and
    was able to establish a business or  businesses  within  the  next  six
    months; or that she genuinely intended to invest the money referred  to
    in Table 4 of Appendix A in her business or businesses;  or  the  money
    referred to in Table 4 of Appendix A would genuinely  be  available  to
    her and would remain available to her until such time as it  was  spent
    by her business or businesses.

 3. In making the decision to refuse her application, careful consideration
    had been given to the evidence which she had submitted;  the  viability
    and credibility of the source of the money referred to in  Table  4  of
    Appendix A; the viability and credibility  of  her  business  plan  and
    market research into her  chosen  business  sector;  and  her  previous
    educational and business experience (or lack thereof).

 4. The respondent raised a number of specific points on the topic  of  the
    viability and credibility of the appellant's business plans.   Some  of
    these were based on what the  appellant  had  said  at  interview,  and
    others were based on the outcome of enquiries that the Home Office  had
    made, such as the results of logging on  to  the  appellant's  business
    website address.

 5. When asked at interview whether she was working from home or if she had
    business premises, she replied that she had business premises.  She had
    already given the address.  The  office  had  a  meeting  room,  Wi-Fi,
    reception, security and there  were  twenty  other  businesses  in  the
    building.

 6. The address given on her business card was 1 Olympic Way, Wembley which
    had an office block next to Wembley Stadium.  But after contacting  the
    buildings manager, he confirmed that they did not rent an office to her
    company.  They also did not rent a virtual office to her  company,  and
    they had never heard of her at the address  supplied  on  her  business
    card.  The respondent contended that  this,  together  with  the  other
    points relied upon, undermined the whole credibility of her application
    as a Tier 1 entrepreneur and also undermined  the  credibility  of  her
    proposed business.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Although the appellant was legally represented, there was no appearance
    by her or by her legal representatives at the hearing which took  place
    before Judge Maciel on 3 February 2015.

 8. At paragraph 2 of her  subsequent  decision,  Judge  Maciel  noted  the
    matter had previously been listed but adjourned due to the  appellant's
    ill-health.  Her  representatives  had  submitted  a  similarly  worded
    doctor's letter which indicated that  the  appellant  was  (still)  too
    unwell  to  travel.   She  had  however  provided  a  detailed  witness
    statement which sought to address the  issues  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter.

 9. So she had decided to proceed with the appeal in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant and her representative.   Her  reasoning  was  that  she  was
    satisfied they were both aware of the hearing, and the  solicitors  had
    written to excuse the appellant's non-attendance.  At the  same,  there
    was no application to adjourn the case.

10.  The  judge  received  oral  submissions  from  Ms  Lane,  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the respondent and at the end  of  the
    hearing she reserved her decision.

11. Her reasoning on the merits of the appeal was contained  in  paragraphs
    [11] to [14}, which I set out below:

    "(11)    I do not find  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  not
         transferred the investment money to the  UK  to  be  evidence  that
         undermines the credibility of the application as the appellant  may
         well not want to spend money  on  an  investment  in  circumstances
         where the visa is not granted.

    (12) However, the application has other significant issues, the primary
         one being the lack of a business  address  despite  claims  by  the
         appellant  that  she  was  functioning  from  a  particular  office
         building.  I note that the Companies House document is provided  on
         the basis of information provided to them from the appellant and it
         is not an independent document.  The appellant appears to have made
         no enquiries with the building manager or provided any confirmatory
         evidence, such as bills or a licence agreement to evidence that the
         business occupies  an  office  in  the  building.   This  would  be
         evidence that the appellant would reasonably have in her possession
         in any event and the failure to provide  the  same  undermines  the
         credibility of her assertion.  There  would  also  be  evidence  of
         funds paid for rent or  a  licence  or  receipts  and  invoices  in
         respect of the same which have not been produced.  I find that this
         undermines the application as a whole and find that  the  appellant
         has failed to provide evidence that her business is functioning  in
         the manner claimed.

    (13) I have not gone to the appellant's website to  verify  her  claims
         and have not held this issue against her. I do not  find  that  the
         provision of two business  plans  undermines  the  application  and
         accept that one business can provide cash flow for the other.

    (14)  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  provide  evidence
         reasonably available to prove that her application is  genuine.   I
         find that the appellant has failed to fulfil paragraph 245DD(k)  of
         the Immigration Rules and is accordingly not entitled to the points
         that she has claimed. Accordingly, the immigration appeal fails."

12. At paragraph [15],  the  judge  gave  her  reasons  for  dismissing  an
    alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR on both family and private  life
    grounds.





The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13. The appellant's solicitors settled an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  Ground 1 was the judge  should  have  granted  an  adjournment
    based upon the  medical  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant.   The
    adjournment should have been granted on the basis that the  judge  made
    findings against the appellant's business address  without  her  having
    the opportunity to address the court.  The respondent had not  provided
    any details of the person they had spoken to at  the  business  address
    and had not adduced any evidence before the Tribunal to show  that  the
    mere assertion in the refusal letter was correct.

14. The appellant had  provided  sufficient  evidence  in  the  form  of  a
    director's appointment report to show on the balance  of  probabilities
    that the business address which the appellant had given was the correct
    address.  As the Secretary of State had raised concerns in relation  to
    the genuineness of the address, the Secretary of State bore the  burden
    of proof: see inter alia JC (Part 9 HC 395 -  burden  of  proof)  China
    [2007] UKAIT 00027.  The judge had erred in law  in  directing  herself
    that the burden of proof was on the  appellant  on  the  issue  of  her
    business address.

15. Ground 3 was that the judge's reasoning on  the  Article  8  claim  was
    flawed/inadequate/insufficient.  The judge had  failed  to  follow  the
    guidance set out in CDS (Brazil).  She had clearly been residing in the
    UK since 2009 and had spent  a  significant  amount  of  money  on  her
    studies, and further to that she had spent money on her business.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

16. On 9 April 2015 Judge Pooler refused permission to appeal on all  three
    grounds raised.  In the circumstances where the appellant  was  legally
    represented and no adjournment request was made to the judge, there was
    no arguable error of law in  proceeding  to  hear  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of the appellant.  The judge had correctly directed herself  to
    the burden of proof and the reliance on the case of JC was misplaced as
    the decision was not taken on the basis of any of the  general  grounds
    under Part 9 of the  Rules.   The  judge  gave  succinct  but  adequate
    reasons in respect of the Article 8  claim,  there  being  no  evidence
    before the  Tribunal  of  the  establishment  of  private  life  or  of
    circumstances which would have  required  consideration  of  the  issue
    outside the Rules.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

17. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission  to  appeal  on
    ground 1 for the following reason:

         "Whilst I see little or no merit in the grounds' challenge  to  the
         substance of the decision under the Rules or Art  8,  the  findings
         are predicated on adverse findings  made  in  the  absence  of  the
         appellant.  The absence of the representatives from the hearing  is
         unexplained as yet.  The Judge had before  her  a  doctor's  letter
         which stated the appellant could not attend.   Whilst  it  was  not
         accompanied by a  letter  from  the  representatives  including  an
         explicit request for an adjournment, it is arguable  that  such  an
         application was implied particularly given the previous adjournment
         on much the same medical grounds.  In failing  to  consider  it  is
         such, it is arguable that the proceedings continued unfairly in the
         absence of the appellant."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I reviewed the correspondence between the  appellant's  solicitors
    and the Tribunal which had preceded the hearing before Judge Maciel.  I
    also noted what the appellant had said in her witness statement on  the
    topic of her business address.   At  paragraph  3(viii)  the  appellant
    said:

         "The respondent also objected on my business premises.  My business
         address is obvious from my director's appointment report  submitted
         with the application.  The director's appointment report is  not  a
         self-generated document.  It is an official  document  provided  by
         the Companies House  under  the  relevant  legislation/rules.   The
         respondent stated in NOR 'however after contacting  the  building's
         manager...'.  The respondent did not give any detail i.e.  who  was
         contacted, what was his/her name when that contact was made,  where
         is any fax or email from the said person.  I would like  to  inform
         the court that this is still my registered office address. "

19. Ms Baruah submitted that a distinction needed to be drawn  between  the
    appellant's business premises and her registered office.  They were not
    the same.  The appellant's business premises were somewhere  else,  and
    this had been the case at the time of her interview.  If the  appellant
    had had the opportunity to give oral evidence at the hearing before the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  this   would   have   been   clarified   through
    supplementary questions.  I pointed out that it did not appear from the
    interview transcript that the appellant had taken the opportunity  then
    to give this clarification. Ms Baruah said that the transcript  of  the
    appellant's answers did not purport to be verbatim,  and  she  did  not
    accept that the appellant had  not  given  this  clarification  at  the
    interview.

Discussion

20. I find that the judge acted reasonably in proceeding with  the  hearing
    of the appeal, rather than adjourning the hearing of  her  own  motion.
    Although a previous hearing  had  been  adjourned  on  account  of  the
    appellant's illness, it did not follow that the appellant's  solicitors
    were to be taken as requesting a further adjournment on account of  the
    appellant's continuing illness. If they had  instructions  to  seek  an
    adjournment, there was no reason for them not  to  say  so  plainly  in
    their correspondence with the Tribunal.  Moreover, the  implication  of
    the  covering  letter  dated  2  February  2015  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors was that their client was content for the appeal to be dealt
    with on the papers.  This was reinforced by the  fact  that  since  the
    previously aborted hearing  the  solicitors  had  provided  a  detailed
    witness statement from the appellant. In this statement  she  responded
    in some detail to each point taken against her in the refusal letter.

21. In the event, the judge based her adverse conclusion on only one of the
    many points which had been raised against the appellant in the  refusal
    letter.  This was the asserted discrepancy between what  the  appellant
    had said about her business premises in the interview  as  against  the
    information which the Secretary of State had obtained subsequently from
    the building manager at the claimed business address.

22. I do not consider that basing her conclusion on  this  discrepancy  was
    procedurally unfair, either by  reference  to  the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  or  by  reference  to  the  additional
    information that was imparted to me at the UT hearing.

23. As  evidenced  by  the  interview  transcript,  the  appellant  plainly
    represented in interview that her business premises were  the  same  as
    the  company's  registered  office.   In  her  witness  statement   the
    appellant was, on the face of it, merely repeating this assertion.  She
    was not purporting to support the assertion by providing  corroborative
    evidence, such as utility bills or a licence agreement to show that her
    business occupied an office in the building.  So it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof.

24. The additional information given to me in support of the error  of  law
    challenge makes matters worse  for  the  appellant,  not  better.   Her
    witness statement plainly does  not  contain  a  clarification  to  the
    effect that at the  interview  the  appellant  was  talking  about  her
    registered office, and was not talking about where she actually carried
    on her business.  Accordingly, the witness statement is  in  retrospect
    mischievous and misleading in questioning the  veracity  of  the  claim
    attributed to the unnamed building manager. For the appellant,  through
    her Counsel, has now made clear that she has never used  the  company's
    registered office as a place to do  business.  So  it  is  only  to  be
    expected that the building manager will not have heard of the appellant
    or her company as someone who  uses  the  address  as  a  place  to  do
    business.  As it is now admitted that the address which  the  appellant
    gave in interview is not the correct address for her business premises,
    the appellant cannot by way of appeal assert that it was unfair of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to find that  it  was  not  her  business  address,
    contrary to what she falsely represented in her interview  and  in  her
    witness  statement.  So  there  was  no  procedural   irregularity   or
    unfairness in the judge reaching an adverse conclusion on the  business
    premises issue, without hearing oral evidence from  the  appellant  and
    without having further and better particulars, supported by  a  witness
    statement, of the inquiry  made  of  the  building  manager,  including
    details of his name etc.

25. The appellant was not granted permission to appeal on grounds 2  or  3,
    and I find that there is no merit in  either  of  these  grounds.   The
    burden always rested with the appellant to show that the refusal of her
    application on non-point scoring grounds was wrong  in  substance,  and
    she has failed to discharge this burden.  As to  an  alternative  claim
    under Article  8  ECHR,  the  judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting such a claim. Article 8 ECHR does not  give  an  applicant  a
    right to work in the  country  of  his  or  her  choice,  and  the  old
    authority of CDS (Brazil) is of  no  assistance  to  her,  particularly
    after the coming into force of s117B of the 2002 Act.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

