
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21625/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th February 2014                           |On 27th February 2014      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 SUNIL CHAND
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G. Saunders (Senior Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance and no representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Sunil Chand is a national of India born on 19th April 1986.  He  was
    granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier  4  (General)  student  on  5th
    April 2011 until the 27th May 2012.

 2. On 5th April 2012 he applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 1 (post-Study) Migrant but his application was refused by the
    Secretary of State on 24th September 2012 under Paragraph 245FD  and  a
    decision to remove was made under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.





 3. The relevant rule, paragraph 245FD reads as follows:-

         "To qualify for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
         Migrant, an Applicant must  meet  the  requirements  listed  below.
         Subject to paragraph 245FE(a)(i),  if  the  Applicant  meets  these
         requirements, leave to remain will be granted.   If  the  Applicant
         does not meet these requirements, the application will be refused.

         Requirements:

         (a)  The Applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
             grounds of refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.

         (b)  The Applicant must not  previously  have  been  granted  entry
             clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant.

         (c)  The Applicant must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraph
             66-72 of Appendix A."

 4. Paragraphs 66 to 72 of Appendix A were as follows:-

         "ATTRIBUTES FOR TIER 1 (POST-STUDY WORK) MIGRANTS

         66.  An Applicant for entry clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier
             1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  must  score  75   points   for
             attributes.

         67.  Available points are shown in Table 10.

         68.  Notes to accompany the table appear below the table.

         Table 10

|Qualifications                                      |Points      |
|The Applicant has been awarded:                     |20          |
|(a) a UK recognised bachelor or postgraduate degree,|            |
|or                                                  |            |
|(b) a UK postgraduate certificate in education or   |            |
|Professional Graduate Diploma of Education, or      |            |
|(c) a Higher National Diploma ('HND') from a        |            |
|Scottish institution                                |            |
|(a) The Applicant studied for his award at a UK     |20          |
|institution that is a UK recognised or listed body, |            |
|or which holds a sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the|            |
|Points Based System, or                             |            |
|(b) If the Applicant is claiming points for having  |            |
|been awarded a Higher National diploma from a       |            |
|Scottish Institution, he studied for that diploma at|            |
|a Scottish publicly funded institution of further or|            |
|higher education, or a Scottish bona fide private   |            |
|education institution which maintains satisfactory  |            |
|records of enrolment and attendance.                |            |
|The Scottish institution must:                      |            |
|(i) be on the list of Education and Training        |            |
|Providers list on the Department of Business,       |            |
|Innovation and Skills website, or                   |            |
|(ii) hold a Sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the     |            |
|Points Based System.                                |            |
|The Applicant's period of UK study and/or research  |20          |
|towards his eligible award were undertaken whilst he|            |
|had entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to     |            |
|remain in the UK that was not subject to a          |            |
|restriction preventing him from undertaking a course|            |
|of study and/or research.                           |            |
|The Applicant made the application for entry        |15          |
|clearance or leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study|            |
|Work) Migrant within 12 months of obtaining the     |            |
|relevant qualification or within 12 months of       |            |
|completing a United Kingdom Foundation Programme    |            |
|Office affiliated Foundation Programme as a         |            |
|postgraduate doctor or dentist.                     |            |
|The Applicant is applying for leave to remain and   |75          |
|has, or was last granted, leave as a Participant in |            |
|the International Graduates Scheme (or its          |            |
|predecessor, the Science and engineering Graduates  |            |
|Scheme) or as a Participant in the Fresh Talent:    |            |
|Working in Scotland Scheme.                         |            |


         QUALIFICATION: NOTES

         69.  Specified documents  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of  the
             qualification and, where relevant, completion  of  the  United
             Kingdom  Foundation  Programme  Office  affiliated  Foundation
             Programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist.

         70.  A qualification will have been deemed to have been  'obtained'
             on the date on which  the  Applicant  was  first  notified  in
             writing, by the awarding institution, that  the  qualification
             had been awarded."

 5. The Secretary of State refused the appeal  in  a  decision  dated  24th
    September 2012. The basis for refusal for the respondent  was  that  he
    had made his application under Tier 1 on 5th April  2012  however  from
    verifying the date of award with the  University  of  Northampton  they
    have confirmed the date of the award  was  the  23rd  July  2012.   The
    decision cited the Upper Tribunal decision of NO (Post-study work-award
    needed by date of application)  Nigeria  [2008]  UKIAT  0054  that  the
    applicant must have been awarded the qualification at the date  of  the
    application and that the Immigration Rules state that the date  of  the
    award must be within the twelve months directly prior to  the  date  of
    the application and the date of the award  is  after  that  date.   The
    claimed points under Appendix B English Language were  refused  due  to
    the failure to meet the requirement for the eligible award.

 6. He exercised his right to appeal  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jackson) in a determination
    promulgated on  18th  December  2012.   He  set  out  his  findings  at
    paragraphs  18-23  distinguishing  the  decision  of  AQ  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 833,  noting  that  AQ  was  decided
    prior to the commencement of Section 85A of the 2002 Act  and  applying
    Ali (s120-PBS) [2012] UKUT 386 held that the conclusion in relation  to
    the material date of the evidence in AQ does not apply to  Section  85A
    cases 9 see paragraph 21).  The judge went on to state that

         "There is  now  a  clear  statutory  framework  which  specifically
         precludes the consideration  of  pot-application  evidence  in  PBS
         cases and the critical date in  such  cases  is  the  date  of  the
         application, not the date of the Respondent's decision on  such  an
         application.  As  above,  at  the  date  of  the  application,  the
         Appellant had not been awarded his degree and  therefore  he  could
         not satisfy the requirements of Appendix Appellant  (nor  therefore
         paragraph 245FD(c) or (d) of the Immigration Rules) even though his
         degree had been awarded before the respondent's decision."

 7. The judge also dealt with arguments of fairness at  paragraphs  22  and
    Article 8 at paragraph 23.  He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 8. He did not deal with the their appeals against removal  decisions  made
    in respect of them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 9. Mr Chand sought permission to appeal the decision  and  permission  was
    refused by Designated Judge Bowen on 22nd January 2013.  Permission was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Macleman on 25th February 2013.   The  appeal
    came before the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan),  and  Mr
    Chand's appeal was  allowed  in  respect  of  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to vary leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom, because the Tribunal followed the approach  adopted
    by Blake J, President and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  in  Khatel  and
    Others (s85A; effect  of  continuing  application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044
    (IAC).

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal against the determination of the Upper Tribunal.   At  the  time
    she did so, permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been
    granted by the Upper Tribunal in respect of  Khatel.   The  grounds  of
    application reiterated the critique of Khatel contained in the  grounds
    of application submitted in that case.

11. As set out in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim  and  others
    (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC) at paragraphs  3
    - 5, 200 applications for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    were made by the Secretary of State  in respect  of  determinations  of
    the Upper Tribunal, allowing  appeals (or dismissing  the  Respondent's
    appeals) on the basis of Khatel.  It appears that a significant  number
    of applications for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    made by the Secretary of State  against  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, applying Khatel.

12. Since it was known that permission to appeal in Khatel had been granted
    (with arrangements made for the Court of Appeal to expedite the hearing
    in  that  court),  it  was  considered  appropriate  to  consider   the
    Respondent's permission applications once the judgments of the Court of
    Appeal became known.

13. On 25th June 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary  of  State
    's appeal against the Upper Tribunal's determinations in Khatel and the
    cases of three other immigrants: Raju and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
    754.

14. As a result, the Tribunal gave directions in the cases before it  where
    the Secretary of State had applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  The Tribunal did so pursuant to rule 45(1)(b) of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "45.-(1)      On receiving an application for permission to appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-



                             ...

                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the Upper Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a material effect on the
                      decision."

15. The Upper Tribunal's directions indicated  that  it  proposed,  in  the
    light of Raju, to review the determinations of the Upper Tribunal,  set
    them aside and re-make the decisions in the appeals by dismissing them.
     The directions made plain that the Appellants would be (or continue to
    be) successful in their  appeals  against  removal  decisions  made  in
    respect  of  them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  This was  because  those
    decisions were unlawful (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512).

16.  On 21st January 2014, the Tribunal issued directions in the  following
    terms:

         "1.  Any directions previously given by the Upper Tribunal in these
             proceedings are hereby revoked.


         2.   The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing  in  the
             Upper Tribunal on the basis that the issues to  be  considered
             at that hearing will be as follows:


             (a)  whether the determination of the Upper Tribunal, made  by
                  reference to the determination in Khatel and others (s85A;
                  effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC),
                  should be set aside in light of the judgment of the  Court
                  of Appeal in Raju and others v Secretary of State for  the
                  Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  754  (as  to  which,  see
                  Nasim and others (Raju: reasons  not  to  follow?)  [2013]
                  UKUT 00610 (IAC);


             (b)   if  so,  whether  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
                  determination of the First-tier Tribunal,  such  that  the
                  determination should be set aside; and


             (c)  if so,  how  the  decision  in  the  appeal  against  the
                  immigration decisions should be  re-made  (see  Nasim  and
                  others).


         3.   The party who was the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal  is
             directed to serve on the Upper Tribunal and the Respondent, no
             later than seven days  before  the  forthcoming  hearing,  all
             written submissions and written  evidence  (including  witness
             statements) on the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, upon  which
             they will seek to  rely  at  that  hearing  (where  necessary,
             complying with Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
             Tribunal) Rules 2008)."


17. On consideration of the file, no further evidence or  submissions  were
    received by the Tribunal from Mr Chand in  respect  of  the  directions
    issued on the 21st January 2014.

18. Thus the appeals were listed before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  was
    neither appearance nor representation  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.
    Notice of Hearing was sent with the directions on 27th January 2014  to
    the address notified to the  Tribunal  and  the  address  held  by  the
    Secretary of State.  I am satisfied that there was good  service  under
    the Rules and pursuant to Rule 38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended) I considered that I should  hear  the
    appeal in the absence of the respondent.

19. Mr Saunders invited the Tribunal to set aside the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal relying on the grounds dated 16th May 2013  and  relying  upon
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in Raju and others (as cited).   He
    submitted that the decision in Raju demonstrated that the  decision  of
    Khatel, relied on by the Upper Tribunal was wrong in law and  that  the
    facts set out in the determination, of  which  there  was  no  dispute,
    demonstrated that the Respondent could not meet the  Immigration  Rules
    and therefore the decision should be set aside.

20. As to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it  was  accepted  there
    was an error of law in that the judge did not deal with the Section  47
    removal which was accepted as unlawful but in all  other  respects  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be  upheld  for  the  same
    reasons given for reaching the conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal was wrong in law.  The judge correctly  identified  that
    the Respondent could not meet the Immigration Rules for the reasons set
    out in the determination.  As to Article 8, it was open to the judge to
    make those findings that he did and applying the decision of Nasim  and
    others (Article 8) demonstrated that the Appellant could not show  that
    the decision was a disproportionate interference  with  his  family  or
    private  life,  irrespective  of  his  marriage,  which  had  not  been
    evidenced  or  substantiated  in  any  way  save   for   the   marriage
    certificate.

21. I reserved my decision at the conclusion of the submissions.

22. I have given consideration to the evidence before me  and  having  done
    so, I am satisfied that the Upper Tribunal  determination  of  8th  May
    2013 must be set aside for the reasons advanced  by  Mr  Saunders,  who
    relied upon the grounds originally submitted and supported by the Court
    of Appeal decision in Raju and  others  and  also  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision of Nasim and others (cited).

23.   There is no dispute as to the facts of this appeal.  The  application
    for leave to remain was made on 5th April 2012  but  his  qualification
    was not awarded until 23rd July 2012. However,  the  decision  in  Raju
    makes it clear that Khatel is wrong in law.  The point  in  Khatel  was
    that it was thought that making an application was a continuing process
    and as long as the necessary documents were put before the Secretary of
    State before she made her decision the requirement of  the  Rules  were
    met.  However as set out in Raju and confirmed in the decision of Nasim
    and Others at paragraphs 20 to 21 the  Immigration  Rules  require  the
    applicant to have made the application  for  leave  to  remain  "within
    twelve months of obtaining the  relevant  qualification"  (Appendix  A,
    Table 10, fourth section); and that paragraph 34G  of  the  Rules  when
    read with  the  fourth  section  at  Table  10  created  a  substantive
    requirement with which the Appellants in Khatel could  not  comply  and
    that the fact that they had adduced evidence,  prior  to  the  date  of
    decision that they had been notified of their awards, was of no  avail.
    The date of "obtaining the relevant qualification" for the purposes  of
    Table 10 of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules as in force immediately
    before 6th April 2012 is the date on  which  the  university  or  other
    institution responsible for conferring the award (not  the  institution
    where the applicant physically studied if different) actually conferred
    that award, whether in  person  or  in  absentia.   In  this  case  the
    confirmation of the award was on the 23rd July 2012.

24. For those reasons and having carried out a review under Rule 45, I have
    reached the conclusion that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  should
    be set aside .

25. I now am required to consider the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Jackson).  I am further satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal in dealing with the decision under the Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds did not disclose an error of law but it  is
    common ground that he did not deal with Section 47 removal decision and
    it is accepted that that was  unlawful  and  therefore  the  respondent
    should succeed on this  part  of  the  appeal  only  as  not  being  in
    accordance with the law.  The judge in the determination  at  paragraph
    18 considered the Respondent's submission and his primary argument that
    he had met the Immigration Rules at the time and that he had passed all
    of the examinations but that due to errors by the university he did not
    receive his certificate until 23rd July 2012.   However  as  the  judge
    noted this was not supported by the evidence.  The email on 28th  March
    2012 from  his  tutor  stated  that  he  confirmed  the  Appellant  had
    completed all parts of the course but went on to state:-

         "... the student will already have the results  achieved  from  his
         results letter... you can write a reference to confirm  the  grades
         awarded, ... what we cannot say is the MBA has been awarded because
         it hasn't yet."

    Thus the qualification had not been awarded and  was  not  notified  in
    writing to the Appellant that it had been.  The  judge  also  found  at
    paragraph 19 that the letter from the University of  Northampton  dated
    2nd April 2012 confirmed that the Appellant had  approved  past  grades
    for all but the final 10 credits required for the  award  of  his  MBA.
    The final 10 credits' work had been provisionally awarded a pass  grade
    but that would need to be internally moderated by  the  university  and
    confirmed by  an  external  examiner  before  being  presented  to  the
    examination board in July.  The author expected  that  the  examination
    board would award the Appellant  an  MBA.   It  is  recorded  that  the
    Appellant's own witness statement confirms the same view.   The  letter
    is also clear that the qualification had not yet been awarded, although
    it was likely that this would happen in July 2012.

26. At paragraph 20 of the determination the judge went on to state

         "The Appellant had not been awarded his degree by the University of
         Northampton until 23rd July 2012, which was after  his  application
         for further leave to  remain.   The  Appellant  did  not  therefore
         satisfy the requirements of Appendix A for the full award of points
         in that category at the date of his application."

27. He went on to state at paragraph 21 that at the date of the application
    he  had  not  been  awarded  his  degree  and  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix A (nor therefore paragraph 245FD(c) or (d)  of
    the Immigration Rules even though his degree had  been  awarded  before
    the Respondent's decision.

28.  The judge did not have the benefit  of  the  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Court of Appeal but  nonetheless  those  findings  are
    consistent with the law as it now has been stated in  Raju  and  others
    and demonstrates that the Appellant  could  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules.

29. The judge also  dealt  with  the  issue  of  fairness  even  though  no
    submissions were made in this regard on behalf of the Respondent at the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge's findings which are
    set out at paragraph 22 of the determination, considering the issue  of
    fairness, are supported  by  the  decisions  in  Nasim  and  others  at
    paragraphs 38  to  41  and  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  advanced  by  the
    Respondent against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  do  not
    demonstrate that this approach was wrong in  law.   As  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge noted,

         "Given the findings in relation to the satisfaction of facts at the
         date of the application are that the route the Appellant wished  to
         apply under had closed, allowing the Appellant, an  opportunity  to
         make further representations and to be told  in  advance  the  case
         against him would not have assisted.  The Appellant  knew  that  he
         had not been awarded his degree in time and the only course he  can
         take  in  the  circumstances  is  to  seek  redress   against   the
         university.  This is not a case where the Respondent is required as
         a matter of fairness to do anything more."

    That is entirely consistent with the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Nasim and others.

30. In respect of Article 8 the judge  dealt  with  this  at  paragraph  23
    stating as follows:-

         "In relation to Article 8, the Appellant has  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom since 5th February 2011 and studied for a year.  It can  be
         assumed that he has built up a limited private life  in  that  time
         but he has provided no evidence in relation to it.   The  Appellant
         in his statement says that  he  married  Mrs  Adili  Bhatt  on  5th
         November 2012 but that alone is insufficient to  conclude  that  he
         has family life in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant has given  no
         evidence as to his relationship, he has not provided a copy of  his
         marriage certificate, there is no statement from Mrs Bhatt and  she
         was not present at the oral  hearing  to  give  evidence.   In  the
         circumstances, I cannot conclude that the Appellant has  family  or
         private life such as to engage Article 8 of the European Convention
         on Human Rights.   In  any  event,  no  submissions  were  made  in
         relation to Article 8 and there was no basis  in  the  evidence  on
         which I could find that the Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
         Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference with  any  private
         or family life that the Appellant could  establish  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

31. In the Grounds of Appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision,  the
    respondent submits that he had submitted evidence of  his  marriage  to
    Adili Bhatt by providing a copy of the marriage certificate.  There  is
    indeed the certificate set out at page 39 which  demonstrates  that  he
    married Adili Bhatt on 5th November 2012.   There  is  a  copy  of  her
    residence permit issued on 4th  September  2012  as  post-study  leave.
    There is also a statement to her date  stamped  received  4th  February
    2013, which is after the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   That  witness
    statement sets out as follows:-

         "I further declare that we have a very strong family life  and  I'm
         afraid that his absence from the UK can disturb our life as I  have
         no such family member or relative living in this  country  to  look
         after me.  We as a couple are happily spending marriage  life  here
         and also dependent to each other.

         I am also committed to be present in the next hearing with him.   I
         further plea to the honourable court to allow his appeal as I won't
         be able to survive in this country alone without my husband, he  is
         also my whole family as well. ..."

32. There were no further details concerning the relationship,  no  further
    evidence relating to the nature of the private life that he  states  he
    has in the United Kingdom and no further matters concerning the factual
    basis of any Article 8 family life claim  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.  His wife did not attend  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    neither has either party attended before  this  Tribunal  or  made  any
    compliance with the directions issued.

33. Even if it can be said that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  by
    failing to take into account the evidence of the  marriage,  the  judge
    had very little evidence concerning the nature of the  relationship  as
    does this Tribunal.  There is no evidence to demonstrate that she could
    not return to India with him so that their family life can resume there
    nor is there any evidence to support her claim that there is no-one  in
    this country to look after her if he was to be removed nor is there any
    evidence to support the claim that it is necessary for anyone  to  look
    after her in any event bearing in mind she  is  an  adult,  and  having
    entered the UK prior to the respondent.

34. The judge accepted that he was  likely  to  have  built  up  a  limited
    private life since he had been in the United Kingdom but as  the  judge
    noted there was no evidence concerning the nature of that private life.
     At its highest he has been in the United Kingdom since  February  2011
    and had undertaken some study.  In the decision the  judge reached  the
    conclusion that he could find no  evidence  that  the  removal  of  the
    respondent would be a disproportionate interference with his Article  8
    rights.  I find that the judge's approach to Article  8  is  consistent
    with that which is set  out  in  Nasim  and  others  (Article  8).   No
    arguable error of law can be shown in his  decision  in  this  respect.
    Such removal would be proportionate to the legitimate end,  namely  the
    operation of a coherent and fair system of immigration control.

35.   As noted in the decision of Nasim and Others,  when  considering  the
    obiter remarks of the Upper Tribunal in CDS (Brazil), it was  noted  at
    paragraph 40 of Nasim and Others that CDS has no  material  bearing  as
    that case involved the interpretation of Immigration Rules rather  than
    the effect of changes in such Rules.  Furthermore, the Appellant in CDS
    was faced with a hypothetical removal, which would have  prevented  her
    from completing the course of study for which she had been given leave.

36.   In the case of Mr Chand, he has finished his course for  which  leave
    to remain as a  student  related.   In  the  present  case  the  having
    finished his course seeks to undertake two years' post study  work  and
    is  therefore  different  from  the   Appellants   in   CDS   (Brazil).
    Furthermore the Tribunal did expressly acknowledge that it was unlikely
    that a person would be able to show an Article 8 right by coming to the
    United Kingdom for temporary purposes, as this  respondent  has.   This
    has also been noted  in the light of the judgment in Patel  and  Others
    (see paragraph 41 of Nasim and Others).  Accordingly, for those reasons
    I adopt and agree with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  do
    not find that there  is  any  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    respondent's Article 8 rights  adopting  the  reasoning  in  Nasim  and
    Others and therefore the appeal is to  be  dismissed  on  human  rights
    grounds also.

Decision

The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan is set aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the Immigration  Rules
and on human rights grounds stands.  The  decision  is  remade  as  follows.
The appeal against the removal decision is allowed to the  extent  that  the
decision is not in accordance with the law.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
