
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21330/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between


                          Rayhana Sharmin Khandoker


                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And





               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Akhter, Edward Alam & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Boyes, promulgated  on  23
    March 2015. While the original appellant  is  the  respondent  to  this
    appeal, I refer to her as the appellant throughout and the Secretary of
    State as the respondent.

    Background


 2. The appellant originally entered the United Kingdom, dependent upon her
    student husband, on 30 March 2004. Her leave and that  of  her  husband
    was extended in the same capacity until 31 March 2009.  On  30  October
    2008, the appellant's husband unsuccessfully attempted to  fraudulently
    gain leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  Post-study
    Worker, with the appellant as his dependant.   The  appellant's  eldest
    child was born in the United Kingdom in 2006 and youngest in 2010.  Her
    appeal rights were exhausted on 11 May 2010. Thereafter, the  appellant
    made a number of applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    on the basis of her family life with her husband and two children,  the
    most recent of which was made on 16 April 2012 and which is the subject
    of this appeal.

 3. That application was refused on 28 April 2014  because  the  respondent
    considered that the requirements of the  Rules  relating  to  partners,
    parents and EX.1 could not be met. In relation to paragraph 276ADE, the
    respondent accepted that only the eldest of the children had  lived  in
    the  United  Kingdom  for  7  years,  however  it  was  not  considered
    unreasonable for him  to  leave  this  country  with  his  parents  and
    sibling. It was not accepted that there were very significant obstacles
    to the integration of the respondent  and  her  family  in  Bangladesh.
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  was
    considered.  It was also considered there  were  no  compassionate  and
    compelling circumstances involved. Particular reference was made to  an
    attempt by the appellant's husband to gain further leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-study work) migrant by  deception,
    which was refused on 4 February 2009, on the basis that he submitted  a
    false certificate from the Cambridge College of Learning.

    The hearing before the FTTJ

 4. The FTTJ heard evidence from the appellant as well as submissions  from
    both representatives. The FTTJ allowed the appellant's appeal solely on
    the basis that the Secretary of State had failed to fully  comply  with
    her statutory duties under section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and therefore her decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law and remained outstanding pending its lawful consideration.
    The FTTJ made no fee award as the appeal was allowed on only a  limited
    basis and the case of JO and Others (section 55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
    UKUT 00517 (IAC) post-dated the Secretary of State's decision.

    Error of law


 5. The grounds of appeal argue that the FTTJ, who had a statutory duty  to
    determine matters before her, erred in failing to do so. The  FTTJ  was
    bound by AJ (India) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191,  where  it  was  "held
    that a failure of the Secretary of State to consider a  child  did  not
    lead to the decision being otherwise than in accordance with the law."

 6. FTTJ Garratt granted permission, finding that it was arguable that  the
    FTTJ erred in referring the matter back rather  than  "getting  on  the
    with the case" in circumstances  where  it  had  been  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had raised section 55  and  dealt  with  it  in  the
    refusal letter.



Decision on error of law

 7. Mr Bramble relied on the decision in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options)
    [2015] UKUT (IAC), which he  submitted  was  the  current  position  on
    remittals to the Secretary of State in relation to  children.  As  this
    was the one issue involved in this appeal, he  argued  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. The Secretary of State's  decision  had  fully
    considered the circumstances of  the  children  and  engaged  with  the
    requirements of section 55. Furthermore AJ (India) had not  been  taken
    into account. All the information was before the judge  and  he  should
    have just got on with deciding the case.

 8. Ms Akther stressed that there were options open to the FTTJ. She placed
    reliance on the decision in JO.  With regard to AJ (India),  she  asked
    me to note that this case was not cited to the FTTJ and did not address
    the  7-year  point.  The  FTTJ  found  that  he  did  not  have  enough
    information to make a decision  after  hearing  the  evidence  and  the
    Secretary of State's reasons were lacking. In relation to [30]  of  the
    FTTJ's decision, where he said that "there was  no  assessment  of  the
    ...impact that removing them from the UK with their parents  will  have
    on them specifically..." I enquired  as  to  what  evidence  there  was
    before either the Secretary of State or the FTTJ regarding  the  impact
    of the intended removal on the children, however  other  than  a  vague
    reference to school reports of the eldest child, Ms Akhter  was  unable
    to refer me to any specific document.

 9. I found that the FTTJ had materially erred in allowing  the  appeal  on
    the limited basis that he did. I therefore set aside  his  decision  in
    its entirety for the following reasons.

10. I have considered the content of the Secretary of State's  reasons  for
    refusal letter of 28 April 2015. The children are considered throughout
    this 13-page decision. Their circumstances are considered in respect of
    paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the  Rules;  exceptional  circumstances  are
    considered; section 55 is set out and addressed  in  detail;  with  the
    issue of the best interests of each child being assessed separately and
    with particular mention made of the education and  specific  school  of
    the eldest child of the family. The circumstances of the minor children
    were and indeed are, that they lived  with  their  parents,  socialised
    with the wider family and the eldest attended primary school.   I  find
    that this decision engaged with the requirements of section  55.  There
    was no aspect of the children's circumstances, which  went  unaddressed
    in this decision. Indeed, Ms Akhter was  unable  to  point  me  to  any
    evidence pointing to the impact on the children of being removed, which
    was what the FTTJ indicated that he was concerned with.

11. The material before the FTTJ consisted of an appellant's bundle,  which
    included a witness statement from the  appellant  dated  6  July  2014,
    financial information including that regarding the United Kingdom-owned
    properties of the appellant and her husband, letters from relatives and
    material from the school of the eldest child, in particular.

12. The FTTJ had all the information before him, the vast majority of which
    had already been considered  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  could
    therefore have proceeded to decide the  appeal.  In  this  I  reproduce
    [39](a) of MK;

         "Where either the FtT or the Upper Tribunal decides that there  has
         been a breach by the Secretary of State of  either  of  the  duties
         imposed  by  section  55  of  the  2009  Act,  both  Tribunals  are
         empowered, in their final determination of the  appeal,  to  assess
         the best interests of any affected child and determine  the  appeal
         accordingly. This exercise will be appropriate in cases  where  the
         evidence is sufficient to enable the Tribunal to conduct a properly
         informed assessment of the child's best interests."

13. Ms Akther invited me to proceed to remake the decision immediately. She
    advised me that the appellant did not require an interpreter, that  she
    was the only witness and that she would be  relying  on  the  evidence,
    which was before the FTTJ. I therefore heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and submissions from each representative, which is set out in
    my typed notes and which I have taken into consideration along with all
    the other evidence before me, in reaching my decision.

14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Remaking

15. To summarise the appellant's evidence,  her  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom consisted of herself, her husband and their  two  children.  In
    addition, her husband had siblings and aunts and uncles and  their  own
    families living in the United Kingdom. The eldest child  was  currently
    in year 5 of primary  school.  The  appellant  and  her  husband  spoke
    "Bangla" at home but the children spoke English.  When  asked  how  her
    eldest child's Bangla was, the appellant replied, "Their first language
    is English." Her eldest child had been to Bangladesh when he was around
    22 months for 4 or 5  weeks  and  the  youngest  had  never  been.  The
    appellant stated that her eldest child would feel scared to  return  to
    Bangladesh because he had seen a television  news  report  featuring  a
    bomb blast in connection to the political situation there.  She  stated
    that the children could not adjust to life in Bangladesh  because  they
    spoke English and could not understand Bangla properly or read or write
    it. When asked whether her eldest child had any friends in  the  United
    Kingdom, the appellant referred to cousins and other  relatives  living
    nearby who they saw almost every weekend.

16. The appellant said that her parents and those of her husband  currently
    reside in Bangladesh and her brother lived in Australia. The  appellant
    lived with her parents before coming to the United Kingdom. She had not
    explored the possibility of sending the children to European or English-
    speaking schools in Bangladesh. None  of  the  school  friends  of  the
    eldest child had written supporting letters. At the weekend, the eldest
    child spent time with his cousins and enjoyed family time. In terms  of
    extra-curricular activity, the eldest child played netball once  during
    the week but his week was busy as he attended a madrassa.

17. Mr Bramble's submissions relied  mainly  on  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter referred to above.

18. Ms Akhter's submissions centred on the eldest child who is now aged  9.
    With reference to Azimi-Moayed & Others (decisions affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197, she argued that the  private  life  of
    the eldest child was concentrated on his peers, that he  spoke  English
    and was doing well at school. In terms of that child's  best  interest,
    she argued that it was "better" for him to remain in the United Kingdom
    and not enough to say that he could readily adapt after living  in  the
    United Kingdom all his life. He was on the cusp of going  to  secondary
    school and was not familiar with Bangladesh. Very weighty reasons  were
    required for separating a child from his community. Ms Akhter confirmed
    that the answer to  this  issue  was  the  same  whether  I  considered
    paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the  Rules  or  section   117B(6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended).  Indeed,  she
    stated that there was no point in  considering  the  case  outside  the
    Rules regardless of my decision under the Rules. I was  referred  to  a
    supporting letter from  the  appellant's  MP,  which  referred  to  the
    family's contribution to the community. Ms  Akther  stressed  that  the
    appellant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  until  2010
    and the fraudulent application carried out by the  appellant's  husband
    did not negate the best interest of the children. It  was  unreasonable
    to expect the eldest child to leave the United Kingdom.

19. Ms Akther did not seek to argue that the partner rules  under  Appendix
    FM were met or that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    integration  of  the  appellant  or  any  other  family   member   into
    Bangladesh. Nor did she make any freestanding submissions  in  relation
    to Article 8 ECHR.

20. The eldest child of the family, who was born  in  May  2006,  has  been
    residing in the United Kingdom, since birth, for more than 7 years. The
    sole issue before me is whether it is  reasonable  for  that  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom, in terms  of  accompanying  his  parents  and
    younger sibling to Bangladesh. Considering, the child's best  interests
    firstly, I note that there is nothing out of  the  ordinary  about  his
    circumstances and I therefore find that his best interests  are  served
    by continuing to be cared for by his parents, along  with  his  younger
    sibling, be that in Bangladesh or the United Kingdom.

21. I consider the eldest child to not yet fall into one of the  categories
    identified in Azimi-Moayed, in that he has  not  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 7 years from the age of 4. Furthermore, there was  no  real
    evidence to show that he has developed a private  life  independent  of
    his parents. His weekend activities are solely related to time with his
    family, including seeing his cousins. He attends  primary  school,  the
    madrassa and plays netball once a week.  His  school  reports  indicate
    that he is doing well. As the appellant stated, his first  language  is
    English; her answer implying that his second  language  is  Bangla  and
    that he understands this language to some extent. I accept  that  there
    could well be a time of adjustment while the eldest child gets to grips
    with his parents' language, particularly if  they  decide  that  he  be
    educated in Bangla rather than English.

22. I consider that there is a realistic possibility of  the  eldest  child
    receiving an education in English in Bangladesh owing to the fact  that
    each of his parents purchased properties in the United  Kingdom,  which
    they could either let or sell to pay any school fees. While the  eldest
    child has cousins and aunts and uncles in the United Kingdom, both sets
    of grandparents live in Bangladesh and could assist him in adjusting to
    life in that country. Considering the circumstances of the eldest child
    in the round, I find that it is not unreasonable to expect him to leave
    the United Kingdom for Bangladesh, along  with  the  remainder  of  his
    immediate family.

23. I find that the Rules, in relation to the eldest child of  the  family,
    amount to a complete code and even if I were to proceed to consider his
    circumstances under paragraph 117B(6), my decision would be the same.

24. Ms Akther did not argue that I should consider the circumstances of the
    appellant, her husband and youngest  child  outside  the  Rules  and  I
    therefore end my consideration here.

25. I accordingly dismiss this appeal.

26. As I have dismissed the appeal, it follows that I make no fee award.

Conclusion

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the FTTJ.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ, however I could see  no  reason
for continuing such a direction now.


Signed      Date: 20 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

