
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21265/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 13 July 2015                     |On: 6 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                              MRS ASSIA HENACHE
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sajid, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwoood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State for
       the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of  Algeria  born
       on 27 March 1982.  However, for the  sake  of  convenience,  I  shall
       continue to refer to  the  latter  as  the  "appellant"  and  to  the
       Secretary  of  the  State  as  the  "respondent",   which   are   the
       designations they  had  in  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    2. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
       decision of the respondent to refuse her application  dated  13  June
       2013 for leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
       settled in the United Kingdom  and  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights.

    3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, S.  Taylor,  allowed  her  appeal
       pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  in  a  decision  dated  7  May  2014,
       granted the respondent permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it
       being found to be arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed
       to follow the guidance in the case of Gulshan (article  8-new  rules-
       correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), in particular  failing  to
       identify the compelling or compassionate circumstances that  led  him
       to conclude that the rules operated unduly harshly thus warranting an
       examination of Article 8 outside them.

    4. Thus the appeal came before me.

       First-tier Tribunal's Findings

    5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appellant's  appeal,  concluding
       that:

           "[12] ... The appellant claimed that she came to the  UK  for  a
           short holiday and  gave  conflicting  evidence  as  to  her  pre
           arranged accommodation arrangements for the  visit.  She  claims
           that she stayed with the sponsor for a matter of  a  few  weeks,
           having entered the UK on 7 September 2012, and she very  quickly
           entered into a relationship with the sponsor, which resulted  in
           the marriage less than three months later  ...  on  29  November
           2012. The parties would have had to apply for  the  marriage  at
           around the beginning of November 2012, so would have applied for
           the marriage license within two months of arrival in the UK. The
           appellant  gave  conflicting  and  contradictory  evidence  with
           regard to the arrangements for her visit and her  background  in
           Algeria, which was also  inconsistent  with  the  oral  evidence
           given by her sponsor.

           [12] ... the  appellant  stated  that  she  comes  from  a  very
           traditional background and that  neither  her  parents  nor  her
           brothers would approve of a marriage which had not been arranged
           and that she would be in danger if she is returned  to  Algeria.
           This evidence is not consistent with her evidence  that  she  is
           well educated and travelled on a mixed sex bus to university and
           gained a degree in Engineering and Computer Science.  After  her
           degree the appellant was not expected to stay at  home  but  she
           worked in the family business  interacting  with  customers  and
           suppliers. She was permitted  to  travel  to  the  UK  with  her
           sponsor's sister. The Tribunal finds that this evidence  is  far
           more consistent with the evidence of the sponsor who stated that
           he and the appellant's family were at the more  liberal  end  of
           Algerian society and there would have been no  cultural  problem
           for the appellant to stay with her sponsor during the visit,  as
           they were adults and also second cousins.  I  am  not  satisfied
           that the appellant  came  from  a  very  traditional  family  as
           claimed and I find that the appellant would not be  at  risk  on
           return to Algeria as a result of her marriage  to  the  sponsor.
           The sponsor recently became  divorced  and  on  the  balance  of
           probabilities, I find it more likely than not that the appellant
           travelled to the UK for the purpose of marriage to the  sponsor.
           The short timescale between the appellant's arrival  in  the  UK
           and the application for the marriage is a further indication  of
           the true reasons for her visit to the UK.

           13.  Notwithstanding my findings in the  above  paragraphs,  the
           parties were married in the UK on 29th November 2012 in a  civil
           marriage. No query was raised at the time by the UK  authorities
           given the short timescale [before the marriage] and  [the  fact]
           that the appellant had a [visitor] visa of less than six months.
           There is no dispute that the parties were  married  under  civil
           law in the UK. The respondent has accepted that the parties  are
           in a genuine and subsisting relationship. The parties now have a
           child born in the UK and the Presenting Officer accepted that  a
           child of a person settled in the UK, with  indefinite  leave  to
           remain in the UK, would be entitled to apply for a UK  passport.
           The child's birth certificate  has  been  submitted,  indicating
           that he was born in London, and the parties are  in  receipt  of
           child benefits in respect of their child. The payment  of  child
           benefit only indicates that  the  claimant  is  not  subject  to
           immigration control and does not  indicate  the  status  of  the
           child, but it has been accepted that the child was  entitled  to
           apply for UK citizenship. I am satisfied that the appellant  and
           sponsor are married and live in a subsisting relationship, I  am
           further satisfied that the parties live in a family unit with  a
           child, born in the UK who is entitled to UK citizenship.

           14.  On the question to insurmountable obstacles to return,  the
           appellant has submitted no independent evidence of the sponsor's
           continued fear of  return  to  Algeria.  No  evidence  has  been
           submitted that the circumstances of the sponsor leaving  Algeria
           still apply over ten years later. I am not  satisfied  that  the
           sponsor has a well founded continued fear to return to  Algeria.
           Similarly I have not accepted the appellant's evidence that  she
           would be at risk on return to Algeria due to her marriage to the
           sponsor. There was no personal objection to the sponsor, he  was
           not a member of the appellant's  extended  family,  and  I  have
           found that the appellant and sponsor both came from more liberal
           minded sections of Algerian society. However,  the  sponsor  has
           not been granted UK citizenship, due  to  [his]  involvement  in
           some criminal  activity,  and  still  only  has  refugee  travel
           document which precludes travel to Algeria. As  the  sponsor  is
           prevented  from  travel  to  Algeria  I  find  that  there   are
           insurmountable obstacles to the parties continuing their  family
           life in Algeria.

           15.   ...  the  application  was  appropriately  refused  [under
           Appendix FM] ... it is clear that the exception in EX 1  is  not
           freestanding and it is necessary for the appellant to  meet  all
           the requirements of the appropriate rules to be granted leave as
           a partner.

           [15] ... Moving to the broader Article 8 test and  applying  the
           Razgar tests, it is accepted that the parties  are  married  and
           have a child in the UK, there is no  dispute  that  the  parties
           have a family life in the UK and that  the  appellant's  removal
           would be an interference with the family life. I accept that the
           removal would be for the legitimate aim of  immigration  control
           and in accordance with the law, being  the  application  of  the
           Immigration Rules, especially in view of  my  finding  that  the
           appellant had come [to the country] for the purpose of  marriage
           and had not made the appropriate application [from Algeria].  On
           the question of proportionality,  I  have  accepted  that  there
           would be insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  parties  continuing
           married life in Algeria, when considering Appendix FM. I  accept
           that the parties could not resume  married  life  elsewhere  and
           also accept the  submission  that  expecting  the  appellant  to
           return to make the proper application would result in  prolonged
           separation as the sponsor would be unable to meet the  financial
           requirements of Appendix FM. I find that removing the  appellant
           to Algeria to apply to return would cause  prolonged  separation
           of the father and child and interference with the family life of
           the family unit and contrary to [the case  of]  Chikwaba  [2008]
           UKHL 40 which concluded that it would be rarely proportionate to
           expect a parent to  leave  the  UK  to  apply  from  abroad.  In
           addition, the parties are responsible for a child in the UK  who
           is entitled to apply for a UK passport. Section 55 of  the  2009
           Act (Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009)  requires
           that the interests of the child is a primary  consideration  and
           the case of Zambrano is authority  that  the  interests  of  the
           child is to be brought up in the presence of both  [parents].  I
           find that the interests of the child is best served by being  in
           the presence of both parents and a long term separation would be
           contrary to the principle of s.55 of the 2009 Act."

       The grounds of appeal

    6. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the following which  I
       summarise. The Tribunal has erred in  law  in  its  approach  to  the
       Article 8 assessment in the following ways.  It  was  made  clear  in
       Gulshan that the Article 8 assessment shall only be carried out where
       there are compelling circumstances not recognised by the  Immigration
       Rules. In this case the  Tribunal  has  failed  to  provide  adequate
       reasons for why the appellant's circumstances are  either  compelling
       or exceptional that they amount to exceptional circumstances  outside
       the Immigration Rules.

    7. At paragraph 15 the Tribunal's finding, that requiring the  appellant
       to return to Algeria to  seek  entry  clearance  would  result  in  a
       prolonged  separation,  is  not  an  exceptional  circumstance.   The
       Tribunal has found at paragraph  12  that  the  true  nature  of  the
       appellant's visit was to marry her sponsor. It  is  proportionate  to
       require her to  return  to  Algeria  to  seek  entry  clearance.  The
       appellant's husband is entitled to work in the UK  and  there  is  no
       reason  why  he  cannot  find  employment  to  meet   the   financial
       requirements of the Rules and it would not be considered  exceptional
       for him to do so. Any separation will be  proportionate  given  their
       attempts to circumvent the Immigration Rules. The appellant  and  her
       husband can maintain contact via modern methods of communication  and
       by visits to a third country whilst she  seeks  entry  clearance  and
       there is no evidence that she cannot adequately care for their  child
       whilst she does so. If the  Tribunal  had  taken  these  issues  into
       consideration they would have found that the decision  to  remove  is
       proportionate.

       The hearing

    8. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is an error
       of law in the determination of the first-tier Tribunal.

    9. Therefore the appeal involves two steps, the first being to determine
       whether there is an error of law in the determination of  the  first-
       tier Tribunal and the second, if I find there was an error,  to  hear
       evidence or submissions to enable me to remake the decision.

       Decision on the error of law

   10. Having considered the determination as a whole, I  find  the  Judge's
       consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of  Article  8  is
       materially flawed. The Judge correctly accepted  that  the  appellant
       does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. He was  then
       entitled to consider the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8  of
       the European Convention on Human Rights.

   11. The Judge accepted that the appellant is not  credible  and  came  to
       this country on a visitor's visa while her true  intentions  were  to
       come to the United Kingdom in order to marry her sponsor.  The  Judge
       made adverse credibility findings against the  appellant.  The  Judge
       was then duty-bound to  consider  the  existence  of  compelling  and
       exceptional circumstances where the appellant should succeed pursuant
       to Article 8  when  she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules as the Immigration Rules are Article 8 compliant.

   12. The Judge appears to find the fact that the appellant sponsor, who is
       not working in this country and who is on benefits, would not be able
       to support  her  entry  clearance  application  from  Algeria  to  be
       exceptional and/or compelling circumstances. The Judge  clearly  fell
       into material error  as  this  in  itself  cannot  be  considered  an
       exceptional or compelling circumstances.

   13. The Judge also found that there are insurmountable obstacles  to  the
       appellant and her husband continuing family life in  Algeria  because
       the appellant is not able to travel to Algeria because even though he
       has been in this country for 10 years he  does  not  have  a  British
       passport and has refugee papers due to the sponsor's criminality. The
       Judge materially erred when took this into account  in  finding  that
       the appellant should not return to Algeria to make an entry clearance
       application.

   14. The Judge did not take into account the respondent's interest  in  an
       effective and fair immigration control and the  appellant's  attempts
       to circumvent the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  present
       the respondent with a fait accompli.

   15. The  Judge  also  fell  into  material  error  by  stating  that  the
       appellant's child cannot go back to Algeria with her/his mother  even
       for a short period of time because the best interests  of  the  child
       are to be with both the parents. The Judge stated that as  the  child
       is entitled to apply for British citizenship, it is not in  the  best
       interests of the child to leave the country even for a  short  period
       of time with his mother in order for her to make an  application  for
       entry clearance. This is a misunderstanding of the case law as to the
       best interests of the child. It would be a matter for  the  appellant
       and her sponsor to decide how best they should proceed  in  light  of
       the fact that the appellant has to  return  to  Algeria  to  make  an
       application for entry clearance.

   16. The Judge's understanding of the case of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40  is
       materially flawed.  The  Judge  stated  "I  find  that  removing  the
       appellant to  Algeria  to  apply  to  return  would  cause  prolonged
       separation of the father and child in an interference with the family
       life of the family unit and contrary  to  Chikwamba  which  concluded
       that it would be rarely proportionate to expect the parent  to  leave
       the UK to apply from abroad." (emphasis mine)

   17. I do not understand the case of Chikwamba exempts the appellant  from
       satisfying the requirements to obtain an  entry  clearance  from  her
       home country. I do not understand Chikwamba to say that an  appellant
       can  circumvent  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules   and
       therefore should not be required to return to  her  home  country  to
       make an application in the  appropriate  category.  Chikwamba  states
       that only in exceptional  cases  and  cases  which  normally  involve
       children that it would not be proportionate and more appropriate  for
       the appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

   18. In paragraph 41 of the speech of Lord Brown (in Chikwamba)  he  asked
       whether the real rationale for the policy was:

             "... perhaps the rather different one of deterring people from
             coming to this country  in  the  first  place  without  having
             obtained entry clearance and to do so by subjecting those  who
             do come to the very  substantial  disruption  of  their  lives
             involved in returning them abroad?"

   19. The Judge failed to take into account that  Chikwamba  was  fact  and
       timeline specific. The  appellant  in  that  case  was  a  Zimbabwean
       national and the Secretary  of  State  was  not  removing  anyone  to
       Zimbabwe at the time.

   20. Having considered the determination as a whole I  conclude  that  the
       Judge erred in law  in  his  evaluation  of  the  appellant's  appeal
       pursuant to Article 8 and I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  in
       respect of Article 8.

   21. The appellant's representative stated that if I was to find an  error
       of law, the appeal should be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal  to
       be reheard and findings of fact to be made in respect of Article 8.

       DECISION

For the reasons given above, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside. I direct that the appeal be placed before a  First-tier  Judge
other than Judge S Taylor to be heard on the first available date.



Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                   The 30th day of July 2015
