
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: IA/21552/2015     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 August 2019                 |              On 14 August 2019  |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                Ja (nigeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clare, instructed by Greenland Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   I
continue this order, which has been in force throughout.

 1. This appeal comes before me today as a result of  an  order  which  was
    sealed by Master Meacher on 9 May 2019.  It was ordered by consent that
    the appeal to the Court of Appeal should be allowed and that the matter
    would be remitted to the Upper Tribunal so that the fresh consideration
    could  be  given  to  the  application  of  section  117B(6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the appellant's case.

 2. The relevant facts may be stated shortly.  The appellant is a  Nigerian
    national who was born on 7 January 1966.  He entered the UK  unlawfully
    in 2002.  He entered into a relationship with a British citizen  called
    MB.  They had two children named PA and MA, who were born on 5  January
    2006 and 21 July 2009 respectively.  The appellant's relationship  with
    MB came to an end some time ago.  On 20  March  2015,  he  applied  for
    leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds,  relying   upon   his
    relationship with his two children.

 3. The respondent refused the application on 27 May 2015 and the appellant
    appealed.  The First-tier Tribunal did not accept  that  the  appellant
    had anything  more  than  occasional  contact  with  his  children  and
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant secured permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, which ultimately set aside the decision of the  FtT
    and remade the decision, dismissing it for different reasons.   It  was
    agreed in the Statement of Reasons which accompanied the order of 9 May
    2019 that the Upper Tribunal had erred in its consideration of  whether
    there existed a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  for  the
    purposes of s117B(6) NIAA 2002 and, further, that it had erred  in  its
    wider approach to Article 8 ECHR.

 4. It was agreed at the outset of the hearing that my task was to consider
    section 117B(6) for myself.  Mr Clare initially sought to suggest  that
    certain findings from the previous decisions might have been  preserved
    but he quite properly accepted my suggestion that nothing in either the
    order or the Statement of Reasons justified that submission.

 5. I was referred to two  bundles  of  documents  and  a  report  from  an
    Independent Social Worker.  I heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,
    who was examined by Mr Clare and cross examined by Mr Tufan.

 6. In submissions, Mr Tufan accepted, firstly,  that  there  could  be  no
    question of whether the children could reasonably relocate  to  Nigeria
    on the facts of this case.  The focus of the enquiry was  therefore  on
    the other factual question in s117B(6), of whether the appellant enjoys
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his daughters.   Mr
    Tufan reminded  me  of  the  correct  approach  to  that  question,  as
    reflected in the judgment of Singh LJ (with whom King and Underhill LJJ
    agreed) at [89] of AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661.  Having heard  the
    appellant's evidence, Mr Tufan accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his daughters and that the appeal
    fell to be allowed.  I did not need to hear from Mr Clare as a result.

 7. I should record that Mr Tufan's concession was  plainly  correct.   The
    appellant states that he has been living with MB  and  their  daughters
    since he left immigration detention  (following  a  short  sentence  of
    imprisonment at Her Majesty's Pleasure) in December 2016.  There  is  a
    note on the Home Office's computer system that he is indeed  living  at
    that address, and has been since  28  December  2016.   Before  he  was
    released from detention, the Independent Social  Worker  Jasmine  Smith
    opined in a report dated 7 November 2016 that he was a devoted  father.
    There is documentary evidence before me from the children's schools and
    from their GP, speaking to the role that  their  father  has  in  their
    life.  There are some minor difficulties  with  the  documents,  as  Mr
    Tufan sought to explore in cross-examination, but none of  these  minor
    issues really detracts from the overall picture of a man who lives with
    his daughters and his ex-partner and who plays a  significant  role  in
    the lives of his children.  He  spoke  about  his  children  with  real
    warmth and with a plausible depth of knowledge.  It is clear to me that
    he shares the parenting role with MB in a responsible way, despite  the
    fact that their relationship has  come  to  an  end.   He  spoke  about
    assisting his younger daughter  with  her  mathematics  and  about  the
    advice he gave to his older daughter about her choice  of  subjects  at
    school.  He made plausible reference to the names of their friends  and
    to the significant events in their lives, such  as  their  taking  Holy
    Communion for the first time.  None of this was scripted or forced  and
    the appellant spoke about his children as I would expect from a devoted
    and active father.

 8. Had Mr Tufan not conceded the only point in issue, therefore,  I  would
    have concluded for myself that  the  appellant  enjoys  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship, as defined in AB (Jamaica), with  his
    two daughters.  As Mr Tufan recognised in his  short  submissions,  the
    engagement of s177B(6) in this manner is  dispositive  of  the  appeal.
    The appellant has committed a criminal offence in the UK but he is  not
    liable to deportation and there is accordingly no  public  interest  in
    his removal.



Notice of Decision

The previous decision of the Upper Tribunal having been  set  aside  by  the
order of the Court of Appeal,  I  remake  the  decision  on  the  appeal  by
allowing it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                               13 August 2019


