
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/21942/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 13 June 2019             |On Friday 14 June 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 NADEEM [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Sunrise
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

     1. By a decision promulgated on 4 March 2019, I found an error of  law
        in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge B  Morron  promulgated
        on 4 August 2017, itself dismissing the Appellant's appeal  against
        the Respondent's decision dated 9 June 2015.  By that decision, the
        Respondent refused the Appellant's human rights claim based on  his
        private life and, in particular, his family life as the  father  of
        three minor children.   My error of law decision is appended hereto
        for ease of reference.

     2. In accordance  with  the  directions  given  in  my  error  of  law
        decision, the Appellant filed a supplementary bundle of evidence. I
        also received a  skeleton  argument  from  Ms  Revill  and  written
        submissions from Mr Melvin.  However, Mr Melvin  indicated  at  the
        start of the hearing that his written submissions had been prepared
        without sight  of  the  supplementary  bundle  and  were  therefore
        overtaken by that evidence.  Mr Melvin accepted that  the  evidence
        in the supplementary bundle shows that the Appellant is  reconciled
        with his wife and children and the couple have a  further  daughter
        born on 8 October  2018.   The  Appellant's  witness  statement  is
        supported by the statement of his wife.  Mr  Melvin  also  accepted
        that their evidence  is  supported  by  other  documents  from  the
        children's schools and photographs which show that the Appellant is
        in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  children.
        Therefore, although both the Appellant and his wife were present at
        the hearing and ready to give oral evidence,  Mr  Melvin  confirmed
        that he did not dispute their evidence and did not wish to ask  any
        questions.  Since I had no questions either, Ms Revill agreed  that
        it was not necessary to call her witnesses.

     3. Mr Melvin referred me to the relevant statutory provisions and case-
        law to which I refer in more detail below.   Although  it  was  not
        clear from the Respondent's letter granting leave to remain to  the
        Appellant's wife and children, the basis on  which  they  had  been
        granted leave (it being said that this was based  on  her  and  the
        children's private life), both Mr Melvin and  Ms  Revill  indicated
        that there were no factors peculiar to the Appellant's  wife  which
        would have generated that grant of leave and that leave  must  have
        been granted on the basis that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
        remove the children from the UK.  Mr Melvin also accepted  that  at
        least one if not more of the  children  are  "qualifying  children"
        having spent more than seven years in the UK.  Ms Revill  confirmed
        that in fact all bar the youngest child are "qualifying children".

     4. Although Mr Melvin did not expressly concede the appeal,  in  light
        of the above, he accepted that it  would  be  unsurprising  if  the
        Tribunal were not to allow the  Appellant's  appeal.   I  indicated
        that I proposed to allow the appeal and would provide my reasons in
        writing for so doing which I now turn to do.

   Discussion and Conclusions

     5. Section 117B (6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 ("Section 117B (6)") provides as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           a) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
              qualifying child, and
           b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
              United Kingdom."

     6. A "qualifying child" is defined by Section 117D (1) of the 2002 Act
        as follows:


           "'qualifying child' means a person who is under the  age  of  18
           and who -
           a) is a British citizen, or
           b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
              seven years or more..."

     7. Section 117B (6) is in essentially the same terms as paragraph EX.1
        of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules save that, in  relation  to
        EX.1, the qualifying period  is  determined  at  the  date  of  the
        application made to the Respondent.  It is common ground that, at 1
        April 2005, when the Appellant made the application  which  led  to
        the Respondent's decision under appeal, none of  his  children  had
        spent seven years continuously living in the UK.   As  such,  I  am
        considering the position applying Section 117B (6)  and  not  under
        the Immigration Rules.

     8. As I have already indicated,  Mr  Melvin  accepted,  based  on  the
        evidence in the supplementary bundle, that the Appellant has  shown
        that  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
        children.  I do not therefore need to set out that  evidence.   The
        four children who live in the UK with the Appellant  and  his  wife
        were born on 20 November 2002, 20 September 2005, 28 July 2010  and
        18 October 2018.  With the exception of the youngest, all have been
        in the UK for more than seven years, having returned here  last  in
        2008 (see [10] of my error of  law  decision).   The  three  eldest
        children are therefore qualifying  children  for  the  purposes  of
        Section 117B (6).  That then leaves only the  question  whether  it
        would be reasonable to expect the children to return to Pakistan.

     9. In the case of SR (subsisting  parental  relationship  -  s117B(6))
        Pakistan [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC), UTJ Plimmer had cause  to  consider
        the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  on  Family  Migration:
        Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Family Life (as a Partner or Parent)  and
        Private Life: 10 - year Routes dated 22 February 2018.   At [50] of
        her  decision,  Judge   Plimmer   rejected   as   "untenable"   the
        construction which the Secretary of State sought to  place  on  the
        term "reasonable to expect" in this context. Her conclusion  as  to
        the meaning of that phrase is encapsulated in [2] of  the  headnote
        as follows:

           "The question of whether it would not be reasonable to expect  a
           child to leave the United Kingdom ('UK') in section  117B(6)  of
           the 2002 Act does not necessarily  require  a  consideration  of
           whether the child  will  in  fact  or  practice  leave  the  UK.
           Rather,  it  poses  a  straightforward  question:  would  it  be
           reasonable "to expect" the child to leave the UK?"

    10. Judge Plimmer's interpretation was upheld by the Tribunal (The Hon.
        Mr  Justice  Lane,  President  and  UTJ  Gill)  in  JG   (s117B(6):
        "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC) Rev 1.

    11. This provision was also  considered  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
        Secretary of State for the Home Department v AB  (Jamaica)  and  AO
        (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661.  The Court approved  the  Tribunal's
        interpretation in JG and SR (72] to [75]).  Accordingly,  the  only
        question is whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
        return to Pakistan not whether they would in fact  have  to  do  so
        (given that they could in practice remain  in  the  UK  with  their
        mother).

    12. I have referred at [12] of my error of law decision to the  Supreme
        Court's judgment in KO (Nigeria) and others v  Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.  The Court of Appeal in  AO
        and AB and the Tribunal in JG  summarise  the  way  in  which  that
        judgment is to be applied when considering Section 117B (6).  I  do
        not need to say any more about that judgment in this case  because,
        as I indicate at [3] above, the Appellant's  wife  has  been  given
        leave to remain based on the position of  the  children.   It  must
        therefore be accepted that it would be disproportionate  to  remove
        them from the UK.  It follows that it would not  be  reasonable  to
        expect them to return to Pakistan.

    13. For those reasons, the Appellant meets the requirements of  Section
        117B (6).  Although other factors in Section 117B, particularly the
        Appellant's unlawful presence in the UK  for  a  number  of  years,
        would militate against him and in favour of the public interest  in
        removal, once Section 117B (6) is met, the public interest does not
        require his removal.  He is therefore entitled to succeed.

    14. For those reasons, the Appellant's appeal is allowed on  the  basis
        that  he  meets  the  requirements  of  Section  117B  (6)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   Accordingly,  his
        removal would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
        1998.

DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds
Signed           [pic] Dated:  13 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/21942/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Friday 1 March 2019                        |                             |
|                                              |.........4 March             |
|                                              |2019...............          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 NADEEM [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Sunrise
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

   1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      B Morron promulgated on 4 August 2017 ("the Decision") dismissing  the
      Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 9 June 2015
      refusing his human rights claim based on  his  private  life  and,  in
      particular, his family life as the father of three minor children.

   2. The Judge found as a fact that the children had not lived continuously
      in the UK for seven years, relying on his  factual  finding  that  the
      children had returned to Pakistan  with  their  mother  from  July  to
      November 2010.  He therefore found that those children had not been in
      the UK for seven years continuously.  The youngest child was  born  in
      the UK but, he found, had not lived in the UK for seven  years.    The
      children were born in 2002, 2005 and 2010.

   3. The Judge went on to consider whether it would be reasonable to expect
      the children to leave the UK with the Appellant who is accepted to  be
      their father.  He is estranged from the children's  mother  who,  with
      the children, has limited leave to remain in the UK.   At the time  of
      the Decision, they had made an application  for  further  leave  which
      remained under consideration. The Judge considered the  reasonableness
      issue under Section 117B (6) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002 ("Section 117B(6)).   He concluded at [70] of the  Decision  that
      it was reasonable to expect the children to return  to  Pakistan  with
      their parents.

   4. The Appellant raises two grounds challenging the Decision.  First,  he
      says that the Judge has made a mistake of  fact  in  relation  to  the
      period spent by the children in the UK which has infected his  finding
      that they had not  been  in  the  UK  for  seven  years  continuously.
      Second, he says  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  his  assessment  of
      reasonableness.  The initial grounds  also  included  a  third  ground
      concerning the procedural fairness of the First-tier Tribunal hearing,
      but that ground appears to have fallen away - I was not  addressed  on
      it.

   5. Permission to appeal the Decision  was  refused  first  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on  26  January  2018  and  then  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Frances on 5 September 2018.  Following an  application
      to  the  Administrative  Court  for  judicial  review  of  the   Upper
      Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal, permission  to  apply  for
      judicial review was granted by Mrs Justice Lang DBE in  the  following
      terms so far as relevant:

           "...the FTT Judge's finding that the children were  absent  from
           the UK from July to November 2010, and therefore that  they  had
           not  been  continuously  resident  for  the  qualifying  period,
           appears to have been a mistaken assumption which  ought  not  to
           have been made on the evidence before him.   The  Claimant  also
           seeks to adduce  further  evidence  confirming  that  they  were
           present in the UK at that time.  I am unable to agree  with  the
           Upper Tribunal that the FTT also decided the  appeal  adequately
           on the alternative basis that the children had been continuously
           resident for the qualifying period."

   6. The Respondent not having sought a  hearing  of  the  application  for
      judicial review, the  decision  of  UTJ  Frances  was  quashed  on  13
      December 2018 and the  appeal  remitted.   Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted by the Vice President of the  Upper  Tribunal  on  10  January
      2019.

   7. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision  contains
      an error of law and, if I so find, either to remit it for  a  de  novo
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal or to re-make the decision.

   8. By a rule 24 notice dated 27 February 2019,  the  Respondent  concedes
      that the Decision contains a material error of  law  and  invites  the
      Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing.

   9. I indicated at the end of the hearing that I found a material error of
      law on both grounds pursued  before  me  and  that  I  set  aside  the
      Decision. I gave directions for  further  evidence  to  be  filed  and
      served as the First-tier Tribunal hearing took  place  about  eighteen
      months ago. I indicated that I would give brief reasons for  my  error
      of law decision in writing which I now turn to do.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   Ground one

  10. The focus of ground one is the Judge's finding at [42] of the Decision
      that the Appellant's estranged wife  and  children  were  out  of  the
      country in  Pakistan  between  23  July  2010  and  3  November  2011.
      However, the evidence recited at [41] is that the wife  returned  with
      the two eldest  children  in  July  2008  which  the  Judge  says  was
      consistent  with  documentary  evidence  about  one  of  the  children
      attending school until June 2008.  The application was made on 1 April
      2015.  There would still be a difficulty in terms  of  the  children's
      period of residence as  at  the  date  of  that  application  for  the
      purposes of paragraph 276ADE.  However, that is not the basis  of  the
      Appellant's application.  The Judge understood that the  children  did
      not return to the UK until November 2010.  The  hearing  was  in  July
      2017.  Therefore, applying Section 117B (6), the Judge found that  the
      children's  period  of  residence  was  insufficient  to   avail   the
      Appellant.  Given the evidence that they returned to Pakistan in  2008
      not 2010, that was an error of fact which was material to the  Judge's
      consideration.

   Ground two

  11. The basis on which permission to appeal was refused by  this  Tribunal
      was that the error of fact was not material because the Judge had gone
      on to consider whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      leave the UK and had concluded that it was.  The Judge considered this
      issue at [63] onwards of the Decision.  In so doing,  he  observed  at
      [64] that "in considering whether it was reasonable to expect a  child
      to leave the UK, the Tribunal should not focus simply on the child but
      should also have regard to the wider public  interest  considerations,
      including the conduct and immigration history of the parents."  Having
      undertaken his consideration at [65]  to  [69]  of  the  Decision,  he
      concluded as follows at [70]:

           "...the Appellant's strongest case relies upon section 117B (6).
            However, I have found that these are  not  strictly  qualifying
           children; and, even if they were, weighing in the  scales  their
           best interests which are of primary importance on the  one  hand
           with the public interest in maintaining immigration controls  on
           the other, I find that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           children to leave the UK."

  12. As the Respondent concedes, that approach is now inconsistent with the
      test as interpreted by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and others  v
      Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.   That
      judgment was handed down on 24 October 2018 and the Judge, in reaching
      his findings, relied on what was at the time  binding  authority  from
      the Court of Appeal.  However, the fact remains that  the  wrong  test
      was applied when considering Section  117B  (6)  and  accordingly  the
      Decision contains an error of law also in that regard.

  13. Having discussed with the  parties  the  appropriate  course,  it  was
      agreed that the decision could be re-made  in  this  Tribunal  as  the
      extent of fact finding is limited as are the relevant issues.    Given
      the passage of time since the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I agreed
      that it was appropriate to give the Appellant  time  to  produce  more
      evidence.  I record the  information  given  by  Mr  Melvin  that  the
      Appellant's ex-wife and children have been given further limited leave
      to remain until 2020.  They are being given periods of  leave  on  the
      ten year' route, their first grant of leave having been in 2014.   The
      factual position is therefore changed since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      hearing.  Moreover, the  children  are  now  older  and  it  would  be
      appropriate for further evidence to be provided in  relation  to  what
      their best interests now require.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge B  Morron  promulgated  on  4  August  2017.   I  make  the  following
directions for the re-making of the decision.

DIRECTIONS

  14. Within six weeks from  the  date  when  this  decision  is  sent,  the
      Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and  serve  on  the  Respondent
      (for the attention of Mr T Melvin) any further evidence  on  which  he
      relies.

  15. The resumed hearing will be listed on the first available  date  after
      eight weeks from the date when this decision is sent.   Time  estimate
      is half a day.
Signed           [pic] Dated:  1 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

