
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21264/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 January 2014                               |On 21 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                         mr radha krishna kanathala
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the decision in the application of Mr Radha Krishna  Kanathala.
    Mr Kanathala represents himself today and the respondent is represented
    by Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. Mr Kanathala appeals, with permission, against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Charlton-Brown who dismissed his appeal against the
    respondent's decision not to grant him further leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   The  Tier  1
    scheme closed on 6 April 2012 and although the applicant's  application
    was made on 5 April 2012 he was not notified of receipt of the eligible
    qualification  until  6  July  2012  and  therefore,  at  the  date  of
    application he did not meet the requirement of the relevant Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The applicant has pointed out today that  his  qualification  date  had
    been delayed both by errors by the Home Office in dealing with his Tier
    4 application and also by errors by  his  sponsor  in  relation  to  an
    English language qualification which he did not require and that  these
    two reasons caused him to begin his course later than anticipated which
    is why it also ended later than anticipated and after the date when the
    scheme was closed.  He complains that although the Secretary  of  State
    emailed her caseworkers on 23 May 2012 to tell them  what  to  do  with
    applications such as his after  the  closure  of  Tier  1  and  he  was
    regularly chasing up the decision on his application made on 5 April in
    that year stating that he was expecting to receive his award in  August
    or September of 2012, he did not receive the courtesy of a response  or
    a decision until 19 September  2012.   In  the  meantime  he  has  been
    working and doing well but he was unable to take up an  opportunity  to
    work on the Olympics because his passport was with the  respondent  and
    he was also unfortunately unable to travel to his grandmother's funeral
    for the same reason because the passport was with the Home Office.   He
    asks me to take all of those into account.

 4. I have not found it necessary to call on  Mr  Jarvis  for  submissions.
    The position is unfortunately now very clear following the decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Nasim & Others (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?)
    [2013] UKUT 610 (IAC) and it is this - that at the date of  application
    the applicant must have the required qualifications.  That was not  the
    case here and unfortunately therefore,  although  the  effect  on  this
    applicant seems to him to be unfair and it may very  well  be  so,  the
    position is that he cannot meet the requirements of the Rules and  that
    the First-tier Tribunal did not err in dismissing his  appeals.   There
    being no material error of law  in  the  First-tier  determination  the
    appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 20.01.2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

