
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21588/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 09 November 2016                  |On 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD BANNATYNE
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              IME OFFIONG EDEM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity we will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    issue a residence card recognising his right of residence in the UK  as
    the extended family member (partner in a durable  relationship)  of  an
    EEA national.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert ("the judge") allowed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 03 June 2016. He made  unchallenged  findings
    that the appellant was likely to be in a durable relationship with  his
    EEA partner and therefore met the requirements of  regulation  8(5)  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations 2006"). His final conclusion was as follows:

         "25. I therefore allow this appeal on a  balance  of  probabilities
         for the reasons set out above. The Appellant is  entitled  to  have
         his application for a Residence Card granted as confirmation  of  a
         right to reside in the United Kingdom under Regulation 8(5) of  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006."

4.    The respondent seeks to challenge the decision on the ground  that  it
    was an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to find that there  was
    an entitlement to a residence card in light of the Tribunal's  decision
    in Ihemedu (OFM's - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.

5.    The appellant's representatives made an adjournment  request  the  day
    before the hearing on the ground  that  his  representative  could  not
    attend  because  an  "emergency  bail   application"   elsewhere.   The
    application was refused because the appellant could attend and  address
    the Tribunal given that it was a straight forward matter. There was  no
    appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the  hearing.  No
    explanation was provided for his absence. In the circumstances of  this
    particular case we considered that we were able  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of the appellant.

6.    In light of the decision  in  Ihemedu  we  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a clear error of law. Mr Staunton accepted that there was
    no challenge to the judge's substantive findings relating to regulation
    8(5). In consequence, only the final paragraph of the  decision,  which
    wrongly finds that the appellant has  an  entitlement  to  a  residence
    card, is set aside.

7.    All that is required in terms of remaking is to make  clear  that  the
    respondent retains discretion whether to  issue  a  residence  card  in
    accordance with regulation 17(4). We remake the decision and allow  the
    appeal  on  the  ground  that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations 2006.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

We remake the decision and ALLOW the appeal

Signed   [pic]   Date 09 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
