
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21282/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 7th November 2014                            |On 14th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                          miss maureen chianu anoje
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Maureen Chianu Anoje was born on 22nd May 1985 and  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria.  The  Appellant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Caswell) against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    9th May 2014 refusing to vary her leave to remain in the UK and issuing
    removal directions under Section  47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom is September 2010  with  leave
    to remain until 2012 as a student. She was then granted leave to remain
    under Tier 1 as a Post-Study Worker until 2nd March 2014.

   3. The Appellant's case can be summarised as follows. While she was still
      living in Nigeria, she had symptoms of headache and vomiting and had a
      CT scan which  showed  a  significant  mass  in  her  brain,  although
      possibly there was not a precise diagnosis. She received treatment  in
      Nigeria. Within a month of her arrival in the UK,  the  Appellant  had
      similar  symptoms  and  sought  medical  treatment  here.  There   was
      hydrocephalus diagnosed. The Appellant had further  investigation  and
      treatment, and a diagnosis of Ependymoma (a type of brain tumour)  was
      made. She had major surgery at Sheffield Teaching Hospital,  including
      removal of  part  of  the  tumour.  She  then  had  radiotherapy.  All
      treatment for the cancer ceased in February 2012. There  has  been  no
      recurrence of cancer.



   4. Because the surgery to remove the tumour had damaged her eye  muscles,
      she was left with constant double vision. She has had  two  operations
      to her eyes which have partially corrected  this.  She  is  now  being
      monitored with three monthly MRI scans. The aim of these is to see  if
      there is any growth of or change to the residue of tumour left in  her
      brain. If she  manages  a  year  without  further  incident,  she  can
      consider a further eye operation to try and improve  her  vision.  Her
      vision is better  than  it  originally  was  after  the  brain  tumour
      operation, but she still has an area of double vision.

 5. After considering the Appellant's case under Article 3  and  Article  8
    ECHR the FtT dismissed the Appellant's appeal. The Appellant sought and
    was granted permission to appeal. The  grant  of  permission  sets  out
    comprehensively the arguable error on the  part  of  the  FtT  and  the
    relevant parts of the grant are set out here.

         "I note that the Article 3 conclusion is  not  challenged,  and  in
         view of the N threshold this is unsurprising.

         In relations to Article 8 arguably legal points  do  arise.  It  is
         arguable  that  the  proportionality  assessment  at  [23]  of  the
         determination lacked reasoning in that it did not set  out  any  of
         the factors on either side of the balance.  As  is  clear  from  MM
         (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  [2012] EWCA Civ 279 there  can  be
         cases where health matters, combined with private or  family  life,
         could produce an outcome in an appellant's favour, and what is also
         clear is that a detailed fact specific  proportionality  assessment
         is needed. There are differing opinions as to the Gulshan approach,
         but in any event the arguability decision at [22] is arguably  hard
         to reconcile with the  MM  (Zimbabwe)  approach  (see  also  Akhalu
         (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400). Another arguable
         point is that the public interest factors inserted  into  the  2002
         Act by s19 of the 2014 Act  should  have  been  considered  in  the
         proportionality assessment."

 6. Thus the matter comes before me to decide in the first instance whether
    the determination of the FtT discloses an arguable error of law.



The UT Hearing

 7. Miss Patel for the Appellant relied in the main on the grounds  seeking
    permission. She submitted that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  its  lack  of
    reasoning for its  Article  8  conclusion,  in  particular  a  lack  of
    consideration of the principles in MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State
    [2012] EWCA Civ 279. She submitted that  had  the  FtT  recognised  the
    principles both in MM (Zimbabwe) and Akhalu then  a  different  outcome
    would have been reached.

 8. Miss Patel also picked up on ground 4 of the grant of  permission.  She
    said the Judge had fallen  into  error  in  not  recognising  that  her
    decision and subsequent promulgation of this appeal  occurred  on  13th
    August 2014. Therefore the public interest factors  inserted  into  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by  s19  of  the  2014  Act
    should have also been  considered  in  the  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment.

 9. Mr Diwnycz defended the determination to the extent of saying that  the
    Appellant could not meet the threshold of D  v  United  Kingdom  [1997]
    ECHR 25 in respect of any Article 3  breach.  However  so  far  as  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights are  concerned  he   said  with  customary
    fairness that he accepted that MM (Zimbabwe) did illustrate that  there
    could be a case where health matters combined with  private  or  family
    life could produce an outcome in an  Appellant's  favour.  He  accepted
    that this required a detailed fact specific proportionality  assessment
    to be made. He agreed that in the present case it did not  appear  that
    this assessment had been carried out.

10. I am satisfied having heard from  both  representatives  that  for  the
    reasons shown in the grant of permission and set out by Miss Patel, the
    FtT determinations  is  legally  unsustainable.  It  lacks  a  detailed
    analysis of the Article 8 proportionality test such as that set  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe).

11. At the end of submissions I announced I was satisfied that the decision
    of the FtT should be set aside for legal error and the decision remade.
    So far as disposal is concerned both representatives were of  the  view
    that fresh findings of  fact  would  need  to  be  made  and  that  the
    appropriate course is to remit this matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Caswell) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Caswell) to  remake  the
    decision.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                        Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                      13th November 2014


