
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21590/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 October 2018                   |On 01 April 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                OLALEKAN [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (Secretary of State)
For the Respondent:    Ms C Hulse, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
                    Solicitors
                    (Mr [F])


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.  At a hearing before me on 4 September 2018,
    I found that this decision had contained a material error  of  law  and
    would have to be remade.  Much of what I set out in that decision  will
    be  incorporated  into  the  present  decision.   Also,  for  ease   of
    convenience I shall throughout this decision (as I did in my  error  of
    law decision) refer to the Secretary of State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to  Mr  [F],  who  was  the
    original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria who was born in March  1976.   He
    came to this country as a visitor on 20 March 2008 and  thereafter  did
    not  leave  when  his  leave  expired.   He  has  accordingly  been  an
    overstayer in this country now for around ten years.  In or about  2011
    he met the lady who is now his wife, a Ms [MA], and  they  underwent  a
    religious marriage in June 2012 and a  civil  ceremony  on  9  November
    2013.  It is not in dispute that  this  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The claimant then applied in 2014 for leave to remain on
    the basis of his family life with his wife in this  country,  his  wife
    being  an  English  citizen.   This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in 2015  but  the  claimant  appealed  against  this
    decision.

 3. The claimant's appeal against this decision  was  successful  but  that
    decision was subsequently set aside by the Upper Tribunal and  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration.   The  appeal  was
    then reheard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 26 February 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15
    March 2018, Judge Lucas allowed the appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appealed against that decision, leave having been granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 15 June 2018, and as already stated above, I
    found that that decision had contained a  material  error  of  law  and
    would have to be remade.

 4. The basis of the claimant's case  is  that  because  of  gynaecological
    problems, following earlier  operations,  the  claimant's  wife  had  a
    hysterectomy.

 5. Before this operation, because she was young  and  would  otherwise  be
    unable herself to bear children, in November 2015 her eggs were  frozen
    for future use.

 6. At the time of the appeal before Judge Lucas, the couple were  claiming
    that a friend of the claimant's wife, a Mrs [A], had offered  to  be  a
    surrogate mother for a child which it was intended would be  born  from
    one of the frozen eggs of the claimant's wife which would be fertilised
    with the claimant's sperm.  It was said that the surrogate mother could
    not relocate to Nigeria  and  that  there  would  for  this  reason  be
    insurmountable obstacles preventing the couple,  and  particularly  Mrs
    [F], from returning to Nigeria such that  EX.1  was  engaged.   In  the
    alternative, it was argued that there were very compelling reasons  why
    exceptionally permission to remain should be granted outside the Rules.



 7. In his decision, Judge Lucas made a number of  findings  of  fact.   In
    particular, he noted that Mrs [A] had not attended the hearing  and  at
    paragraph 22 the judge expressed what could fairly be said  to  be  his
    scepticism as to the truthfulness of this evidence, finding as follows:

         "22. It is unfortunate to say  the  least  that  Mrs  [A]  has  not
             attended this hearing.  It is said that she has offered to  be
             a surrogate mother for the appellant and his wife.  This is  a
             life changing decision for both her and the appellant and  his
             partner.  Yet, for her own 'child care  issues'  she  has  not
             chosen to attend this hearing.  A hearing  which  is  of  some
             importance for the appellant and his  partner.   It  has  been
             said that her failure to attend this hearing  is  not  at  all
             reassuring of her genuine  commitment  to  being  a  surrogate
             mother for  the  appellant  and  his  partner.   There  is  no
             explanation at all as to why the husband of Mrs  [A]  has  not
             attended the hearing.  This is important because he is said to
             be supportive of the project.  He has not even made a  witness
             statement."

 8. Then, at paragraph  23  of  his  decision,  Judge  Lucas  continued  as
    follows:

         "23. The decision to be a surrogate mother is life changing and  of
             utmost importance.  The Tribunal does  not  find  it  credible
             that Mrs [A] has chosen not to attend this hearing for  'child
             care issues'.  It concludes that  there  is  doubt  -  on  the
             balance of probabilities - that she has made a  genuine  offer
             to be a surrogate mother in this case.  It is of note that she
             is not even mentioned in the counselling letter ... from April
             2016."

 9. In  other  words,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  which  was  the
    appropriate standard of proof, as the judge noted at  paragraph  21  of
    his decision, the judge made adverse credibility findings  as  to  this
    aspect of the claimant's case.

10. The judge also considered what the difficulties would be with regard to
    relocation to Nigeria and  noted  in  particular  at  paragraph  25  as
    follows:

         "25. The Tribunal has noted the comment of the  hospital  (at  page
             17) about the release of the eggs  to  another  clinic.   This
             confirms that Mrs [F]'s eggs are indeed frozen.  However,  two
             issues are troubling in this case.  First, the  appellant  and
             her partner have made no enquiry at all about the availability
             of services or surrogates in Nigeria to address  the  concerns
             of the clinic.  Secondly, and somewhat surprisingly, they have
             not discussed the possibility of the return to Nigeria of  the
             appellant at all."

11. For this reason the judge concluded at paragraph 26 as follows:

         "26. It is difficult to conclude in all of the above  circumstances
             that the issue of very significant obstacles has been properly
             or adequately addressed by the appellant.  It is not therefore
             accepted that the appellant has satisfied the requirements  of
             EX.1 and this aspect of the appeal is therefore dismissed."

12. In other words, the claimant had failed to satisfy the Tribunal that he
    could succeed under the Rules.  For this reason the judge then went  on
    to consider whether or not the claimant should  be  allowed  to  remain
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  It is well  established
    that in order to succeed on this basis (see, for  example,  the  recent
    Supreme Court decision in Agyarko and Ikuga  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11,
    which was very closely followed this year by the Court of Appeal in TZ)
    it is necessary to show that the consequences of requiring  a  claimant
    to return to his or her home country are sufficiently  compelling  that
    it could be said that the decision  that  he  or  she  must  return  is
    "unjustifiably harsh".  That is not a small hurdle to overcome.

13. In the error of law decision, I noted  that  any  decision  maker  when
    considering whether or the grant of leave to remain outside  Article  8
    is warranted would have to consider the factors set out within  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  inserted
    by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014) which is headed "Article  8:
    Public interest considerations applicable in all cases".  This includes
    at Section 117B(4) that little weight should be given to a private life
    or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is established
    by a person at a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully (as clearly was the case here) and also at (5)  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

14. Any decision maker also must have in mind what is provided  at  Section
    117B(1) which is that the maintenance of effective immigration  control
    is in the public interest.

15. In other words, before making a finding that an appeal  should  succeed
    on Article 8 grounds outside the  Rules,  a  judge  must  carry  out  a
    proportionality exercise and must have regard to all  the  factors  set
    out in Section 117B.

16. The judge's findings in this regard, which  formed  the  basis  of  his
    decision to allow the appeal, were (to say the least) sparse  and  were
    as follows:

         "27.  The  Tribunal  has  considered  Article  8  outside  of   the
             Immigration Rules.  It relies upon  its  findings  above  with
             regard to EX.1.  The appellant has overstayed in the UK  since
             2008 and has no status to be here.  It is accepted that he has
             a UK citizen wife and there is no challenge as to the  genuine
             and subsisting nature of the relationship.  It has noted  that
             there is good evidence of the partner's income in  this  case,
             as reflected in the financial evidence at pages 31-71.   There
             is  therefore  some  substance  to  the  submissions   of   Mr
             Richardson that there is little public interest  in  requiring
             the appellant to leave his wife to apply for a visa to  rejoin
             her in the UK.  There is no doubt that she is a UK citizen and
             the genuine and subsisting nature of their relationship is not
             in doubt.  Given all of the background  evidence  relating  to
             the  medical  condition  in  this  case  and  given  the  (un-
             evidenced) prospect of a surrogate (given the above  findings,
             it is only a prospect), the Tribunal concludes that  there  is
             little or no public interest in  requiring  the  appellant  to
             return to Nigeria and make an application to rejoin  his  wife
             in the UK.  She is in employment and there  are  therefore  no
             financial concerns about a recourse to public funds."

17. In his oral submissions before this  Tribunal,  at  the  error  of  law
    stage, it was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  this
    decision, or certainly the reasons (or lack of reasons)  justifying  it
    were simply "bizarre".  In the first place if the  judge  had  in  mind
    (although this was not mentioned in terms) a Chikwamba point, there was
    no evidence that the claimant had an English language certificate,  and
    nor was there any consideration of what was  stated  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Hyatt, which  is  effectively  that  a  judge  will  have  to
    consider what the reasons were for requiring somebody who was likely to
    be granted permission to return to the home country in order to make an
    application  from  there.   In  this  case,  that  must   include   the
    maintenance of effective immigration  control  and  in  particular  the
    public interest in making it clear that people who remain in the United
    Kingdom without leave for a long period of time cannot just then expect
    to be allowed to remain while their applications  are  considered.   At
    the very least, so the Secretary of State submits,  these  are  matters
    which needed to be considered by the decision maker.

18. In this case, the  Secretary  of  State's  position  is  even  stronger
    because the judge had specifically found that the  arguments  based  on
    EX.1 had to fail on the facts as he found them.

19. So far as the English language certificate is concerned, in  the  error
    of law decision, I stated that this did not appear to be the  strongest
    part of the Secretary of State's case.  I noted that the  claimant  had
    apparently given evidence  before  Judge  Lucas  and  had  been  cross-
    examined in English and that it was not (so far as I  was  then  aware)
    suggested that his English was not of sufficient quality that he  could
    if he took such a  test  pass  it.   Having  heard  the  claimant  give
    evidence at this hearing, however, as will appear below,  that  is  not
    now my view.  The claimant  chose,  as  was  his  right,  to  give  his
    evidence through an interpreter, but it was clear from the evidence  he
    gave that his understanding  of  and  ability  to  express  himself  in
    English was sufficiently poor that it cannot be assumed that if he  now
    took the necessary test in spoken English he would pass it.

20. Moreover, in the judgement of this Tribunal, the other  arguments  made
    on behalf of the Secretary of State were  and  remain  compelling.   It
    cannot simply be said that just because a person  might  ultimately  be
    successful in obtaining a visa to rejoin his or her spouse  he  or  she
    should not be removed in the  meantime.   This  claimant's  immigration
    history is as already noted very poor, and there  is  clearly  a  large
    public interest in removing such people.  Also, as is made plain within
    Sections 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act, little weight  can  be  given
    either to the private life of the claimant or to his relationship  with
    his wife, which relationship was developed at a time when both of  them
    knew that he had no lawful right to be in this country.  (The  evidence
    is not clear as to precisely when the claimant's  wife  knew  that  the
    claimant had no status within this country, which  is  a  matter  which
    will be discussed below).  That does not necessary mean that his  claim
    was bound to fail, but it does mean that his appeal could not  properly
    be allowed without the judge giving consideration to these factors.

21. It followed that Judge Lucas's decision would have  to  be  remade  and
    having heard submissions on behalf of the claimant  (the  Secretary  of
    State being neutral on this point) as to  whether  or  not  the  appeal
    should again be remitted (Ms Hulse's  submissions,  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant, was that she would prefer the appeal to be remitted again) it
    was the view of this Tribunal  that  in  this  case  it  would  not  be
    appropriate to remit this case yet again.  The appeal had already  been
    heard twice in the First-tier Tribunal and the time had now come when a
    final decision should be made.

22. At this part of the hearing, the Tribunal was informed by Ms Hulse (who
    has represented the claimant at both the hearings before me) that there
    had been a change with regard to the plans which the couple  now  claim
    to have with regard to potential surrogacy.   Apparently  the  original
    intended surrogate was  no  longer  prepared  to  assist  but  (it  was
    claimed) they had found someone else who was prepared to be  surrogate.
    Obviously, no evidence with regard to that was at that stage before the
    Tribunal.  It was also the case that as Judge Lucas had  noted  in  his
    decision, the claimant had by that stage failed to provide evidence  as
    to the availability of services or surrogates in Nigeria to address the
    concerns which had been expressed by the clinic which  had  frozen  Mrs
    [F]'s eggs.  Accordingly, I gave directions as to  the  time  in  which
    such an application which would have to exhibit  all  the  evidence  on
    which it was intended to rely, must be made.  I also gave time for  the
    Secretary of State to respond to such evidence if so  advised,  and  in
    particular to adduce any evidence that he might be  advised  to  adduce
    with regard to the availability of services or surrogates in Nigeria.

23. Subsequently, further evidence was submitted on behalf of the  claimant
    which is now contained within the file, and  the  appeal  was  relisted
    before me.

The Hearing

24. This appeal was before me on 15 October 2018, following which I gave
    consideration to all the submissions which had been made and reached a
    provisional decision.  Regrettably, the file was then mislaid and so my
    decision was not then finalised and communicated to the parties.  The
    file having now been relocated, this decision is now being promulgated.
     The Tribunal apologises to the parties for the delay.

25. Prior to the hearing the claimant's solicitors submitted  a  Bundle  to
    the Tribunal.  Unfortunately, the Bundle was paginated incorrectly  and
    not all of the pages had been  provided  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
    However, the missing pages were provided at the hearing, and no further
    adjournment was necessary.

26. Most of the documents contained within the Bundle had  previously  been
    within the file, but there were fresh statements from the claimant  and
    his wife, and also from Ms [LA], who it was intended should be the  new
    surrogate, and also from Mr [A], her partner.  There was also a witness
    statement from Mrs [A], who had not attended  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal when it was said that she had  offered  to  be  the
    surrogate.  In her statement, she explained that she had  not  attended
    because a babysitter had let her down, and she also stated that she was
    not now able to be the surrogate, and gave her reasons.

27. A further letter was also provided from Guy's and St  Thomas'  Hospital
    dated 10 September 2018, in  which  the  Consultant  Gynaecologist,  Dr
    Kopeika had set out, in half a page,  the  history  of  Mrs  [F]'s  egg
    preservation.  In it the doctor said that "we would strongly  recommend
    for her to continue with  the  treatment  with  us",  and  referred  to
    counselling that had previously been undergone by the claimant's  wife.
    In this letter reference was made  to  an  appointment  which  the  new
    surrogate had with the hospital on 2 October, some  three  weeks  after
    the date of the letter but two weeks before the date of this hearing.

28. At the hearing I heard submissions on behalf of both parties  and  also
    heard evidence from three of the witnesses, that is  the  claimant  and
    his wife, and Ms [LA], who were  all  cross-examined.   The  other  two
    witnesses, that is Mr [A] (Ms [LA]'s partner)  and  Mrs  [A],  did  not
    attend.  The evidence which was given and the submissions are  set  out
    in my Record of Proceedings and I shall refer below only to such of the
    evidence and submissions as is  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  this
    Decision.  I have, however, considered carefully everything  which  was
    said to me, both in evidence and submissions, and had regard to all the
    documents within the file, before reaching my Decision.

The Evidence

29. Although the claimant had asked for the assistance of  an  interpreter,
    he had originally intended to give his evidence in  English,  with  the
    Yoruba interpreter being available to translate the odd question  which
    he did not understand.  However,  it  soon  became  apparent  that  the
    claimant's understanding of English was very poor indeed and very  soon
    he started to give all his evidence in Yoruba, and the  questions  were
    translated for him as well.

30. The claimant was asked a number of supplementary questions and was also
    cross-examined.  Even making allowance for  difficulties  the  claimant
    may have had in giving his evidence in his native language,  he  was  a
    very unimpressive witness.

31. In his witness statement, which was signed on 27 September  2018,  that
    is some eighteen days before the hearing, the claimant  explained  that
    Mrs [A], who was to  have  been  the  surrogate,  had  been  unable  to
    continue but that they had luckily found another friend, Ms  [LA],  who
    was now prepared to be a  surrogate.   This  offer  will  be  discussed
    below.

32. In cross-examination, the claimant accepted that he had  been  in  this
    country about six years before he had made an  application  to  remain,
    and it was during this period that he had met his wife.  When asked  at
    what stage he had told his wife that he did not have permission  to  be
    in the UK he said that she had found out during  their  wedding.   When
    asked whether he was saying during the marriage ceremony or the run  up
    to the wedding, the claimant said he did not understand  the  question,
    and when asked to explain by reference to a date he said that he  could
    not remember.

33. On being further questioned, he said that he had told her  he  did  not
    have permission to be in the  UK  in  the  house  after  the  religious
    ceremony at the mosque, which had been on 2 June 2012.

34. However, when he was asked how long after 2 June 2012 he had  told  his
    wife that he did not have permission to be in the UK,  he  changed  his
    story to say that he had discussed it before the religious wedding.

35. After the claimant had confirmed that the religious, Muslim wedding had
    come before the civil wedding, and he was asked again  how  long  after
    the religious wedding (on 2 June 2012) he had told his wife he did  not
    have permission to be in the UK, he  then  replied  about  two  months.
    When he was asked by the Tribunal why it  was  in  those  circumstances
    that he had said that he had discussed it  with  his  wife  before  the
    religious wedding, the claimant then replied that he had  discussed  it
    before the wedding because his wife had asked him.  He then  said  that
    his wife had asked him again after the religious wedding  when  he  had
    told her that he did not have permission to stay in the  UK.   He  told
    her that he needed to stay in the UK because he had sold his mother his
    property in Nigeria.  He accepted that  he  continued  to  get  married
    legally in the UK, even though by that time his  wife  had  been  aware
    that he had no permission to remain in the UK.

36. The claimant was asked what research he had done  with  regard  to  the
    possibility of transferring his wife's gametes (that is  her  eggs)  to
    Nigeria, to which he claimed to have done some research.  He said  that
    he had had a discussion with a doctor in Nigeria and understood that it
    would be "delicate" to take the eggs to Nigeria  because  there  was  a
    lack of certainty as to how the eggs would be handled in  Nigeria,  and
    whether this would be clean.  He had been told this by  the  doctor  in
    Nigeria.

37. On further questioning it appeared that this was  a  reference  to  the
    doctor at St Catherine's Hospital in Abuja,  Nigeria,  a  photocopy  of
    whose letter is in the Bundle at pages 23 to  24.   This  letter  while
    referring to the  risk  of  eggs  being  misplaced,  does  not  mention
    cleanliness at all.  When this was put to the claimant he replied  that
    his understanding was that they were not sure about what  contamination
    would be caused by whoever was going to carry the eggs.  I noted at the
    time that there was no reference to this within his witness  statement.



38. The claimant then confirmed that he had not himself sought advice  from
    any other hospital in Nigeria,  although  he  believed  his  wife  had.
    Further, when asked, he confirmed that  he  had  not  himself  had  any
    conversation with St Catherine's Hospital either, (which  was  not  the
    impression he had tried to convey earlier), so it appears that all  the
    evidence he was giving on this was entirely hearsay.

39. When asked whether he had  researched  the  possibility  of  finding  a
    surrogate mother in Nigeria, the claimant's  first  response  was  that
    they had not, that they had only looked into  this  in  the  UK.   When
    asked again he said that he had looked in Nigeria but  they  could  not
    get anyone.  When asked where he had looked, he replied that  his  wife
    had gone searching at some hospitals in Nigeria.

40. When asked how they were paying for IVF in the UK, the claimant replied
    that he did not pay anybody, and when asked further  whether  that  was
    because the treatment was on the NHS, he replied that it was  his  wife
    who was going to the hospital.  He was asked then whether the  hospital
    who was doing all the procedures was aware that he did not have  status
    in the UK at which he said he did not know, because his wife was  doing
    it.  He had been to the hospital when his wife had had fibroids.

41.  The  claimant  was  then  asked  whether  his  wife's  eggs  had  been
    fertilised, to which his initial reply was "Yes",  and  they  had  been
    frozen.  When asked again whether the eggs had been fertilised with his
    sperm, he replied that they had tested his sperm and it would work well
    with his wife's eggs.  When it was put to him that  that  was  not  the
    question and he was asked again whether the eggs had  been  fertilised,
    he replied "Not yet".

42. The claimant was then asked why  if  he  had  been  able  to  find  two
    surrogates in the UK he should  not  be  able  to  find  surrogates  in
    Nigeria, to which he replied that "Not many  woman  would  be  able  to
    divulge their secrets".  When it was suggested that as he had not asked
    anyone in Nigeria he could not know, the claimant replied that his wife
    had asked her friends in the UK about the same possibility,  which  did
    not really answer the question he had been asked.

43. The claimant was  then  asked  whether  it  was  correct  that  he  had
    supported himself in the UK by being a security  guard,  to  which  the
    claimant's initial reply was that he was  not  working.   When  it  was
    suggested that that was not an answer  to  the  question  he  had  been
    asked, he repeated that he had not worked in the UK.  Mr Whitwell  then
    asked in terms whether the claimant had ever worked in the UK, to which
    he replied that he had not.

44. Following up on that answer, Mr Whitwell asked the claimant why he  had
    recorded his  employment  on  his  marriage  certificate  as  "security
    officer", to which he replied (correctly) that it had been his wife who
    had been so described.  Mr Whitwell then referred to the certified copy
    of the entry of marriage which is at the second page 18 of  the  Bundle
    (the  Bundle  being  numbered  somewhat  haphazardly)  in   which   the
    claimant's wife had, as  he  stated,  been  described  as  a  "security
    officer" but in which he had been described as a "cleaner".

45. When this was pointed out to the claimant, he replied that he had  done
    this "for two or three months".  It was then put to  him  that  he  had
    then worked in the UK to which he admitted that he  had,  "for  two  or
    three months".

46. The claimant was asked whether when he had said earlier that he had not
    worked in the UK that was not correct, to which he replied that he  had
    been helping people out, so he did not regard it  as  a  job.   He  was
    asked whether he had been paid for the work he had done,  to  which  he
    admitted that each time he had done a job he received some money.

47. The claimant was then asked whether his intended surrogate had been  to
    a counselling appointment on 2 October 2018, to which he  replied  that
    the lady who had been intended to be the surrogate had not come because
    she had lost her father.

48. It was then put to the claimant that  it  was  Ms  [LA]  (that  is  the
    second, current surrogate) who had  been  due  to  have  a  counselling
    appointment on 2 October 2018 (see paragraph 11 of her  statement)  and
    the claimant was asked whether she had attended.  The claimant  replied
    that she did not go, and when asked why not said that this was  because
    she had lost her father.  He then corrected himself and  said  that  Ms
    [LA] had gone to her appointment.

49. The claimant was then asked whether he had gone to counselling at  all,
    to which he replied that he had in about 2017 but he could not remember
    the dates.

50. A final question the claimant was asked was what language he  spoke  to
    his wife in, to which he replied that it was a mixture of  English  and
    Yoruba, which is the Nigerian language.

51. The claimant's wife then gave evidence and also adopted her most recent
    statement, which is in the Bundle at pages 6 to 10, which statement had
    been signed about a  month  earlier  than  that  of  her  husband,  the
    claimant, on 22 August 2018.

52. The claimant's wife explains in her statement that the original planned
    surrogate, Mrs [A], had decided not to go ahead because of the death of
    her father, but that Ms [LA], another friend, had now offered to be her
    surrogate and that she would be going  for  counselling  on  2  October
    2018.  She states that Ms [LA] had previously offered to be a surrogate
    but she had never accepted this  because  at  that  time  Mrs  [A]  had
    already offered.

53. Mrs [F] then gives reasons why she could not relocate to Nigeria, which
    was first because having agreed with Ms [LA]  that  she  would  be  her
    surrogate she could not leave her to undergo this without support  from
    her in this country.  She could not leave her friend to go through  the
    surrogacy herself, but "will need our support and we can  only  provide
    that for her in the UK".  Ms [LA] could not go to Nigeria  because  she
    had an established private and family life of her own in the UK and had
    a British partner and a job in this country.

54. Mrs [F] also claims that because she had lived in the UK now  for  over
    sixteen years and had no ties to Nigeria (and  nor  did  the  claimant)
    there  would  be  "insurmountable  obstacles"  preventing   them   from
    returning to Nigeria.

55. She deals in one paragraph  (paragraph  10)  with  why  she  could  not
    reasonably be expected to have the surrogacy procedure carried  out  in
    Nigeria, as follows:

         "10. Further I would like to submit that [the claimant] and I  have
             called  a  hospital  in  Nigeria,  St  Catherine's  Specialist
             Hospital Ltd.  I have spoken to a doctor  from  that  hospital
             and they inform me that they advise the patient to  carry  out
             tests in Nigeria to see whether eggs can be frozen.   However,
             in my case my eggs are frozen already and the doctor  informed
             me that they have never had a procedure where eggs  have  been
             transferred from another country to Nigeria.  The doctor  also
             told me that the patient has to pay around 2.5 million Naira a
             year, which is equivalent  to  around  �4,000,  to  store  the
             frozen eggs until a surrogate is found.  My husband and  I  do
             not have this kind of money, and cannot afford this".

56. I note that nowhere in Mrs  [F]'s  statement  does  she  refer  to  any
    enquiries which she or the claimant made as to what they would have  to
    do to find a surrogate in Nigeria.

57. In supplementary questions, when asked when it was that she had learned
    that the claimant had no status in the UK,  her  initial  response  was
    that she could not remember the exact date, but she thought  she  found
    out when she asked why he had no job.  When asked if she could give  at
    least some idea when that was, she thought that would "be late  2011  I
    think".

58. Mrs [F] was reminded that there had been two  ceremonies  of  marriage,
    first the religious on 2 June 2012 and then the  civil  ceremony  on  9
    November 2011 and was asked with regard to these dates when she thought
    she had known that her husband had no legal  status  in  the  UK.   Mrs
    [F]'s response was  that  she  thought  it  was  before  the  religious
    marriage, that is before June 2012.

59. Mrs [F] then said that she had personally known she could not  carry  a
    child just before her operation in 2016.  She had had one operation  in
    2005 to remove fibroids, but at that stage her uterus was still  there.
    She had gone to hospital in or around  2013  when  she  discovered  her
    fibroids had grown and it seems she had had a hysterectomy.  They  said
    that they might have to remove her ovaries but because she had not  had
    a child before doing so they would freeze some eggs.  They  had  frozen
    eight eggs before her second operation.  At  that  time  they  had  not
    looked for a surrogate.

60. Mrs [F] had become a British citizen in May 2016, having  been  granted
    ILR in 2015.  She had been granted leave to remain as a spouse  of  her
    previous husband.

61. Although at paragraph 9 of her statement Mrs [F] had claimed  that  "my
    home and friends and family are all here in the UK" and that "I have no
    ties to Nigeria as well as my husband not having too", she admitted  in
    cross-examination that her mother lived in Nigeria;  however,  she  was
    disabled.

62. As already noted, in her statement,  Mrs  [F]  had  not  mentioned  any
    attempts she had made to discover whether  and  if  so  how  she  could
    obtain a surrogate in Nigeria, and so she was  asked  whether  she  had
    ever considered getting a surrogate in Nigeria.  To this  question  Mrs
    [F] claimed that at one point she had gone  online,  and  searched  for
    "surrogates in Nigeria" but having read some statements that girls  who
    had gone on to be surrogate mothers had given she found  it  was  scary
    and did not see any prospect  of  obtaining  a  surrogate  in  Nigeria.
    Although it seems that there was  some  success  in  Nigeria  with  IVF
    treatment, she did not  see  (from  the  internet)  much  prospects  of
    success for surrogacy, which was why she contacted a hospital  and,  as
    she put it, "what they told me wasn't what I wanted to hear".

63. When then asked specifically as to what enquiries she had made, whether
    in this country or in Nigeria as to being able to find a  surrogate  in
    Nigeria, Mrs [F] replied that the doctor at the hospital had said  they
    do not help with finding surrogates and that "the law in Nigeria is not
    good re surrogates".  People asked for money, it was like  a  business,
    which was not really what she wanted.  The doctor  had  said  that  she
    would need a lawyer, because  if  eventually  she  found  a  surrogate,
    arrangements would have to be made through a lawyer.

64. When asked whether the Nigerian hospital had given her any advice about
    her transferring her eggs to Nigeria, Mrs [F] replied that the hospital
    had told her that  they  had  not  had  a  case  where  eggs  had  been
    transferred to their care, but they would have to refreeze  them  which
    would cost her �4,000 "or things like that".  To store the  eggs  would
    cost her �4,000 a year.

65. Mrs [F] was then asked how her treatment was  being  paid  for  at  the
    moment, to which she had replied that they had an appointment to see Dr
    White on 23 October 2018 (that was eight days after  the  hearing)  who
    would do the test for her and her surrogate had been for counselling as
    well to go away and think about it.

66. When Mrs [F] was reminded that that was not the question she  had  been
    asked and was asked the question again, she replied that they  had  not
    yet reached the point where they had to pay anything.  All treatment so
    far had been on the NHS, although she would have to pay for  surrogacy.



67. In cross-examination, Mrs [F] was asked what fees or  arrangements  she
    had with her surrogate to which the  answer  was  that  she  would  pay
    expenses, "but we haven't talked about that because she hasn't been for
    any tests yet".

68. She was then asked whether the hospital had been able  to  confirm  she
    would be a suitable surrogate, to which Mrs [F] replied  that  although
    the surrogate had had counselling, she had not had any tests yet.  That
    was a process that had to be gone through.

69. When asked whether the surrogate had time to back out, Mrs [F]  replied
    that she had three to six months, and that  she  had  been  advised  to
    "think carefully  about  it".   She  eventually  accepted,  after  some
    prevarication, that the surrogate could back out after this appeal.

70. When asked about the extent of  her  research  in  Nigeria  as  to  the
    possibility of surrogacy, Mrs [F] confirmed that this was  confined  to
    searching on the internet, and she said that she had  done  this  "more
    than five times".  She also when asked confirmed that she had only made
    enquiries of the one hospital, which was St Catherine's in Abuja.

71. When asked why she could not find similar surrogates in Nigeria if  she
    was to return there with her husband, Mrs [F] said that because she had
    left that country seventeen or eighteen years ago,  she  did  not  know
    anyone there now.   She  also  said  that  having  to  talk  about  her
    situation all the time was very depressing.   When  asked  whether  the
    real reason she did not want to return to Nigeria and find a  surrogate
    there was because it would cost her money, Mrs [F] replied  that  these
    people would be strangers and she did not  know  anything  about  them.
    She agreed that there would be additional costs in  Nigeria,  and  that
    she would have to pay a stranger there, whereas in the UK the surrogate
    would be a friend.

72. The final live witness was Ms [LA], who was the possible surrogate  now
    relied upon.  She also relied on her  statement,  which  was  dated  25
    September 2018, some three weeks or so before this hearing.

73. The statement is very short and (as will be clear  below)  was  clearly
    drafted for her  by  the  claimant's  solicitors.   It  refers  to  the
    "insurmountable obstacles" in the claimant's case and also how a  group
    of the friends of Mrs [F] had offered to be their surrogate.

74. Ms [LA] describes how she was in  a  long-term  relationship  with  her
    partner, Mr [A], a British citizen, and that they  are  "in  a  stable,
    loving and  committed  relationship".   No  further  details  of  their
    relationship are contained  within  the  statement,  save  that  having
    decided that she wanted to be a surrogate, because she  understood  how
    much Mrs [F] wanted a baby, "My partner and I discussed this thoroughly
    and at the end discussed that I should  offer  [M]  and  Olalekan  [the
    claimant] to be a surrogate for them".  She then repeats what  she  was
    apparently told about why the previous surrogate  had  felt  unable  to
    continue.

75. A paragraph is added as to why she could not move to Nigeria "because I
    have my own established private and family life here  in  the  UK"  and
    "can only be their surrogate in the UK due to my own private and family
    life and work being here in the UK".  She also adds  that  "Further,  I
    cannot undergo the surrogacy without [the claimant and Mrs [F]] present
    with me here in the UK" because "I require their support and help  here
    in the UK".

76. What this witness essentially says in her statement   is  that  because
    she likes Mrs [F] and her husband (the  claimant)  so  much  and  feels
    sorry for them because they had been let down by their first surrogate,
    she was very happy just to help them, her partner had agreed, but  that
    this would only be possible if the claimant and Mrs [F] remained in the
    UK.  They would be going to counselling and then  everything  would  go
    ahead.   As  already  mentioned,  the  statement   lacks  any   details
    regarding what the personal situation of this witness with her  partner
    actually is.

77. In cross-examination, Mr Whitwell very properly explored these matters.



78. Because there was no mention in  her  statement  of  any  children,  Mr
    Whitwell asked Ms [LA] whether  she  had  any  herself,  to  which  she
    replied that she did not.  She was asked whether as a 36 year old woman
    who was in a stable relationship she saw herself as having any children
    with her partner to which she replied that she had, but  she  had  been
    "on gynaecology for this".  When asked to explain  what  she  meant  by
    this, she said that they had been trying for a baby and did not see any
    reason why she had  not  become  pregnant  and  was  still  under  that
    investigation.

79. When asked how long she had been trying for a child,  Ms  [LA]  replied
    that it was "about six years now".

80. When asked whether the doctors had been able to say whether the  reason
    she had so far been unable to have a child was to do  with  herself  or
    her partner, the witness replied  that  "Everything  is  fine  with  my
    doctor".  This was not explored further.

81. When asked whether or not any suggestion had been  made  that  Ms  [LA]
    could have IVF treatment, she  replied  that  that  had  not  yet  been
    suggested.  When asked whether she had considered this, she replied she
    had not yet but she wanted them to do more investigations first  before
    she would think of IVF.

82. She was then asked whether she would have  to  undergo  some  tests  in
    respect of being a surrogate for Mrs [F] and the claimant, to which she
    replied that she would, and in answer to another question she said that
    these tests had not yet been done.  She had gone for the interview  and
    they had given her three to six months to  think  about  it,  with  her
    partner before coming back.

83. When asked whether they had talked about her own wish to  have  a  baby
    she replied that they had, and she confirmed also that  she  was  still
    trying.

84. Ms [LA] was then asked about what  was  said  at  paragraph  7  of  her
    statement which was that "A group of [M]'s friends had  offered  to  be
    their surrogate" and was asked who these people were.  Ms [LA]  replied
    that that had been when she went to the hospital to visit  her  with  a
    friend (that is not with a group).  She was asked why she  had  written
    "A group of her friends" to which she replied that "they" (that is  the
    claimant's solicitors) had talked to her about these matters  and  they
    had written out her statement for her.

85. She was then asked what she  meant  when  she  wrote  that  "there  are
    insurmountable obstacles" with regard  to  the  claimant  and  Mrs  [F]
    returning to Nigeria together.  She was asked what  she  had  meant  by
    that.  She had obvious difficulty in answering this question and so she
    was asked by the Tribunal in terms whether she knew what this meant, to
    which she replied that she did not.

86. Ms [LA] was then  asked  about  what  had  been  discussed  during  her
    counselling session some two weeks or so  previously.   She  was  asked
    first whether the doctors had discussed with her whether or not being a
    surrogate might jeopardise her chances of having her own child  because
    this would have to be delayed, to which she replied  that  in  her  own
    case she had been trying for a long time unsuccessfully, but  this  was
    not mentioned to her.  They did mention other things.  When asked  what
    other things had been mentioned she replied that she was asked  whether
    she would want the child to know her and whether she would want to have
    anything to do with the child to which she had said that she did not.

87. When asked what payments she expected to receive, Ms [LA] said  perhaps
    something in place for insurance in case  it  affected  her  job.   The
    hospital had apparently told her that they would discuss this with  Mrs
    [F].  There had been no mention of adoption during her counselling.

88. There were two  other  witness  statements,  from  Mr  [A],  Ms  [LA]'s
    partner, and from Mrs [A], who had been the  prospective  surrogate  at
    the time of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Neither  of
    these witnesses were present and so neither  were  cross-examined.   Mr
    [A]'s  statement  is  exceptionally  brief,  amounting  to  five  short
    paragraphs, totalling  less  than  one  page,  which  includes  generic
    evidence such as that the statement will be used as evidence  and  that
    he understands that it is made in support of the claimant's appeal.  He
    says (at paragraph 3) that he and Ms  [LA]  (whose  name  is  incorrect
    spelt) "had been in a relationship since 2010, and  are  in  a  stable,
    loving and committed relationship".  He then says that he has known the
    claimant and Mrs [F] through his partner and that he  knows  that  they
    "are great, genuine and honest people" and that "all they want is to be
    given the opportunity to start their own family".  He then says that he
    fully supports his partner to  be  their  surrogate  mother.   What  is
    completely missing from this statement is any  consideration  (or  even
    acknowledgement) of what impact Ms [LA]'s decision to  be  a  surrogate
    would have on this couple's desire to have a child  of  their  own,  or
    even any mention that this was something which they wished to do.

89. Mrs [A]'s statement explains that although she had  been  intending  to
    attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal to confirm  that  she
    was willing to be a surrogate for the claimant and Mrs [F],  she  could
    not attend because she had been let down  by  a  babysitter.   It  also
    appears from this  statement  that  the  offer  had  been  made  before
    attending any counselling, and that she never had attended  counselling
    because before this could take place her father had been ill  and  then
    died and she had been put under stress because she had worked  hard  to
    pay for her father's medical bills.  It  is  not  entirely  clear  why,
    given that her father was now dead, she could no longer be a surrogate,
    but in any event she said that this was her  reason  for  changing  her
    mind.

90. The claimant also relied on the documents contained within the  Bundle,
    and in particular the  correspondence  and  letters  from  Guy's  &  St
    Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and  St  Catherine's  Hospital  in  Abuja.
    Reference will be made where relevant to these documents.

Submissions

91. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Whitwell,  referring  to  EX.1.
    (whether  there  will  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family   life
    continuing in Nigeria) referred first to the quality of evidence  which
    had been given.  The evidence had not been given in  a  straightforward
    manner.  There had been a discrepancy, for example, in  the  claimant's
    evidence as to whether or not he had been working, and there were  also
    discrepancies as to when Mrs [F] became aware of the precariousness  of
    the relationship, in particular whether this was before  or  after  the
    religious ceremony of marriage.  This was relevant  when  the  Tribunal
    had to decide whether or not this  was  in  effect  merely  a  case  of
    someone without status in the UK who  had  decided  to  strengthen  and
    solidify his family life where otherwise he had no legitimate basis for
    being allowed to remain.

92. When considering whether EX.1. would apply, it was necessary to look at
    the definition of insurmountable obstacles within  EX.2.,  and  in  the
    Secretary of State's submission, family life, such  as  it  was,  would
    continue.  The claimant and his partner both spoke Yoruba, the language
    of Nigeria, and both the claimant and Mrs  [F]  had   previously  spent
    their formative life in Nigeria.  There is no reason why they could not
    continue their family life in that country.

93. So far as the evidence with regard to surrogacy was concerned,  it  was
    far from clear that IVF through the  surrogacy  of  Ms  [LA]  would  be
    successful.  Ms [LA] was a lady in her  late  30s  with  gynaecological
    problems, as yet not fully explored, which had  so  far  prevented  her
    from becoming pregnant.  In other words there were  potential  physical
    difficulties even without taking account of psychological and emotional
    difficulties.   This  Tribunal  had  to  consider  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities whether this  surrogacy  arrangement  would  in  fact  be
    effective, even were the claimant to be allowed to remain in the UK.

94. In any event, surrogacy arrangements could be made within Nigeria.  The
    claimant's wife was saying that she would rather have someone she  knew
    and that she did not wish to incur the financial expense which would be
    involved in entering into a surrogacy arrangement within  Nigeria.   It
    was also said that the process of transferring her eggs from the UK  to
    Nigeria was not straightforward.

95. With regard to this latter point, clearly the transfer of gametes  does
    take place from the UK to other countries as was shown from the  letter
    of 27 September 2017 from Guy's & St Thomas' NHS Foundation  Trust,  at
    page 22 of the Bundle.  In that letter the Hospital Trust sets out  the
    conditions necessary for the requirements of UK legislation to be  met,
    and there had been no evidence that these conditions could not be  met.
    Indeed, from the letter from St Catherine's Hospital in Abuja, at pages
    23 and 24 of the Bundle, it  was  clear  that  eggs  were  on  occasion
    transferred to Nigeria because there is reference within  that  letter,
    at  the  third  paragraph,  to  a  case  "where  the  courier   service
    transferring the frozen gametes misplaced the gametes", indicating that
    these transfers did take place.  Also, Mrs [F] had  said  she  had  not
    even researched the position with other hospitals, so the claimant  had
    not established that eggs could  not  be  transferred  successfully  to
    Nigeria and nor had he established that surrogacy could not take  place
    in that country.

96. On behalf of the claimant, Ms  Hulse  submitted  that  Mrs  [F]  had  a
    totally natural desire to have a child born with the  assistance  of  a
    surrogate whom she knew, trusted and liked, and who would  be  amenable
    to her suggestions as to how much rest she should have, what  food  she
    should have and whether she needed to take time off and  so  on.   This
    was not like buying a tube ticket, it was a much more personal  matter.
    Financial arrangements were difficult.  In  this  country  a  surrogate
    cannot be paid,  but  can  receive  expenses.   The  procedure  is  not
    straightforward, even if one has all the eggs and they  are  fertilised
    it still may not work.  But moving the eggs and taking increased  risks
    was not a good idea.

97. While it was accepted that there was a still long way to go  with  this
    surrogacy, it was not proportionate to risk the eight eggs which had so
    far been frozen.  What the Tribunal had to consider is whether to  deny
    the couple the best opportunity of  trying  for  a  child  would  be  a
    seriously harsh consequence as set out within EX.2.

98. With regard to the argument that  the  claimant  and  his  wife  merely
    wanted to continue to avail themselves of NHS treatment,  Mrs  [F]  had
    had this treatment and as a British citizen was entitled  to  it.   The
    hardship that would be occasioned by the claimant's  removal  would  be
    suffered by both of them.

Discussion

99. My starting point has to be that  none  of  the  requirements  set  out
    within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) to (vi) of  the  rules  are  satisfied.
    With regard to (vi) there are no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's own integration into Nigeria were  he  to  be  required  to
    return there.  He speaks the language, he  was  brought  up  there  and
    there is no special reason why  he  could  not  reintegrate  into  that
    society.

100. I must then consider whether  or  not  EX.1.  if  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules is engaged.  The relevant parts of  EX.1.  and  EX.2.
    are as follows:

         "Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         ...

             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                  ... and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
                  with that partner continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.    For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable
             obstacles' means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and which could not be
             overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
             applicant or their partner."

101. Even if EX.1. does not apply, I would have to consider whether  or  not
    leave should be given under Article 8 outside the Rules  on  the  basis
    the circumstances were sufficiently compelling that exceptionally leave
    should be granted even though the claimant does not qualify within  the
    Rules.

102. The claimant's case is primarily that EX.1. is engaged because,  it  is
    said, the difficulties which  would  be  faced  by  this  claimant  and
    particularly his partner in having a child together are so  significant
    that if they were to move to Nigeria they either could not be  overcome
    or would entail very serious hardship for them.

103. The way the claimant's case has been put is essentially that  Mrs  [F],
    who understandably wishes to have a child, is now in a position in this
    country where that wish can be fulfilled by implanting her  egg,  which
    would first have to be fertilised, within Ms [LA], who would act as her
    surrogate.  That chance of motherhood, it is said, would be  frustrated
    (or would at the very least  be  likely  to  be  frustrated)  were  the
    claimant to be returned to Nigeria.

104. In order for this claim even to be arguable, the  claimant  would  need
    to establish, by credible evidence, first that Mrs [F] currently has  a
    realistic prospect of having a child through the use of a surrogate  in
    this country, and secondly, that if she were  to  relocate  to  Nigeria
    with the claimant, this relocation  would  create  a  very  significant
    difficulty to this aspect of their family life which either  could  not
    be overcome, or would entail very serious hardship.

105. I deal first with the realistic prospects of the claimant and his  wife
    having a child through a surrogate within the UK.  At the outset, it is
    right that I record my finding that this claimant  was  not  an  honest
    witness.  As already noted above, his evidence  was  inconsistent  with
    regard to whether or not he had been  working.   He  clearly  had,  but
    initially he chose to deny this.  When  he  was  challenged  in  cross-
    examination, he tried to maintain that when he had said that he had not
    worked in the UK, whereas on his own  admission  he  had  worked  as  a
    cleaner for at least two or three months, this  had  not  been  a  lie,
    because he was only "helping people out" so he did not regard this as a
    job.  However, as he admitted, he did get paid for all the jobs that he
    did, and I do not accept that he did not appreciate that he was  indeed
    working, when, obviously, he was not entitled to do so.

106. The claimant's evidence was also inconsistent as to when  he  had  told
    his wife that he had no status in this country.

107.  It  also  became  apparent  during  cross-examination  that  when  the
    claimant informed the Tribunal that he had "done some  research"  (this
    evidence, as with all  his  evidence  was  given  in  Yoruba  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter) he had  not  actually  himself  done  any
    research at all.  Rather, he was repeating what he understood that  his
    wife had discovered, although the evidence he gave with regard to  what
    St Catherine's Hospital had  said  (with  regard  to  the  possibly  of
    contamination of the eggs) was not what was in fact in their statement.



108. The evidence adduced on behalf of the claimant, within  the  statements
    themselves, were also very unsatisfactory, not only for what they  left
    out  (in  particular  with  regard  to  the  very   relevant   personal
    circumstances of Ms [LA] and  her  partner,  which  will  be  discussed
    below), but also because Ms [LA] in particular had signed  a  statement
    which she clearly did  not  fully  understand.   This  became  apparent
    during her cross-examination when notwithstanding that she had referred
    to the "insurmountable obstacles" which the claimant and his wife would
    face in Nigeria, she admitted that she did not actually understand what
    this meant, but had just signed the statement which had  been  prepared
    for her by the claimant's solicitors.   Similarly,  she  had  signed  a
    statement which had included a  reference  to  a  group  of  Mrs  [F]'s
    friends being prepared to act as her surrogate, whereas in fact she had
    at most visited the hospital with one  other  person.   This  also  was
    apparently something which the claimant's solicitors had  misunderstood
    when they wrote the statement.

109.  Even  without  these  very  unsatisfactory  aspects  surrounding   the
    evidence adduced on behalf of the claimant, and taking that evidence at
    its highest, it is clear  that  there  is,  in  the  judgment  of  this
    Tribunal very little realistic prospect of Ms [LA]  being  a  surrogate
    for Mrs [F].  It is clear that she has not yet thought through properly
    what would be involved, and nor has she received (if her evidence is to
    be believed) appropriate counselling.  Although this is a matter  which
    only came to light during cross-examination, Ms [LA] has in  fact  been
    herself trying to conceive for about six years now, with  her  partner.
    She has not yet investigated the possibility of IVF  for  herself,  and
    nor has she considered what impact her now trying to be a surrogate for
    Mrs [F] would have on her chances of conceiving her own child.  She  is
    a 36 year old lady and clearly time is of the essence if she now wishes
    to have her own child.  Leaving aside the real possibility  that  there
    may be physical difficulties in surrogacy (which do not appear to  have
    been explored at all yet), the potential emotional trauma  which  might
    be suffered by a lady who is longing to have her own child  by  bearing
    another person's baby is something which  would  need  to  be  explored
    fully  before  any  surrogacy  arrangement  was  entered   into.    The
    impression given from the evidence is that  it  is  just  assumed  that
    surrogacy is a simple, easy matter involving very little  consideration
    rather than a potentially traumatic experience, especially for  a  lady
    who so far has been unable to bear her own children.

110. When one then considers also that the claimant's  case  as  put  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was that a different lady (who  apparently  had
    been unable to attend that hearing because she had babysitting problems
    on that day) had agreed to be a surrogate, this Tribunal has even  less
    confidence that this prospect has  been  explored  at  all  thoroughly.
    Having considered all the evidence, not only do I consider  that  there
    is no realistic probability at the moment of Ms [LA] in  fact  being  a
    surrogate for the claimant and his wife, but I believe it to be  highly
    unlikely.

111. Even if there was a realistic prospect of Ms [LA] attempting  to  be  a
    surrogate for Mrs [F], this would not occur for some time, because,  as
    already indicated above, something as serious as  this  could  only  be
    undertaken after proper and thorough counselling  and  medical  checks,
    which have not yet been done.  So one would have to consider whether or
    not there would be any serious or significant difficulty  preventing  a
    surrogacy arrangement being concluded within Nigeria.  The reasons  put
    forward are first that Mrs [F] would prefer to have  a  surrogate  whom
    she knew and trusted, and secondly, financial.  It  is  also  suggested
    that there could be difficulties in transferring the gametes.

112. With regard to the transfer of the eggs, it is  clear  from  the  (very
    limited)  evidence  from  the  hospital  in  Nigeria  that   eggs   are
    transported, because that hospital gave an example of  where  something
    had gone wrong in the transportation of eggs.  There is an almost total
    lack of  evidence  regarding  IVF  treatment  within  Nigeria  and  the
    transportation of eggs, and on the basis of the evidence  adduced,  the
    claimant has not shown that there would be any significant difficulties
    in arranging this which could not be  overcome.   Although  the  couple
    might prefer, other things being equal,  for  Mrs  [F]'s  treatment  to
    continue in this country, EX.1. will only apply in circumstances  where
    there would be significant difficulties which would  be  faced  by  the
    claimant and Mrs [F] in Nigeria which could not be  overcome  or  would
    entail "very serious hardship".  Unless  the  treatment  could  not  be
    continued in Nigeria, without "undue hardship", EX.1. will not apply.

113. Even if there is a small risk involved  in  transporting  the  gametes,
    this could be significantly reduced by transporting the eight  eggs  in
    two batches of four (at any rate there is no  evidence  that  it  could
    not).  Also, there was no evidence as to what this risk  actually  was;
    the only "evidence" on this point was a comment from the hospital which
    had heard of an occasion where something had gone wrong.

114. So far as the surrogacy arrangement itself is  concerned,  again  there
    has been an almost total absence of evidence as  to  what  difficulties
    might arise within Nigeria.  The highest the claimant's case  was  put,
    was that this would be  more  expensive,  because  in  Nigeria  it  was
    believed (without evidence) that a surrogate would expect to be paid in
    addition to her expenses, and that the claimant and  Mrs  [F]  did  not
    currently know anyone  in  Nigeria.   Absent  evidence,  one  can  only
    speculate as to what difficulties there would be and again the claimant
    has not made out even an  arguable  case  of  there  being  significant
    difficulties which could not be overcome without undue hardship.

115. Although the claimant and Mrs [F] would prefer  to  continue  receiving
    assistance on the NHS, this is not something to which the  claimant  is
    currently entitled (although Mrs [F] is) and it is not clear whether or
    not the hospital in this country appreciated that the claimant  had  no
    status here.

116. Accordingly, I do not consider that EX.1. applies.

117. Absent EX.1., there is nothing in  the  circumstances  of  this  couple
    that could even arguably be said to be so compelling  as  exceptionally
    to warrant the grant of permission to remain under  Article  8  outside
    the Rules.

118. The remaining argument which had been raised on behalf of the  claimant
    before the First-tier Tribunal (but which was not  sustained  certainly
    in oral argument before  this  Tribunal)  was  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate  to  make  this  claimant  go  to  Nigeria  now   because
    (following Chikwamba) as he would almost certainly be allowed to return
    to this country as a spouse, it would not be proportionate  to  require
    him to leave the country in order to  make  that  application.   In  my
    judgement, such an argument must fail.  The decision in  Chikwamba  was
    clarified by the Court of Appeal in Hyatt, in which it was decided that
    the respondent must show that there  is  a  proper  reason  why  it  is
    appropriate to return  an  applicant  in  these  circumstances  to  the
    country of his nationality, in order for an application to be made from
    there.  In this case that reason is to be found now in Section  117  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, inserted  by  Section
    19 of the Immigration Act 2014, the relevant parts of which provide  as
    follows:

         "117A.   Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -



             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)      as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a)      in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B ...

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
             cases

             (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                  in the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English -

                  (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

             ...

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)      a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.
             ...".

119. In this case, therefore, the starting  point  must  be  (as  implicitly
    recognised in Hyatt) the weight which  must  be  given  to  the  public
    interest in removing persons who have no right to be in  this  country.
    Little weight can be given to the claimant's private life, because  not
    only was his immigration position precarious throughout his stay in the
    UK, but he was also here unlawfully.  Similarly, because he was in this
    country unlawfully, little weight can be given to the  relationship  he
    has established with his wife.

120. In these circumstances, even were I to find that it is likely that  the
    claimant would be able to apply successfully from Nigeria to return  to
    be with his wife, I would still not regard that fact as  sufficient  to
    render his removal disproportionate.

121. Moreover, there is one further aspect  and  it  is  this.   As  I  have
    already indicated above, it was  apparent  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing that this claimant's English was insufficient to enable him  to
    understand  ordinary   conversation.    It   was   also   in   evidence
    (unsurprisingly) that he talks to his wife  in  Yoruba,  which  is  her
    native tongue as well as his  (apart  possibly  from  a  smattering  of
    English).  In these circumstances I do not accept that the claimant has
    established that an application from abroad would be bound to  succeed;
    it may very well not.

122. In these circumstances, there is no reason why this claimant should  be
    allowed now to remain in this country under Article 8.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas as containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed, under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 14 March 2019

