
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21726/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 June 2015                                |On 19 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           muhammad shakeel abbasi
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kumar, instructed by Capital Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 27 April 2015, the Secretary of  State  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision and reasons statement
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Archer that was  promulgated  on  4  March
    2015.

 2. Judge Archer allowed the appeal against the immigration decisions of  3
    April 2014 to refuse to vary his leave on the basis  that  he  did  not
    provide the specified evidence to show he met the  maintenance  (funds)
    requirements of appendix C to the immigration rules and to  remove  him
    by way of directions.  In reaching his  decision,  Judge  Archer  found
    that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules but that it would be disproportionate to  remove  him  given  the
    investment the appellant had already made in his studies in the UK.

 3. The Secretary of State did not (of  course)  challenge  Judge  Archer's
    decision in relation to the immigration  rules.   However,  she  argued
    that  he  had  failed  to   apply   the   statutory   public   interest
    considerations contained in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and failed to have regard to the  guidance
    provided by the Upper Tribunal in Nasim and others (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 00025 (IAC).

 4. Ms Savage's submissions amplified these grounds.  She did not  need  to
    go further.  However, in reply to my concerns, she confirmed  that  the
    Secretary of State did not  dispute  that  Mr  Abbasi  had  established
    private life within the meaning of  article  8(1)  and  the  issue  was
    whether Judge Archer had erred in his assessment in article 8(2).

 5. Mr Kumar accepted that the Mr Abbasi could not meet the requirements of
    the immigration rules.  He had failed to provide his birth certificate,
    which was a mandatory document, with his application.

 6. Mr Kumar did not accept, however, that  Judge  Archer  failed  to  have
    regard to the statutory public interest considerations. Although  Judge
    Archer does not specifically refer  to  s.117B  of  the  2002  Act,  in
    paragraph 27 he described the need to maintain an effective  system  of
    immigration  control  as  a  legitimate  objective.   That   replicates
    s.117B(1).  In addition, it is  clear  from  paragraph  29  that  Judge
    Archer was aware of Mr Abbasi's immigration history and thereby  showed
    he was aware of the nature of his immigration  status.   The  appellant
    had applied in time and was not an overstayer.  It had to be remembered
    that when Judge Archer determined the appeal the Upper Tribunal had not
    reported AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).

 7. As to other issues, Mr Kumar argued that by  the  date  of  hearing  Mr
    Abbasi had provided evidence to show that he was related as claimed  to
    his sponsor (his father) and therefore there were sufficient  funds  to
    ensure his presence in the UK did not undermine the economic  wellbeing
    of the UK.  Although the evidence could not be admitted in relation  to
    the grounds of appeal relating to the immigration rules,  the  evidence
    could be admitted in relation to the grounds of appeal relating  to  Mr
    Abbasi's private life rights.  Mr Abbasi had shown that  he  had  never
    been a burden on public funds and he had a good immigration history.

 8. Mr Kumar also submitted that it should be remembered that in  paragraph
    23 of his decision and reasons statement Judge  Archer  found  that  Mr
    Abbasi had made a genuine  mistake  in  failing  to  submit  his  birth
    certificate with hi application.  As such, he should not  be  penalised
    disproportionately.

 9. Mr Kumar submitted that Judge Archer brought these issues together  and
    carried out the necessary balancing exercise in paragraph 29.

10. As I announced at the end of the hearing, I  am  satisfied  that  Judge
    Archer erred in law when  considering  article  8(2)  and  that  it  is
    necessary to set his decision aside in order for it to  be  remade.   I
    also indicated that I would remake the decision in relation to  article
    8 to dismiss the appeal against the immigration decisions  of  3  April
    2014 on that ground.  I reserved my reasons which I now give.

11.  I  am  not  satisfied  that   Judge   Archer's   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of  the  immigration  decisions  is  adequate.   At  no
    juncture does Judge Archer refer specifically to s.117 of the 2002 Act.
     Although that is not an error in itself, in the circumstances of  this
    case it is an error because it is difficult to  see  how  Judge  Archer
    engaged with the statutory public interest considerations.   To  accept
    Mr Kumar's arguments requires me to read much into the vague statements
    made by Judge Archer which can only mean that Judge Archer's  reasoning
    is inadequate.  The failure to properly engage with the public interest
    considerations is an error of law because it undermines  the  whole  of
    the balancing exercise.

12. In such circumstances it is necessary for me to set aside the  decision
    in relation to article 8 and to remake it.  Mr  Kumar  confirmed  there
    was no further evidence from Mr Abbasi.

13. It is clear from the evidence presented that the  appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  It is trite law that a
    "near  miss"  argument  has  no  relevance   in   the   proportionality
    assessment.  Nor is article 8 to be used as a means to  circumvent  the
    immigration rules.  The need to maintain effective immigration  control
    means that a robust approach is  required  or  their  purpose  will  be
    easily defeated.  In addition, as I am remaking the decision at today's
    date, I have to have regard to the fact that Mr  Abbassi's  immigration
    status is precarious for the reasons set out in AM.  This means  little
    weight should be given to any private life Mr  Abbasi  has  established
    whilst being in the UK.  For these reasons, on the facts in this appeal
    there is significant public interest in not granting Mr Abbasi  further
    leave.

14. It would be possible for Mr Abbasi to offset  the  public  interest  in
    removing him if he can show that the consequences would be such  as  to
    undermine his moral and physical integrity, as described in  Nasim  and
    others.  Yet he has provided  no  evidence  that  comes  anywhere  near
    showing that the decision would do any such thing.  He  complains  that
    to leave his studies would mean he would have wasted the financial  and
    time investment he has made.  But as explained by the  Upper  Tribunal,
    such arguments carry little weight.  Mr Kumar accepted that  Mr  Abbasi
    had put forward no other arguments about why his personal circumstances
    should outweigh the public interest considerations.

15. In addition, I am aware  that  delay  in  the  application  and  appeal
    procedure means that Mr Abbasi will by now have completed  his  studies
    in any event.  The issue he seems to be putting  forward  is  that  the
    immigration decisions would prevent him staying in  the  UK  for  other
    purposes.  However, he has provided no information about his intentions
    or why it would be  disproportionate  to  expect  him  to  reapply  for
    overseas should those intentions be to return to  the  UK  under  other
    provisions of the immigration rules.

16. It follows from these considerations that the immigration decisions are
    proportionate and that Mr Abbasi's original appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

The decision and reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Archer
contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision  and  dismiss  the  appeals  against  the  immigration
decisions of 3 April 2014.






                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
