
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21328/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2017                                |On 7 August 2017              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                            mr Shekelzen Rustemaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania who  was  born  on  21  September
    1967.  He appeals to the Upper Tribunal (UT)  with  the  permission  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker (Judge Coker) given on 4 April 2017.  In her
    brief reasons, Judge Coker considered  that  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Turquet (the Immigration Judge) may have  failed  to  consider
    the relationship between the appellant and [EN], his partner's son. The
    appellant has  formed  a  relationship  with  [JN]  who  is  a  British
    national. They lived as a  family  unit  together  with  the  sponsor's
    daughter, [E].

Background

2.   The appellant entered the UK illegally in 2002  and  on  25  August  of
    that year claimed asylum.  The claim was refused but,  on  13  December
    2011, the appellant made a further claim. That claim was on  the  basis
    that a number of  the  appellant's  protected  human  rights  would  be
    unlawfully interfered with if he was removed from the UK.  On 12  March
    2014, he sought an EEA residence card but  that  application  was  also
    refused.  Finally, the application to which the present appeal  relates
    was made on 8 September  2014.   That  application  was  based  on  the
    appellant's protected family and private life but that application  was
    also refused - hence the present appeal.

3.   The respondent considered the application in the light of whether  EX.1
    applied to  the  application.   Since  the  appellant  had  no  British
    children in the UK it was decided that the appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements of EX1 (a).

4.   The respondent recognised the relationship between  the  appellant  and
    [EN] but also noted that the appellant  had  no  British  children  and
    there was no genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  British
    partner for the required period of two years.  Furthermore, no adequate
    documentation had been provided to confirm  the  dissolution  of  their
    earlier marriages.  Clearly, the appellant did not  satisfy  the  "ten-
    year route".  The respondent also considered  the  "parent  route"  but
    found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM R-
    LTRPT1.1 (d).  The appellant did not have a British child  nor  was  he
    solely parentally responsible for his partner's children and  therefore
    he failed to qualify  for  leave  under  the  relevant  paragraphs  (E-
    LTRPT2.2 and E-LTRPT2.3 of Appendix FM).  The appellant also failed  to
    meet the eligibility requirements to establish a  relationship  with  a
    British child under EX1 and under D-LTRPT1.3.  He did not qualify under
    the "ten-year route".  The respondent also considered  the  application
    under the provisions of paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration  Rules.
    However, the appellant had not lived in the UK for the required  period
    and did not qualify.  Finally, the appellant considered  whether  there
    were any exceptional circumstances which ought to be taken into account
    to allow the appellant leave to remain in the UK on  the  grounds  that
    his right to respect for  private  and  family  life  as  contained  in
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  might  be
    engaged.  The respondent also considered her  obligations  towards  the
    welfare of the appellant's partner's children under Section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  (section  55).   The
    respondent noted that [EN] suffered from a form of  muscular  dystrophy
    and that  the  appellant  provided  care  for  him.   However,  despite
    requesting evidence  on  6  May  2015  for  a  letter  to  confirm  the
    appellant's caring role for [EN], this had not been forthcoming.  There
    was a letter dated 9 March 2015 from  Rainbow  Medical  Services  which
    sets out that they employed [EN]'s mother and sister as carers and that
    [JN] had expressed a wish that the appellant should  be  registered  as
    such.  However, the appellant did not provide evidence that he provided
    such a level of care to [EN] that this could not be provided  by  other
    employees.  It was accepted that the appellant "may  provide  help  and
    assistance to [EN] and his  mother"  but  he  had  not  provided  sound
    evidence that [EN] required him to remain in  the  UK  to  continue  to
    provide that role  nor  had  he  established  that  his  removal  would
    unlawfully interfere with that relationship.  Overall his  removal  was
    considered proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining effective
    immigration control and was in accordance with the Section 55 and other
    duties summarised above.  The grant of leave outside the Rules was  not
    considered appropriate and his application  for  leave  to  remain  was
    therefore refused.

5.   The appellant appealed that refusal of further leave  to  remain  by  a
    notice of appeal dated 5 June 2015.  The grounds simply state that  the
    respondent had not  addressed  the  "exceptional  circumstances"  which
    existed and the appellant "disagrees" with the  "finding  made  by  the
    defendant".

6.   The appeal came before the Immigration Judge sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
    on 1 September  2016  on  1  September  2016.   Having  summarised  the
    immigration history she noted the evidence which she had heard  through
    an Albanian interpreter from the appellant, [JN] and [E], his partner's
    daughter. She fully recorded that evidence in the notes which she took.
    At the end of the hearing she reserved her decision which she gave only
    fifteen days later.

7.   The Immigration Judge summarised the  requirements  in  the  Rules  for
    respect for family and private life as  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE.  In her summary of the  case  the  Immigration  Judge
    noted that the relationship between the appellant and his partner was a
    "genuine and subsisting" one but that it had only been formed in  2013.
    She observed the complex care needs of [EN] arising from  the  presence
    of muscular dystrophy,  a  muscle  wasting  disease.   Rainbow  Medical
    Services Limited, who provided night care for [EN], confirmed that they
    would be prepared to register the appellant as a carer as he provided a
    lot of  care  already.   The  appellant  also  provided  emotional  and
    psychological support as he had a good relationship with both [EN]  and
    [E], [EN]'s sister.  It was submitted that the UK was the only  country
    where the appellant and his partner could enjoy a family life  together
    because [JN] could not consider relocating to Albania where  her  son's
    complex  health  needs  would  not  be  met.    The   appellant   urged
    "exceptional circumstances" on the FtT but the  Immigration  Judge  was
    not persuaded that it was impossible for [JN] not to employ staff  from
    a care agency, as has been referred to above.  That the  appellant  had
    established a family life in the UK was accepted.  However, removal was
    proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of   maintaining   effective
    immigration controls.  The Immigration Judge in her  decision  set  out
    fully the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  summarised  recent
    case law, including the case of Agyarko which at that time had not  yet
    been decided by the Supreme Court.  The appellant had not satisfied the
    Immigration Judge that there were indeed  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.  She accepted that the appellant
    had established a private life but he  could  maintain  a  private  and
    family life in Albania where he had family members living.  There  were
    no sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  for  considering  the  case
    outside the Immigration Rules.   Dealing  with  [EN]'s  serious  health
    needs, she noted that the appellant had been described as  one  of  the
    main carers for [EN]  and  she  took  account  of  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's  GP,  Dr  Jackson,  who  had  stated  that  [EN]  regularly
    travelled to Albania especially in the winter months  so  he  could  be
    exposed to additional sunshine.  It was clear to the Immigration  Judge
    that the appellant and [EN] had a good relationship and it was accepted
    that he did help his partner and daughter at  home  with  [EN]'s  care.
    However, [EN] had a 24-hour care package in place and the appellant was
    not  an  essential  part  of  that  package.   The  Immigration   Judge
    acknowledged that the presence of a disabled child with a  serious  and
    wasting disease in the household would be emotionally draining for  the
    appellant and his partner and  that  he  provided  her  with  emotional
    support.  The Immigration Judge looked at the case within the framework
    of the law and decided that one option was for the appellant to  return
    to  Albania  and  make  an  application  for  entry   clearance.    The
    circumstances in the  appellant's  case  were  neither  compelling  nor
    exceptional.  The respondent had carried out a full balancing  exercise
    but decided  that  the  appellant's  removal  was  proportionate.   The
    Immigration Judge concluded that the UK would not be in breach  of  any
    of  its  obligations  under  the  ECHR  if  the  conclusion  that   the
    Immigration Rules were not met was sound.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

7.   The grounds  of  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  state  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  had  misunderstood  the  appellant's   case.    The
    appellant had accepted that the Immigration Rules were not met and that
    was the basis upon which she  was  invited  to  determine  the  appeal.
    Secondly, the conclusion in relation  to  the  previous  marriages  not
    being dissolved was not relevant.   Thirdly,  there  was  an  error  of
    approach  to  the  question  of  insurmountable  obstacles/failure   to
    consider the evidence fully.  The Immigration  Judge  had  pointed  out
    that [EN] does go to Albania for a month every year,  but  it  was  not
    accepted  that  this  would  mean  that  she  could  live  there.   The
    Immigration Judge had been wrong in law to treat the case as one  where
    there were no  insurmountable  obstacles.  The  Immigration  Judge  had
    adopted the wrong approach.  The fact that [EN]  could  travel,  as  on
    some occasions he did, did not  mean  that  his  care  needs  would  be
    adequately met if the family removed to Albania.  No funding exists  in
    Albania for such treatment and  there  were  other  family  members  to
    consider.  The Immigration Judge was criticised for not considering the
    case outside the Rules and failing to take account of evidence  to  the
    effect that [EN] would "not survive" in  Albania.   In  addition,  [JN]
    would be  likely  to  become  depressed.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    suggestion that the appellant could  return  to  Albania  and  make  an
    application for entry clearance from abroad had not  been  put  to  him
    during the hearing. Accordingly, Mr Lamb's submitted that there was  "a
    real issue of procedural unfairness" regarding that issue.

8.   At the hearing on 12 May 2017 both  parties  were  represented.   There
    were a number of difficulties with the documentation, in that  Mr  Lams
    did not consider he had seen all the documents that had been put before
    the FtT and, in particular, the letter referred to by  the  Immigration
    Judge, referred to in paragraph  32  et  seq  in  the  decision.   This
    necessitated standing the case down twice before it was finally reached
    at 2:35 p.m.  In  addition  to  a  substantial  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents provided for the Upper  Tribunal  a  day  or  so  before  the
    hearing (?) I was also supplied with the original bundle of  documents.
    Mr Lams pointed out that Judge Coker was of the view  that  it  was  at
    least arguable that there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  return
    of this family to Albania.  Nevertheless, the Immigration Judge had not
    really considered this issue since the required period of  cohabitation
    for the partner route had not been established.  Mr  Lams  pointed  out
    that the respondent had not been represented at the hearing.   Mr  Lams
    emphasised many of the points summarised above that were  already  made
    in the FtT.  He emphasised that [EN] had extensive  needs  which  would
    only be fulfilled within the UK, with its advanced  healthcare  system.
    It was unrealistic to  suggest  that  the  parties  could  relocate  to
    Albania. In any event, [JN] was born in Kosovo. It was  submitted  that
    Immigration  Judge  had  made  perverse  findings  unsupported  by  the
    evidence, for example, in paragraph 32 of her decision.

9.   By reply, Mr Armstrong pointed  out  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    given anxious scrutiny to the case, going into matters in  detail.   He
    pointed  out  that  [EN]'s  needs  were  at  the   forefront   of   her
    consideration of the matter, pointing out that paragraphs 44-45 of  the
    decision contained a significant amount of detail. He referred to  page
    A13 of the bundle of documents filed on the appellant's  behalf,  which
    indicated that [EN] would be looked after by  a  team  of  professional
    carers  if  the  appellant  were  returned  to  Albania.   The  refusal
    suggested that insurmountable obstacles was an issue. However,  it  was
    not necessary for the Immigration Judge to deal  with  it  because  the
    appellant fell at the first hurdle, in that he was unable to  establish
    a relationship of sufficient duration with [JN].

10.  Mr Lams responded to these submissions  by  referring  to  C19  in  his
    bundle, which was a letter from [EN]'s doctor, which suggested that the
    appellant's  involvement  in   his   healthcare   needs   was   "core".
    Proportionality had not been  properly  addressed  by  the  Immigration
    Judge.  I was taken to  the  well-known  passage  at  paragraph  43  in
    Agyarko. In any event, the case was wholly exceptional  and  should  be
    decided outside the Immigration Rules if necessary.

11.  At the end of the hearing I  decided  to  reserve  my  decision  as  to
    whether there was a material error of law.  As to ultimate disposal, Mr
    Lams suggested that a further hearing was necessary  at  which  updated
    evidence could be given.  I pointed out that such evidence should  have
    been filed with the Upper Tribunal and that no  application  to  adduce
    additional evidence had been made.  Mr Armstrong  said  that  I  should
    simply decide the case on the existing evidence as the appellant had  a
    full opportunity to present the facts before the FtT and any  error  of
    law could be corrected by re-deciding the case.



Discussion

12.  Judge Coker gave permission in this case because she considered  it  to
    be  arguable  that  the  finding  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the return of this family to  Albania  was  perverse.   Mr
    Lams argues persuasively the appellant's relocation  to  Albania  would
    have a detrimental effect on the future care needs of  [EN].   He  also
    argues equally persuasively, that the whole family could not remove  to
    Albania, given that [EN]'s health  needs  are  closely  allied  in  the
    advanced health  service  which  people  enjoy  in  this  country.   In
    addition, the sponsor, is a UK national.  So are [EN]  and  [E].   They
    form a family unit together with the sponsor and the appellant.

13.  The issue before the UT is whether the Immigration Judge properly  took
    account of the  difficult  circumstances  in  this  case  and  came  to
    conclusions that were open to her or  whether  in  fact  she  erred  in
    misconstruing or misunderstanding the "insurmountable  obstacles"  test
    and failed to consider adequately the need  for  a  balancing  exercise
    under Article 8 before reaching her decision.

14.  As Judge Martin explained, in her  initial  refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal,  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules as he had not been the partner of [JN] for the period
    required by GEN.1.2 of those Rules.  His application could only succeed
    under Article 8.  He had no children by his partner, who  had  been  in
    the UK since 2001 and had two children by previous relationships,  [EN]
    and [E], both of whom had been in the UK for thirteen years at the date
    the application was made (4 March 2015).  It appears the appellant  had
    been in the UK since 2011 and during his time cohabiting with [JN]  had
    formed a bond with [EN] and his sister, as well as playing an important
    role in helping with [EN]'s complex care requirements.   The  appellant
    himself had entered the UK illegally in 2002, returned  to  Albania  in
    2009 and then come back to the UK in 2011, although he had not given  a
    consistent account of his immigration history.  He appears  to  have  a
    poor immigration history with frequent applications to remain on  bases
    which did not have proper foundations.

15.  The appellant now seeks to argue that  the  FtT  erred  in  failing  to
    attach proper and appropriate weight to his role in caring for [EN] and
    on the basis, that the alternative conclusion  that  the  family  could
    relocate to Albania was not reasonably open to that Tribunal.

16.  As to the former case, [EN] has now  been  in  the  UK  for  more  than
    thirteen years according to question h) of the appellant's application,
    and had an established care regime in  place  at  the  point  that  the
    appellant entered into his life.  There is no doubt that the  appellant
    has a close involvement in his life as well as  to  the  lives  of  his
    partner and stepdaughter.  The Immigration Judge dealt fully  with  the
    extent of the appellant's caring role in her decision at, for  example,
    paragraph 32 et seq.  This paragraph should not be read out of context,
    coming as it does after  a  long  summary  of  the  medical  and  other
    evidence, including the nature  of  [EN]'s  condition  and  its  future
    prognosis.  The Immigration Judge took full account  of  all  the  case
    law, including the case of Agyarko, which has since been decided by the
    Supreme Court.  I was helpfully reminded of paragraph 43 of  that  case
    by Mr Lams  in  his  submissions.  That  paragraph  is  concerned  with
    "insurmountable obstacles" which do not, in fact, arise  in  this  case
    because the appellant did not qualify under the Immigration Rules.

17.  The appellant's principal submission is that his role  in  [EN]'s  care
    and in terms of the support he gives to the wider  family  unit  is  so
    crucial and "core" as to make the Immigration Judge's conclusion,  that
    it was reasonable for the respondent to decide to remove him, perverse.
    Contrary to this submission, I have concluded that the Immigration  Jud
    properly considered this issue. She reached a conclusion that was  open
    to her on  the  evidence.   The  appellant  clearly  presents  [EN]  as
    providing him with a "trump card", which he would not be able to do  if
    [EN] was his own child.  It is not to denigrate his important  role  in
    the child's welfare or his caring personality.  Nor is it to deny  that
    there will be serious consequences for him  and  negative  consequences
    for the whole family flowing from his removal.  However,  the  evidence
    did not support the conclusion that he had such an important and caring
    role, akin to that of a professional carer, that his removal  from  the
    UK would seriously  damage  [EN]'s  long-term  welfare  and  that  such
    removal was unjustified.

18.  The alternative finding in relation to "insurmountable obstacles"  was,
    so to speak, obiter dicta for the reasons given  above.  The  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  in  any  event.
    Therefore, it  was  strictly  unnecessary  to  consider  insurmountable
    obstacles.

19.  Had it been necessary to consider insurmountable obstacles, that  issue
    had to be approached in a "practical and realistic"  way,  rather  than
    referring to those obstacles which would literally make  it  impossible
    for family life to continue in the  country  of  origin.   It  was  not
    altogether surprising that the Immigration Judge concluded at paragraph
    32 of her decision that there were "not  un-surmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside  the  UK"  given  that  [JN]  came  from
    Albanian speaking Kosovo, both the children, apparently, spoke Albanian
    (see the application form) and they  regularly  travelled  to  Albania.
    Relocation  would,   ordinarily,   therefore,   have   been   possible.
    Unfortunately, due to [EN]'s complex health needs,  and  primarily  for
    economic reasons, this is practically impossible.   Unfortunately,  the
    burden of paying for [EN]'s complex health needs falls on  the  British
    taxpayer.  However, this is [EN]'s right given that  he  is  a  British
    citizen.  He is entitled to all the benefits of citizenship. However, I
    stress, the conclusion on insurmountable obstacles was not one that was
    strictly necessary since the case could only succeed under  Article  8,
    as the appellant's representatives conceded.

Conclusion

20.  I have  therefore  concluded  that  the  Immigration  Judge  reached  a
    decision that was open to her on the evidence she had heard.  She  took
    account of all the evidence which she  carefully  weighed  up  in  this
    sensitive case.  For those reasons, I am unable to  find  any  material
    error of law in the decision of the FtT.

Notice of Decision

21.  The decision of the FtT stands and this appeal by the appellant to  the
    UT is dismissed.

22.  No anonymity direction was made by the FtT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
    direction.


Fee Award

23.  I have dismissed the appeal to the UT and there was  no  fee  award  by
    the FtT and I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Dated 25.5.17

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
