
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 October 2014                        |On 6 January 2015                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              mr umesh sardana
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Prior ("the judge") in a determination  promulgated
    on 12 August 2014.  The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  with
    leave as a student, in 2009.  In  December  2013,  his  leave  in  that
    category was curtailed for  non-attendance,  so  as  to  expire  on  18
    February 2014.  Shortly before that date,  the  appellant  applied  for
    leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a  British  citizen.   That
    application was refused on 8 May 2014 and  the  appellant  brought  his
    appeal.

2.   The appellant's relationship with his partner began in 2011 and led  to
    cohabitation from March  2013.   His  partner  is  the  mother  of  two
    children, aged 14 and 17 as at the date of  hearing.    The  appellant,
    his partner and her children live together and form a single household.
     It was contended on the appellant's behalf that GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM
    of the rules was misunderstood or misapplied by the Secretary of State.
     The decision maker had treated  that  paragraph  as  applying  to  the
    appellant himself, rather than to  his  partner,  and  so  the  adverse
    decisions were not in accordance with the law.  It was  also  contended
    that factors contained in  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,
    relevant to determining whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
    warranting a grant of leave outside the rules  on  Article  8  grounds,
    were not properly applied.  In particular, the best  interests  of  the
    children fell to be assessed, in accordance with section 55 of the 2009
    Act.

3.   The judge agreed that GEN.1.2 had not been correctly applied but  found
    that this error had no substantive impact  on  the  adverse  decisions.
    The Secretary of State was entitled to maintain  her  stance  that  the
    appellant did not have a partner in the United Kingdom within the terms
    of the rules and the requirements of  section  R-LTRP.1.1(a)  were  not
    met.  The relationship and period of cohabitation had not lasted for  a
    sufficiently long period of time.

4.   The judge accepted  that  the  best  interests  of  the  sponsor's  two
    children and other matters  set  out  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions were not expressly addressed in the letter giving  reasons
    for the decisions.  However, this was not a  case  where  the  decision
    maker had failed to exercise a  discretion.   The  letter  contained  a
    paragraph in which the decision  maker  stated  that  the  question  of
    exceptional circumstances had been considered but none  were  shown  in
    the appellant's application.  The judge found at paragraph  16  of  the
    determination that "there was no information as to the relationship  of
    the sponsor's two daughters with the  appellant"  and  "no  information
    before the Tribunal at the hearing as to that relationship".  So far as
    Article  8  is  concerned,  the  judge  found  that   there   were   no
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the  rules  and  concluded
    that the  grounds  of  appeal  were  not  made  out.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

5.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    absence of any mention of the children in the letter giving reasons for
    the adverse decisions showed that the decisions themselves were  flawed
    and the judge erred in failing to properly engage with the  appellant's
    case in this context.  Permission to appeal was granted on 3  September
    2014, on the basis that it was arguable that  the  respondent  and  the
    judge ought to have taken into account and assessed the best  interests
    of the children.  The appellant had made clear in his application  that
    his British partner had two children, who formed part of his household.



Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Biggs relied  upon  his  skeleton  argument.   The  welfare  of  the
    appellant's stepchildren had not been considered by  the  Secretary  of
    State or assessed by the judge.  The correct course was for the  appeal
    to be allowed on the basis that the decisions did not  adequately  take
    into account the welfare of the children or the  human  rights  of  the
    appellant and his family members.  Although the grounds  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal were rather general, they  were  sufficient  to
    show that section 84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act was in  issue.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal ought to have determined that ground, in accordance  with
    the duty arising under section 86 of the  2002  Act.   The  appellant's
    case was expressly put on the basis that  the  decisions  were  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law  as  relevant  factors  in  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions were not taken into account and there  was  an
    absence of any regard to section 55 of the 2009  Act.   Similarly,  the
    judge failed to engage with the Secretary of State's  failure  to  take
    these matters into account.

7.   Moreover, the judge's  approach  to  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention  was  flawed.   He  accepted  that  there  was   no   proper
    consideration in the decision letter but went on to make the point that
    this was not a case where discretion had not been exercised.  Mr  Biggs
    submitted that, on the contrary, the Tribunal was obliged  to  make  an
    Article  8  assessment  and  the  assessment  of  the  children's  best
    interests formed part of this.   Where  there  was  so  little  in  the
    decision letter, unless the Tribunal felt able to make the  section  55
    assessment itself, the proper course was to remit the  matter  back  to
    the decision maker.  There was, after all, nothing  to  show  that  the
    decision maker had considered the point and this was a clear public law
    error.  The First-tier Tribunal ought to have allowed the appeal  under
    section 86(3)(a), as the decisions were not in accordance with the law.



8.   Ms Holmes said that if the children came into play at all, the  section
    55 duty fell to be  considered.   In  this  case,  however,  there  was
    nothing of substance before the judge or the decision maker to  require
    a section 55 assessment.  The onus was on  the  appellant  to  put  his
    case.  There appeared to be  no  evidence  regarding  the  relationship
    between the appellant and the stepchildren.    There  was  no  material
    error in these circumstances.

9.   Mr Biggs responded  by  saying  that  even  though  there  was  limited
    information before the decision maker and the Tribunal, the absence  of
    any consideration of the best interests of the children amounted to  an
    error in the decisions themselves and by the judge in  determining  the
    appeal as he had.  There was no reason to depart from  ordinary  public
    law principles, as explained in FI [2014] EWHC 2287.  The Secretary  of
    State was alive to the interests  of  the  children.   The  appellant's
    bundle included a letter sent by the respondent to the appellant, on 27
    March 2014, asking for documentary evidence.  In that  letter,  mention
    was  made  of  the  stepchildren.   The   rather   brief   "exceptional
    circumstances" paragraph in the decision letter was simply not  enough.



Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  Mr Biggs drew attention to a letter  dated  27  March  2014,  from  the
    respondent to the appellant's solicitors, in which mention is  made  of
    the children.  The Secretary of State requested  evidence  about  them.
    The form of application completed by the  appellant  in  February  2014
    mentioned the children in two places.  First, in  paragraph  4.7,  they
    are identified as living with their mother  at  her  address  and  that
    address is also identified (at paragraph 120) as  the  appellant's  own
    address.  The children are  mentioned  again,  in  paragraph  7.13,  as
    living at the premises and their names and ages (they were then 13  and
    17 years old) also appear.

11.  The decision letter, summarised by the judge, contains nothing  at  all
    about the children and the focus is instead on the relationship between
    the appellant and his partner  or  sponsor.   The  Secretary  of  State
    acknowledged that this was genuine and subsisting but found that it was
    one which fell outside the  rules  in  view  of  its  relatively  short
    duration.  The letter also gives reasons  for  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the rules
    and there is then a short paragraph beneath the  heading  "Decision  on
    Exceptional  Circumstances".   A  careful  reading  of  this  paragraph
    reveals that it contains no reasoning or analysis as such.  Mention  is
    made of consideration of the  application  and  whether  it  raises  or
    contains any exceptional circumstances.  The decision maker  concludes:
    "It has been decided that it does not"  but  there  are  no  supporting
    reasons.

12.  The decision of the Administrative Court in FI  provides  some  support
    for  Mr  Biggs'  submissions.   In  that  case,  an   application   for
    registration as a British citizen, by a child, met with a  decision  in
    which the focus was on the circumstances  of  the  claimant's  parents.
    Registration was refused as neither parent was a British  citizen.   In
    further  letters  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  decision  was
    maintained and in due course section 55 of the 2009 Act was  mentioned.
    The court concluded that  the  decision  did  not  withstand  scrutiny,
    largely because of the exiguous reasoning in the first decision letter.



13.  With great respect to Ms Holmes, I do not accept  her  submission  that
    the absence of any assessment by the decision maker or the judge cannot
    amount to a material  error  because  there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    substance  about  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and   the
    stepchildren.  In this context, I accept Mr Biggs' submission that  the
    bare facts of the case were before  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    judge.   I  have  drawn  attention  to  the   identification   of   the
    stepchildren in the application form, as living with the appellant  and
    his  partner.   Although  detail  was  certainly  lacking,   that   was
    sufficient, I conclude, to put the Secretary of State  on  notice  that
    the section 55 duty required some reasoning, even if fairly  brief,  in
    the decision letter.   Paragraph  9  of  the  determination  records  a
    submission made on behalf of the appellant regarding the best interests
    of the children and the absence of any consideration of this  important
    and relevant matter by the respondent.

14.  With great respect to the judge, the  determination  does  not  include
    any consideration of the best interests  of  the  children.   What  was
    missing was an engagement with the section 55 duty.  An  assessment  of
    the best interests of the children was required and, stepping back from
    that, an Article 8 assessment which  took  those  best  interests  into
    account (in accordance with guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AJ
    (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191).

15.  In these circumstances, I conclude that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains a material error of law and must  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

16.  The two representatives agreed that if a  material  error  were  shown,
    there would be no need for a further hearing  because  if  the  adverse
    decisions were flawed by want of any proper consideration of  the  best
    interests of the children, the judge making a similar error,  it  would
    follow that they were not in accordance with the law.

Remaking the Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision having been set aside under  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, I remake it
    in the Upper Tribunal.  As the Secretary of State's decisions were  not
    in accordance with the law, I allow the appeal.  The appellant awaits a
    lawful decision or decisions from the Secretary of State, which  should
    take into account the duty arising under section 55 of  the  2009  Act.
    Any decision on whether exceptional circumstances are  present  in  the
    appellant's case should be accompanied by reasons.

NOTICE OF DECISION

18.  The appeal is allowed.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no order on this occasion.


TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
decisions were not in accordance with the law, and taking  into  account  my
findings regarding the  absence  of  a  best  interests  assessment  of  the
children and an absence of reasons in support  of  the  conclusion  that  no
exceptional circumstances are present, I make a whole fee award in  relation
to any fee that has been paid or is payable in these proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
