
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21262/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2016                   |On 5 January 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                          CAROLINA THERESA BASTERO
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Herself
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the appeal  of  Carolina  Theresa  Bastero,  a  citizen  of  the
   Philippines born 15 October 1967, against the decision of the First-tier
   Tribunal of 12 July 2016, dismissing her appeal  against  a  refusal  to
   issue a residence card of 17 August 2015.


2. Her application had been for a residence  card  as  an  extended  family
   member on the basis  of  her  membership  of  the  household  of  Marian
   Urbanek, a citizen of Slovakia exercising Treaty Rights  in  the  United
   Kingdom,  and  the  spouse  of  her  sister  Ms  Cherry   Urbanek.   The
   representations of 14 January 2015 from Alcantara  Consultancy  Services
   Ltd explained the background to that application.  The  Appellant  lived
   with her sister and brother-in-law  in  a  self-sufficient  family  unit
   without any recourse to public funds.

3. The application was  refused  because  the  evidence  attesting  to  the
   relationship between the sisters was illegible, and because  no  history
   of dependency was  established,  the  decision  maker  noting  that  the
   Urbaneks had married in 2010  whereas  the  Appellant  had  entered  the
   United Kingdom in 2005: accordingly it was presumed that they could  not
   have  cohabited  abroad  such  that  it  could  be  said  that  she  was
   accompanying or joining  a  relevant  extended  family  member  in  this
   country.

4. The Appellant appealed against that decision. There was no appearance on
   behalf of the Appellant at the hearing. An  application  had  previously
   been made by the Appellant's sister for an adjournment on grounds  of  a
   lack  of  legal  representation,  and  refused,  because  it  had   been
   formulated too  late.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal
   because the Appellant had not discharged the burden of  proof  that  lay
   upon her, absent attending the hearing to explain  herself  and  without
   having provided a witness statement explaining her case as  to  how  she
   met the requirements of the EEA Regulations.

5. The First-tier Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal on 3 November 2016 on the basis that it was  arguably  unlawful
   for the Judge below to have fond there to have been no material evidence
   before him upon which the Appellant could succeed, without having regard
   to the covering letter supporting her application.

Findings and reasons


6. The Tribunal's understanding of the availability  of  appeal  rights  in
   extended family member cases has progressed since this appeal was  first
   listed and  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  issue  has  been
   thoroughly examined in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT
   411 (IAC).  Reg  26(1)  of  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   Regulations 2006 sets out a 'general' right of appeal  against  an  "EEA
   decision" which based any such right upon possession of  an  entitlement
   to EEA residence rights.


7. The Tribunal in Sala noted the two broad classes of  case  found  within
   the EEA Regulations, i.e. those where there was an  automatic  right  to
   the  recognition  of  residence  subject  to  certain   criteria   being
   satisfied, and those where the satisfaction of  particular  requirements
   only entitled a person to the exercise of discretion by the Secretary of
   State. It then explained that, given the legal difference between  cases
   where there is an unequivocal  right  which  the  government  could  not
   refuse so long as the necessary conditions were established, as  opposed
   to cases where there is merely an ability to apply for consideration via
   a favourable exercise of discretion, it was only in the former class  of
   case that an entitlement, and thus a right of appeal,  arose,  following
   the refusal of an application for a residence card.

8.  Accordingly  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
   appreciate that there was in truth no appealable decision under the  EEA
   Regulations before it. I substitute a decision for its dismissal of  the
   merits of the appeal before it, with a dismissal of the appeal for  want
   of jurisdiction.

          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.
    The appeal is dismissed.



[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 4 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
