
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21871/2014
                                                               IA/21873/2014
                                                             & IA/21876/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between


     HKP      First appellant
     HHP Second appellant
     DP  Third Appellant
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                     And

     The Secretary of State for the Home Department   Respondent


Representation:
For  the  appellants:     Mr  C  Yeo,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Compass
Immigration Law
For the respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.

Given that  these  proceedings  involve  a  child,  I  continue  that  order
(pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008)
and consequently, this determination identifies  the  minor  appellant,  and
the adults associated with him, by initials only in order  to  preserve  the
anonymity of the minor appellant.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background facts:

 1. The appellants have been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I Howard promulgated  on  8  May  2015
    dismissing their appeals against separate decisions of the  respondent,
    each dated 6 May 2014, to remove them under s.10 of the Immigration and
    Asylum Appeals Act 1999. The decisions were made in response  to  their
    representations of 14 December 2013 and 3 February 2014  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  for
    the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms  (ECHR).  The
    respondent's reasons for the decisions were given in a  letter  of  the
    same date (hereafter the "reasons for refusal" letter or "RFRL").

 2. The appellants are nationals of  India.  The  first  appellant  is  the
    husband of the second appellant. They were born,  respectively,  on  27
    July 1976 and 7 July 1978. The third appellant is their son, born on 30
    October 2003.

 3. The appellants arrived in the UK in August 2006  as  visitors.  At  the
    time, they were aged, respectively, 30 years, 28 years and 2  years  10
    months. They overstayed. On 20 July 2012, they submitted a human rights
    application which was refused on  27  February  2013.  They  were  each
    served with enforcement notices (forms  IS.151A)  on  2  December  2013
    informing them of their  liability  to  removal  as  persons  who  have
    remained unlawfully in the UK. A pre-action protocol letter was sent to
    the respondent on 19 March 2013. The original decision  was  maintained
    on 22 November 2013.

 4. By their letters dated 14 December 2013 and 3 February 2014, the family
    made further representations for leave to remain. These representations
    were the subject of the decisions that were appealed to the judge under
    s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002
    Act").

 5. By August 2013, the third appellant had lived in the UK for a period of
    7 years. The family's representations for leave on the basis of Article
    8 were made shortly thereafter, in December 2013.

The relevant legal provisions

 6. It was not argued  before  Judge  Howard  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants satisfied the requirements of  para  276ADE  or  that  their
    Article 8 claims could succeed outside  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the "Rules") irrespective of the
    success or otherwise of the third appellant's case  under  para  276ADE
    and his Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

 7. It was submitted before the judge that the  third  appellant  satisfied
    the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules. Also  relevant  is
    s.117B of the 2002 Act. These provide as follows:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i)  ...; and

         (ii) ...; and

         (iii)    ...; or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

         (v)  ...; or

         (vi) ....




         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

The evidence before Judge Howard

 8. By the date of the hearing before Judge Howard on  4  March  2015,  the
    appellants had lived in the UK for a period of 8  years  7  months  and
    were aged, respectively, 38 � years, 36 � years and 11 years 5 months.

 9. The evidence before the judge included a report dated 25  January  2014
    (the date of 25 January 2013 stated on  A50  must  be  a  typographical
    error) from a Ms Christine Brown, an independent  social  worker.   The
    report was prepared following her meeting with the appellants at  their
    family home on 19 December 2013 which lasted approximately 2 hours.

10. In her report, Ms Brown said, inter alia, that the third appellant  had
    developed his private life in the UK  in  the  belief  that  he  was  a
    British citizen. He had come to regard himself as being British. He was
    thriving in the UK and he could not understand why he may now  have  to
    leave his school friends behind and his friends  within  the  community
    with whom he has become  attached  including  those  who  attend  their
    temple. The third appellant has little concept  of  India  as  a  place
    outside of what he may have  viewed  on  the  television.  He  is  very
    westernised in his outlook. His removal has the potential to  create  a
    rift with his parents for causing him, in his view, to  lose  all  that
    matters to him and without, in his view, good cause. His removal  would
    leave his parents faced with having to manage a very distressed and  an
    angry child. The third  appellant  could  neither  read  nor  write  in
    Gujarati although he could understand his parents.

11. At section 5 of her report, entitled: "Conclusion and recommendations",
    Ms Brown said that the third appellant has a strong and,  it  appeared,
    an enduring network of peer relationships to which he is very attached.
    Removal  from  the  UK  would,  in  her  opinion,  be  a  negative  and
    retrospective measure and an unnecessary and disruptive one.  Ms  Brown
    had no doubt that the third appellant was significantly bonded with his
    extended relationships and that the impact on him of removal  would  be
    devastating for him. At paragraph 5.5, she said:

         "...  It  is  [the  third  appellant]  who  will,  in  essence,  be
         'punished' for his parents'  lack  of  status,  with  enormous  and
         enduring implications for him; a situation over  which  he  has  no
         control and one that he did not at any point determine or knowingly
         introduce into his life ..."

12. In Ms Brown's opinion, the welfare of  the  third  appellant  would  be
    irrevocably compromised by his removal to India. Although there was  an
    education system in place in India, there will be an expectation  on  a
    still young and traumatised child to make the adjustment from all  that
    is familiar and safe to him to  that  which  is  alien  and,  Ms  Brown
    suggested, frightening and disorientating which, she said, will  impact
    adversely on his future development as he struggles to  come  to  terms
    with what has occurred and what he will view, as a chid, with fear  and
    anxiety because there is no easy transition from one country to another
    when this is against the child's wishes.

The findings of Judge Howard

13. Judge Howard found that the third appellant did not meet  satisfy  para
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules. He did not accept that it was  unreasonable
    for the third appellant to return to India  with  his  parents.  Having
    concluded that para 276ADE(1) was  not  satisfied,  he  considered  the
    Article 8 claim of the appellants outside the Rules. He found that  the
    removal of the third appellant would  be  proportionate.  He  therefore
    found that the removal of all three appellants would be proportionate.

14. Judge Howard gave his reasons at paras 13-28, which I now quote:

         "13. I have considered all the material the appellant has submitted
             in support of their appeal.

         14.  It is submit [sic]  that  the  third  appellant's  case  falls
             within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). At the time of the application
             [the third appellant] had not spent seven years in the UK.  By
             August 2013 he had spent seven years in the UK. Given that  it
             was only in August 2013 that this  "route"  was  available  to
             [the third appellant] I must consider the appeal in  light  of
             the rules extant at that time and not earlier. In August  2013
             the qualification "and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
             the applicant to leave the UK" was in force.

         15.  It is appropriate to  consider  section  55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. It is not  the  case  of
             either the appellants or the respondent that it  is  otherwise
             than in the best interests of [the third  appellant]  that  he
             remain with both his parents. Thus the question with  which  I
             am concerned at this state is whether there are reasons  other
             than that he should remain with his parents  that  dictate  it
             would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK,  as  he
             would remain with his parents in the UK or India.

         16.  The matters relied upon by the third appellant to  argue  that
             it would not be reasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the  UK
             centre around  the  private  life  he  has  established  as  a
             consequence of  his  having  undertaken  all  of  his  primary
             education in the UK. That he has thrived in the environment of
             his primary school is undeniable  and  is  spoken  of  by  the
             school in his school reports and reflected in the work he  has
             done examples of which are included in the appellants' bundle.

         17.  In addition to this material the  appellants  commissioned  an
             independent social worker, Christine Brown, to  consider  this
             and other material and to express an opinion as to what is  in
             the third appellant's best  interest.  At  section  5  of  her
             report she sets out her conclusions.  Not  unsurprisingly  she
             finds a boy who has a strong  and  enduring  network  of  peer
             relationships to which he is very  attached  [5.2],  that  his
             welfare needs are being met by his parents as well as  by  his
             peer networks [5.4] and that he is significantly  and  closely
             bonded with his extended relationships [5.5]. It  is  in  this
             paragraph that she goes on to opine that impact of his removal
             will  be  devastating  for  him,  adding  it  is  [the   third
             appellant] who will, in essence, be 'punished' for his parents
             lack of status with enormous  and  enduring  implications  for
             him. She asserts that [the third appellant]'s welfare will  be
             irrevocably compromised by his removal to India.

         18.  Her reasons for so concluding are  based  upon  the  fact  his
             extended relationships will  come  to  an  end  and  that  the
             educational  opportunities  in  India,  while   present,   are
             significantly inferior, certainly in the maintained sector, to
             those offered by the same sector in the UK.

         19.  The opinion expressed by the social worker with which I do not
             agree is the  notion  that  [the  third  appellant]  would  be
             'punished' for his parents' lack of status.  This  is  emotive
             and does not represent the reality of  the  situation.  For  a
             family to be required to return to its country  of  origin  in
             circumstances where the members of the family present  in  the
             UK are only the appellants  and  where  the  entirety  of  the
             extended family is still in the country of  origin  cannot  be
             characterised as a punishment.

         20.  He will be returning with his parents to the  place  where  he
             was born. He will be reunited with his  extended  family.  The
             first  and   second   appellants   also   argue   that   their
             circumstances in India would be much reduced due to the  first
             appellant's lack of education and the lack of opportunities in
             that country. The appellants are of the Brahman caste. A  high
             caste. As already stated the whole of the extended  family  is
             to be found there and it to them they will return. I am  quite
             satisfied this family, like the vast majority of  families  in
             India, operate joint family system and as such  they  will  be
             assimilated back into the first appellant's family and home.

         21.  In the event of his returning to India he will continue to  be
             educated, perhaps not at the level he  currently  enjoys,  but
             educated nonetheless. He will be exposed to a  new  cohort  of
             peers  of  similar  age  and  ethnicity.  He  does  not  speak
             Gujarati. This will be hurdle he must overcome, but given  the
             whole of his immediate and extended family speak it  as  their
             first language there is no reason to suppose that he will not,
             in a relatively short space of time become proficient in  that
             language too. His English language skills will be  a  positive
             advantage to him in India.

         22.  [the third appellant] was two and three quarter years old when
             he came to the UK. He is now eleven. The years he has spent in
             the UK are formative, but not determinative. I  simply  cannot
             accept the proposition that a child in the  position  of  [the
             third appellant], even on the balance of probabilities, cannot
             reasonable be expected to return to India  with  his  parents,
             particularly where the entirety of his remaining family is  to
             be found their and culturally his  parents  remain  closer  to
             India than the UK, as both gave evidence before me through  an
             interpreter.

         23.  Having found that the appellants do not meet the  requirements
             of any of the Immigration Rules I must  now  consider  whether
             there is any Article 8 claim. My approach is that now set  out
             in detail by Aikens LJ in the Court of Appeal decision MM  and
             others [2014] EWCA Civ 985  and in particular the analysis  at
             paragraphs 130 to 154. Paragraph 130 summarises  the  position
             as follows:

                  "Sales J's decision therefore follows the  logic  of  Laws
                  LJ's statements in [38]-[39] of  AM  (Ethiopia),  analysed
                  above. However, there is a difference in that in Nagre the
                  new rules were themselves attempting to cover,  generally,
                  circumstances where an individual  should  be  allowed  to
                  remain in the UK on  Article  8  grounds;  whereas  in  AM
                  (Ethiopia) and in the present appeals the rule  challenged
                  stipulates  a  particular  requirement  that  has  to   be
                  fulfilled before the applicant will be allowed to enter or
                  remain. The argument in each  case  is  that  it  is  that
                  specific requirement that offends Article  8.  Nagre  does
                  not add anything to the debate,  save  for  the  statement
                  that if a particular person is outside the  rule  then  he
                  has to demonstrate, as a preliminary  to  a  consideration
                  outside the rule, that he has an arguable case that  there
                  may be good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
                  the rules. I cannot see  much  utility  in  imposing  this
                  further,  intermediary,  test.  If  the  applicant  cannot
                  satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is  not  a
                  further Article 8 claim. That will have to  be  determined
                  by the relevant decision-maker."

         24.  Thus I ask myself whether, on the  evidence  before  me,  that
             they have an arguable case that there may be good grounds  for
             granting leave to remain outside the Rules.

         25.  The evidence set out above upon which I consider the Article 8
             claim. In so doing I have considered the cases of  R.  v.  The
             Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (Appellant)  ex
             parte Razgar (FC) (Respondent) [2004]  UKHL  27  and  Huang  v
             Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department;  Kashmiri  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.

         26.  In assessing that claim I must  consider  the  five  questions
             posed by their Lordships in Razgar.

             "(1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?"

             In addition to the matters germane to  the  third  appellant's
             case and set out above in the context of his Immigration Rules
             claim  I  also  heard  evidence  about   the   private   lives
             established by the first and second appellants in  the  UK.  I
             have a large number of letters and other documents which speak
             of the friendships they have forged while living  in  the  UK.
             The schooling and friendships both represent  aspects  of  the
             three appellants separate private lives. Each will in turn  be
             interfered with by their removal from the UK.

             "(2) If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?"

             The private lives spoken of by the first and second appellants
             are unremarkable. Given they have been in the UK since 2006 it
             would be remarkable if they had  not  forged  friendships  and
             where permitted found work. However, to  interfere  with  such
             aspects of the private life of an adult cannot be said  to  be
             of  such  gravity   to   warrant   international   protection,
             particularly when considered in  the  context  their  unlawful
             presence for the vast majority of their time in the UK.

             [the third appellant]'s schooling is  established.  It  is  at
             least arguable that to interfere with it at this  stage  would
             have consequences of such gravity  as  to  potentially  engage
             Article 8.

             "(3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?"

             Given my findings in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
             Immigration Rules it follows the interference is in accordance
             with the law.

             "(4) If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?"

             Part 5A of the  2002  Act  at  paragraph  117B  sets  out  the
             statutory criteria to be considered  when  carrying  out  this
             assessment. ...

             What is apparent from the statute is that in the instant  case
             the  fact  very  nearly  all  the  private  life  [the   third
             appellant] has established in the UK was established at a time
             his presence was unlawful. As a consequence as a matter of law
             it is something to which I should attach little weight.

             "(5)  If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

             I do not propose to set out again all my  finings  as  to  the
             reasonableness of requiring the third appellant to be  removed
             from the UK. However, when considering those  matters  in  the
             context of Article 8 the third appellant is  disadvantaged  as
             the weight I can attach to  those  matters  is  reduced.  When
             assessing those matters in the context of the Article 8 claim,
             and giving them what weight I can the conclusion to which I am
             driven is that the decision to remove the third  appellant  is
             proportionate.

         27.  In reaching my conclusion on the Article 8 claim I have  again
             considered the best interests of the  child  as  a  matter  of
             priority and in accordance with section  55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

         28.  It for these reasons I driven to the conclusion  the  removals
             would be proportionate."

The grounds

15. The grounds are organised under four headings, entitled grounds A to D.
    These may be summarised as follows:

16. Ground A is  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    discounting the evidence of the appellants as to the loss of ties  with
    family and friends  in  India.  He  also  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence. In summary, the following points are made:

    (i)  The judge erred in taking into account that  the  third  appellant
         has extended family in India. He ignored the evidence of the second
         appellant that she has not been in contact  with  close  family  or
         friends in India for the past 4 to  5  years  and  that  the  first
         appellant's father is deceased. He ignored  the  first  appellant's
         evidence that the third appellant's limited command of the Gujarati
         language would make it near impossible for him to communicate  with
         Gujarati speaking family overseas. The judge therefore  also  erred
         in finding that this family, in common with the  vast  majority  of
         families in  India,  would  be  assimilated  back  into  the  first
         appellant's home and family,

    (ii)  The  judge's  finding  that  the  third  appellant  will   become
         proficient in Gujarati in a relatively short space of time was  not
         based on evidence. He further failed to consider the reasonableness
         of being forced to learn a new language or the detriment that  this
         would cause the third appellant.

    (iii)    The judge had said at para 20 that the appellants are  of  the
         high Brahman caste and will therefore not suffer from a significant
         lack of opportunity on return to India. In doing so, he had ignored
         the fact that the first appellant and his father were labourers.

    (iv) The  judge's  finding  at  para  22  that  the  first  and  second
         appellants remained culturally close to India  as  both  had  given
         evidence through an interpreter oversimplified the  diverse  nature
         of culture.

17. Ground B is that the judge failed to consider the report of Ms Brown in
    the round, together with  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.  In
    particular, the grounds argue that the judge erred in finding  that  Ms
    Brown's opinion, that the third appellant would effectively be punished
    for his parents' lack of status, was emotive as Ms Brown's opinion  was
    drawn from her observations.

18. Ground C is that the judge misapplied s.117B in his assessment  of  the
    Article 8 claims outside the Rules. The following points are made:

    (i)  The judge erroneously applied s.117B to the  fourth  step,  rather
         than the fifth-step in applying the five-step approach explained in
         Razgar.

    (ii) The judge failed to consider the  third  appellant's  strong  peer
         network in the UK.

    (iii)    The  judge  had  misapplied  s.117B  because  s.117B  did  not
         statutorily require the judge to place little weight on  the  third
         appellant's private life. As the judge had  "mandatorily"  attached
         little weight to the private life of the third  appellant,  he  had
         effectively not carried out the balancing exercise in  relation  to
         proportionality outside the Rules.

    (iv) The judge failed to consider other factors such as s.117B(2), that
         the public interest favours English speakers.

    (v)  The judge failed to apply  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  [2013]  UKUT
         00197 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal said that  "seven  years  from
         age 4 is likely to be more significant to a child  than  the  first
         seven years of life".

19. Ground D is that Judge Howard failed  to  properly  consider  the  best
    interests of the third appellant.  The  following  further  points  are
    made:

    (i)  In stating that the third appellant  will  be  exposed  to  a  new
         cohort of peers of similar age and ethnicity, the judge  failed  to
         take into account the loss of the third appellant's current  peers,
         including his best friend. The grounds argue that the fact that new
         friendships can be formed does not mitigate the  loss  of  existing
         relationships.

    (ii) The judge failed to consider the fact that the third appellant  is
         at a sensitive stage of his education  due  to  the  transition  to
         secondary education in the coming months and  therefore  failed  to
         following the guidance of the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) &
         others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, that a decision as to what is in
         the best interests of children will depend on a number of  factors,
         including the stage at which their education has reached.

20. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Simpson  granted  permission  without
    restriction, stating that it was arguable that,  when  considering  the
    third appellant's case, the judge failed to  due  weight  to  the  fact
    that, having lived in the UK in excess of 8 years, he  is  a  qualified
    child under para 276ADE. Judge Simpson considered that it was  arguable
    that, in assessing the reasonableness of his removal, it was  incumbent
    upon the judge to take note of the findings in Azimi-Moayed  that  "the
    Tribunal notes that seven years  from  age  4  is  likely  to  be  more
    significant to a child than the  first  seven  years  of  life".  Judge
    Simpson referred to the third appellant being now in secondary  school,
    that any removal to India was likely to have  serious  implications  in
    respect of his educational prospects, particularly as  he  is  English-
    speaking and cannot speak, read or  write  Gujarati.  She  referred  to
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act which states that the  public  interest  does
    not  require  removal  of  a  person  with  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualified child where it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

Submissions

21. Mr Yeo reminded me of para 7.6 of the Explanatory  Memorandum  and  the
    "Compatibility Statement" dated 13 June 2012 which preceded the  coming
    into force of HC 194 which brought into effect the  amendments  to  the
    Rules with effect from 9 July 2012. The requirement  of  reasonableness
    in para 276ADE(1)(iv) was only introduced in December 2012. The test of
    reasonableness  was  not  a  hard  test  to   meet.   There   were   no
    countervailing factors in  the  third  appellant's  case.  He  had  not
    committed any criminal offences. The judge failed to  refer  to  Azimi-
    Moayed and EV (Philippines).  The third appellant had  had  his  entire
    education to date in the UK.  The  hearing  before  Judge  Howard  took
    place in March 2015 but his decision was only promulgated in May  2015.
    The delay was significant because the  third  appellant  completed  his
    primary education in  July  2015.  He  commenced  secondary  school  in
    September 2015.

22. Mr Yeo submitted that Judge Howard omitted to  take  into  account  the
    third appellant's own wishes and feelings. Judge Howard considered that
    the appellants would be assimilated into their own extended families in
    India. However, the evidence was that the family home  did  not  exist.
    Judge Howard found that the third appellant would  be  able  to  become
    proficient in the Gujarati language in a short space  of  time  whereas
    the evidence was that the third appellant was very resistant  to  going
    to India. Mr Yeo submitted that  this  would  be  an  obstacle  to  his
    learning Gujarati.

23. Mr Yeo took me through the report of Ms Brown in  considerable  detail,
    submitting that the judge had not engaged properly with  this  expert's
    report. When Ms Brown said that the third appellant's removal would  be
    regarded as "punishment", she was considering  the  position  from  the
    third appellant's point of view.

24. If the word "reasonable" is interpreted as having a high threshold  for
    the purposes of para 276ADE(1)(iv), Mr Yeo  submitted  that  the  third
    appellant could succeed outside the Rules on the  basis  of  Article  8
    jurisprudence which continued to apply.

25. Ms Fijiwala submitted, in essence, that the judge  had  not  materially
    erred in law.

Assessment

26. I have intentionally set out the grounds at some  length.  It  will  be
    apparent that the grounds amount in  large  part  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the reasoning and  findings  of  Judge  Howard.  This
    notwithstanding the terms in which permission was granted. I also  make
    the following specific points.

27. In relation to ground A, the first appellant had stated in his  witness
    statement that his father had died. He also  said  that  he  has  three
    sisters. Although he said that his family have "spread apart" since his
    departure from India and that he has lost  contact  with  most  of  his
    family and friends, this does not mean contact cannot be  resumed.  The
    second  appellant  has  a  sister,  a  brother,  her  parents  and  her
    grandparents in India. Whilst she too says that she  has  not  been  in
    contact with close family and friends in India for the last 4-5  years,
    this does not mean that contact cannot be resumed. It is plain from the
    reasoning of Judge Howard that, in finding that the appellants would be
    assimilated into their extended families, he was not prepared to accept
    their unsupported evidence that  they  have  lost  contact  with  their
    immediate families and cannot  look  to  them  for  assistance  in  re-
    settling themselves in India.

28. The judge did not speculate in finding that the  third  appellant  will
    become proficient in the Gujarati language in a short space of time. Ms
    Brown said in her report  that  the  third  appellant  understands  his
    parents. He attends the Hindu temple. It is therefore  inevitable  that
    he will regularly have been exposed to people who speak Gujarati.  This
    will plainly make it easier for him to  learn  to  read  and  write  in
    Gujarati.

29. Whilst it is true that Judge Howard did not specifically indicate  that
    he was aware that the first appellant and his  father  were  labourers,
    there is no obligation on  judges  to  refer  to  every  piece  of  the
    evidence before them.

30. The remainder of ground A amounts to no more than a  disagreement  with
    the judge's reasoning and findings and an attempt to re-argue the case.



31. Ground B is likewise hopeless. Judge Howard gave adequate consideration
    to the report of Ms Brown. Mr Yeo attempted to suggest that Ms  Brown's
    statement, that the third appellant would effectively be  punished  for
    his parents' lack of status,  was  a  statement  made  from  the  third
    appellant's point of view. In other words, she was merely  stating  how
    the third appellant would view matters. However, that is  not  how  the
    relevant sentence in para 5.5 of her report, which I have quoted at  my
    para 11, reads. It is plain that she was expressing  her  own  opinion,
    that the removal of the third appellant would  effectively  punish  him
    for his parents' lack of status. The judge did not err in rejecting her
    opinion in this respect for the reasons he gave.

32. Since ground C concerns the proportionality exercise outside the Rules,
    I shall consider ground D before I turn to ground C.

33. There is no substance at all in ground D. It is plain that Judge Howard
    was fully aware, and took into account, that the third appellant "has a
    strong and enduring network of peer relationships to which he  is  very
    attached" in the UK (see para 17 of his decision). It was obvious  that
    the  third  appellant  would  lose  the  ability  to   continue   those
    relationships in the same way if removed from the UK. The judge did not
    need to specifically say  so.  There  is  therefore  no  merit  in  the
    contention that he failed to take the loss of such  relationships  into
    account.

34. Ms Fijiwala accepted that the judge had  not  taken  into  account  the
    stage at which the  third  appellant  had  reached  in  his  education.
    However, given that the third appellant was due to  commence  secondary
    school in the UK in September 2012 and  that  removal  to  India  would
    likewise result in the third appellant having to attend a  new  school,
    any error in failing to consider that the third appellant  was  due  to
    commence secondary school shortly was not material,  in  my  judgement,
    bearing in mind that he did take into account (as I  have  said  above)
    the loss to  the  third  appellant  of  his  ability  to  continue  his
    relationships with his existing peers.

35. Accordingly, ground D does not establish any material error of  law  in
    the decision of Judge Howard.

36. Overall, the judge gave adequate reasons for his finding that the third
    appellant did not satisfy para  276ADE(1)(iv).  He  engaged  adequately
    with the evidence that was before him. His finding was  fully  open  to
    him. It cannot be said that his finding was not reasonably open to  him
    or that it was an irrational or perverse finding.

37. For all of these reasons, Judge Howard did not materially err in law in
    reaching his  finding  that  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK. It follows that he did not materially err in
    law in finding that the third appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    of para 276ADE(1)(iv). It further follows that he  did  not  materially
    err in law in dismissing the third appellant's appeal under  the  Rules
    and therefore the appeals of the first and second appellants under  the
    Rules.

38. Before turning to ground C, I will deal with Mr Yeo's submission  that,
    if the threshold for reasonableness in relation to  para  276ADE(1)(iv)
    is higher than is the case when  Article  8  jurisprudence  is  applied
    outside the Rules, it is possible for the third appellant to  establish
    in relation to his Article 8 claim outside the Rules, that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK, even if he fails  to  satisfy
    the requirement of reasonableness under para 276ADE(1)(iv). In relation
    to this submission, I make the following points:

    (i)  There is no authority for the proposition that the  threshold  for
         reasonableness under  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  is  different  from  the
         threshold of reasonableness when applying Article  8  jurisprudence
         outside the Rules. I have decided grounds A, B and D on that basis.



    (ii) The submission ignores the Court of Appeal's judgment in SSHD v SS
         (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  In my  judgment,  applying
         SS (Congo), the position is that, if a minor applicant is unable to
         show that removal would not be reasonable under para  276ADE(1)(iv)
         of the Rules, he/she can only succeed in his or her Article 8 claim
         outside the Rules if it can be  shown  that  there  are  compelling
         circumstances for the grant of leave to remain  outside  the  Rules
         (para 33 of SS (Congo)). Although this is a formulation  which  the
         Court of Appeal said in SS (Congo) is not as strict as the test  of
         exceptionality  or  a  requirement  of  "very  compelling  reasons"
         applicable in deportation cases, it gives appropriate weight to the
         focused  consideration  of  public  interest   factors   as   finds
         expression in the Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules
         in Appendix FM.  There is no reason to apply a  different  approach
         in relation to the right to private life and  the  requirements  of
         para 276ADE(1).

    (iii)    The judgment in SS (Congo) was delivered on 23 April 2015,  in
         the period between 4 March 2015 (the date  of  the  hearing  before
         Judge  Howard)  and  8  May  2015  (the  date  his   decision   was
         promulgated). The judge did not refer to SS (Congo) and he did  not
         apply it. Instead, he considered the third  appellant's  Article  8
         claim outside the Rules in a  freestanding  way,  pursuant  to  the
         guidance in Razgar. This was a generous approach. If he had applied
         SS (Congo), he would only have  needed  to  say  that  nothing  was
         advanced in support  of  the  third  appellant's  Article  8  claim
         outside the Rules that was not relied upon in relation to his  case
         under  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  that  therefore  there   were   no
         compelling reasons for the grant of leave to remain on the basis of
         Article 8 outside the Rules. He did  not  need  to  carry  out  the
         detailed assessment he carried out outside the Rules, at paras  23-
         28 of his  decision.  There  is  quite  simply  nothing  about  the
         circumstances of the third appellant  which  provide  a  compelling
         case for the grant to leave on the basis of Article 8  outside  the
         Rules.

    (iv) For these reasons, and even if I am wrong in  anything  I  say  at
         paras 39-41 below, any  error  in  relation  to  ground  C  is  not
         material.

39. There is nothing of any substance in ground C.  There  is  no  material
    error of law in applying s.117B to the fourth step as  opposed  to  the
    fifth step of the five-step approach explained in Razgar.  Contrary  to
    the grounds, the judge did take  into  account  the  third  appellant's
    strong peer network in the UK (see, in particular,  para  17  where  he
    noted the opinion of Ms Brown in this respect). S.117B(4)  did  require
    little weight to be placed on an individual's private life  established
    whilst his or her immigration  status  was  unlawful.  Section  117B(4)
    draws no distinctions between adults and children.

40. Section 117B(2), which states that it is in the  public  interest  that
    persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  UK  are  able  to  speak
    English, does not create a freestanding right to enter or remain  based
    on an individual's ability to speak English. In any  event,  the  judge
    was plainly aware that the third appellant speaks English and he quoted
    section 117B in full. There is therefore no reason to think that he did
    not take into account the fact that the  third  appellant  is  able  to
    speak English fluently.

41. The Upper Tribunal did not say in Azimi-Moayed that, whenever  a  child
    has lived in the UK for seven years or more from the age of four years,
    it would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. This will
    be a question of fact in every case. All relevant factors will need  to
    be considered and the best interests of the child considered.  This  is
    precisely the approach the judge followed.

42. For all of the above reasons, Judge Howard did not  materially  err  in
    law. The appeals of the appellants to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error  of  law.  The  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal are dismissed.


Signed   Date: 2 January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

