
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21013/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8 September 2017                   |On 26 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Pritam Kumar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms S Munira, Solicitor of Dr Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, Pritam Kumar, to whom I shall refer as "the  Applicant"
    is a citizen of India born on 5 November 1980.  On 23 October  2009  he
    arrived and was granted leave to enter as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    migrant.  He did not seek further leave.  On 10 July  2014  he  married
    Arzou Jhan Beg at the  Croydon  Registry  Office.   She  is  a  British
    citizen by birth.  She also  holds  an  Identity  Card  issued  by  the
    Pakistani authorities to overseas Pakistanis.

 2. At the date of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal the  Applicant's  wife
    was on the verge of going into labour: the Expected Due Date (EDD)  for
    her first child was 5 September 2017.

 3. On 11 October 2015 the Applicant applied for further leave on the basis
    of his private and family life which was eventually refused on  19  May
    2016.

The SSHD's Decision

 4. On 19 May 2016 the Appellant to  whom  I  shall  refer  as  "the  SSHD"
    refused the Applicant's application noting he did not meet any  of  the
    time critical requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The SSHD considered that the obstacles to his re-integration  to
    India  were  not  very  significant  and  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances warranting grant of leave to remain under  Article  8  of
    the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. On 1 June 2015 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds focus first on  the  Applicant's  Indian  Hindu
    origin and his conservative family background; second his wife's mother
    being a Muslim of Pakistani extraction and third  there  is  a  general
    reference to the oppression of women in India. The grounds  assert  the
    consequences for the Applicant and his wife are  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to the Applicant's wife settling in India.

First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 6. By a decision promulgated on 12 January 2017 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Stewart allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on
    human rights grounds.

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    noted that the  Applicant's  wife  had  contemplated  living  with  her
    husband in the same area as his family and had found  that  she  simply
    did not like the prospect.  The Respondent asserted the Judge  had  not
    assessed the risk and had considered the  Applicant's  subjective  fear
    was sufficient to dispose of the appeal. There had been  no  meaningful
    balancing exercise to assess the proportionality to the public interest
    of the decision.

 8. On 20 July 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  J  M  Holmes  granted
    permission on all grounds, noting that at the time of his marriage  the
    Applicant's immigration status was not "precarious" but unlawful  since
    he was an overstayer with no  pending  application.  Consequently,  the
    Judge's approach to the factors identified in Section 117B of the  2002
    Act  was  arguably  an  error.  He  also  noted  that   subsequent   to
    promulgation the Supreme Court handed down judgment in  R  (Agyarko)  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.

The Hearing at the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Applicant did not file any response pursuant to Procedure  Rule  24
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  but  late  on  6
    September filed evidence of his wife's EDD of 5 September.

10. The Applicant attended  the  hearing.   I  explained  the  purpose  and
    procedure to be  adopted  and  he  confirmed  his  current  address  as
    recorded in the Tribunal file.

Submissions for the SSHD

11. Mr Tarlow relied on the permission grounds.  The Judge  at  para.27  of
    his  decision  had  considered  only  re-location   to   Haryana,   the
    Applicant's home state.  India was a very large country and it would be
    possible for the Applicant and his wife to settle elsewhere without his
    family learning their whereabouts.  This omission  materially  infected
    the Judge's consideration of the claim under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.  Further, the Judge  had  not
    given consideration to  any  of  the  relevant  factors  identified  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

12. Subsequent to the hearing the Applicant's wife had become pregnant  and
    now was at full term.  The decision contained material  errors  of  law
    such that it should be set aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

13. Ms Munira submitted the judgment in Agyarko was handed down  after  the
    decision had been promulgated.  There were no factual parallels  shared
    by the applicants in Agyarko and this  appeal.   The  Applicant's  wife
    held a Pakistani national Identity Card and any prospective re-location
    had to be considered in the light  that  the  Applicant  and  his  wife
    follow their own different religions.

14. Ms Munira referred extensively to the  background  evidence  about  the
    general risk to women in India and the advice issued by the Foreign and
    Commonwealth Office at page 97 of the Applicant's bundle. I  note  that
    the  section  dealing  with  the  Northern  States  makes  no  specific
    reference to the state of Haryana.  I asked her to focus on the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision and to explain why the submissions made for  the
    SSHD did not disclose any material error of law.

15. Ms Munira then submitted that it was not a material error of  law  that
    the Judge had failed to consider the facts identified in  Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act because the  Applicant's  claim  under  Article  8  was
    sufficiently strong and there was enough evidence to support his  claim
    that he and his wife would be at risk in  India.   She  relied  on  the
    statements of law contained in paras.23-26 of the Judge's decision.  He
    had made a sound assessment at para.28 of the reasons why the Applicant
    with his wife could not relocate anywhere in north India,  namely  that
    she was a British national about to give birth to a British  child  and
    was a Muslim of Pakistani origin.

16. The Applicant's wife was self-sufficient as evidenced  by  the  various
    bank statements to be  found  at  pp.1ff  of  the  Applicant's  bundle.
    Private and family life overrode the factors  referred  to  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act and in addition the circumstances had now  changed
    because of the Applicant's child.  The  best  interests  of  the  child
    needed to be considered.

17. Ms Munira submitted that Indian law did not recognise dual nationality.
    As the holder of an identity card issued by the  Pakistani  authorities
    the Applicant's wife would not be able to acquire  Indian  nationality.
    The terms of any leave she might be able to obtain would require her to
    report to the police.  Ms Munira  repeated  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles which overrode the provisions of Section 117B  and  that  the
    Applicant satisfied the criteria of the Immigration Rules.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal decision should be upheld.

Response for the SSHD

18. Mr Tarlow pointed out that the Applicant's child had not yet been  born
    and accordingly no duty had yet arisen under Section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. He conceded the duty  might  well
    arise in a few days once the Applicant's child had been born.

Consideration

19. I noted that Ms Munira had failed to address  specifically  the  issues
    relevant to the points raised by the application for and the  grant  of
    permission  to  appeal  or  the  wording  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.  Her submissions had failed to take account of the fact  that
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act had not been engaged because the  child  was
    not yet born.

20. In any event, even on her reasoning that Section 55  was  engaged,  she
    had failed to address the Tribunal of the relevant jurisprudence in  MM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ.50  which  had  been  affirmed,  albeit
    reluctantly, in R (MA (Pakistan)) and Others v  Upper  Tribunal  [2016]
    EWCA Civ.705.  MM (Uganda) had been  handed  down  a  week  before  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  R (MA (Pakistan)) and R  (Agyarko)
    are both declaratory of the law as it always had been so are applicable
    to the consideration of this appeal even if they post-date the  hearing
    or promulgation of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

21. I decided that the Judge's decision contained material  errors  of  law
    such that it could not stand and should be set aside  in  its  entirety
    and the appeal remitted for hearing afresh in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    having  regard  to  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007  and  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement of 10 February 2010 (as amended).  I set  out  below
    my reasons.

22. As mentioned in the grant of permission, the Judge  relied  on  out  of
    date old case law.  No mention was made case law current at the date of
    the hearing and, in particular SS (Congo) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ.387
    and R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ.440.

23. Section 117A(2) of the 2002 Act imposes a mandatory requirement on  the
    Tribunal to consider the public interest and the factors  mentioned  in
    Section 117B.  The Judge failed to  consider  the  factors  and  failed
    expressly to mention of the public interest.  The consequence  is  that
    his proportionality  assessment  is  unsafe.   For  these  reasons  the
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact
    are retained.

24. The situation of the Applicant in relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    will be radically different after the birth of his child and the First-
    tier Tribunal will have to take this into account  at  any  re-hearing.
    The Applicant should consider taking advice immediately  following  the
    birth of his child whether immediately to notify the SSHD.

Anonymity

25. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal I find that none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before a Judge other than  Judge
    Stewart.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
25. ix. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

