
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/21990/2014
                                                               IA/21996/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 February 2015                  |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                UMA MADAN LAL
                                  MADAN LAL
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tallow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr H Sarwar instructed by MA Consultants


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants, nationals of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decisions of the Secretary of State of  23  April  2014  to
    refuse to grant their applications for indefinite leave to  remain  and
    to remove them from the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp allowed the
    appeals and the Secretary of State now appeals with permission to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. The background to these appeals is that the appellants, now aged 73 and
    79, entered the UK on 15 September  2004  with  visit  visas  and  were
    granted leave to enter for six months. In October 2004 they applied for
    leave to remain  as  dependent  parents  and  their  applications  were
    refused on 15 December 2004 with no right of  appeal.  On  27  February
    2006 their solicitors applied on their behalf for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of  their  human  rights.  There  was  no  response  to  this
    application and, after a number of requests for information  about  the
    application, the respondent wrote to them in  June  2012  stating  that
    there was no record of  the  application.  On  21  January  2014  their
    current representatives applied on their behalf for indefinite leave to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of their private  and
    family life in the UK. Their applications were refused on 23 April 2014
    on the basis that their circumstances were not sufficiently  compelling
    or compassionate to justify a  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules and they did not meet the requirements of
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  first
    appellant and the appellant's son and grandson. In summary the evidence
    was that the appellants are close to and depend on their son in the UK.
    They have lived with their  son  for  nine  years.  They  also  have  a
    daughter, son-in-law and grandson in the UK. They have  a  daughter  in
    India from whom they are estranged and they have no home in India.  The
    first appellant suffers from depression and is unwell  and  the  second
    appellant is forgetful.

 5. The Judge accepted that the appellants do not meet the requirements  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. The Judge went  on  to  consider  the
    appeals outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8 and allowed  them
    on the basis that the  decisions  to  remove  the  appellants  are  not
    proportionate.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  misdirected  himself  in  finding  that  delay  was  a
    determinative factor. It is contended that the appellants came  to  the
    UK as visitors and were at all times aware of the impermanence of their
    stay  and  therefore  had  no   legitimate   expectation   that   their
    applications  would  succeed  and  further  that  the  delay  had   not
    disproportionately affected them as it had enabled them  to  remain  in
    the UK and strengthen their ties here. Mr Tallow  accepted  that  there
    had been a lengthy delay in this case. However he  submitted  that  the
    Judge erred in treating this as a determining factor.

 7. The grounds of appeal further contend that the unauthorised use of  the
    NHS is a public interest factor and that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    was wrong to consider that the delay had  diminished  this  factor.  Mr
    Tallow submitted that the Judge erred in paragraph 36 where he said;

         "36. By taking no action to remove the appellants since the  expiry
         of their visit visas in 2005, the respondent cannot be said to have
         demonstrated any compelling need to maintain effective  immigration
         control or to protect the United Kingdom's  economic  interests  by
         preventing unauthorised use of the National Health Service."

 8.  Mr  Sarwar  submitted  that  the  Judge  carried  out  a   substantive
    proportionality assessment from paragraphs 32 onwards  considering  all
    of the factors in the case. He submitted that the Judge  relied  on  EB
    (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41. He submitted the cases relied on in the
    grounds of appeal - MM (Delay -reasonable period  -  Akaeke  -  Strbac)
    [2005] UKAIT 00163 and HB (Ethiopia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1713 - pre-date EB
    (Kosovo) which is the key authority on delay.  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge  considered  other  factors  at  paragraphs  28  and  29  of  the
    determination and that delay was not the determinative  factor  in  the
    Judge's proportionality assessment.

Error of law

 9. The Judge outlined the history of  the  appellants'  contact  with  the
    respondent since February 2006. The Judge  concluded  on  the  evidence
    before him that there was an unexplained and significant delay  between
    then and June 2012 when the respondent asserted that no application had
    been received. The Judge said that he considered that the  delay  is  a
    significant factor in this appeal. However  he  considered  it  in  the
    context of the repeated attempts made by the appellants  to  regularise
    their stay during that period. He also considered it in the context  of
    his findings as to family and private life made at  paragraphs  22,  28
    and 29 which underpin the proportionality  assessment.  This  is  clear
    from paragraph 38 where he quoted paragraph 14  of  EB  (Kosovo)  where
    Lord Bingham said; "... the applicant may  during  the  period  of  any
    delay develop closer personal and  social  ties  and  establish  deeper
    roots in the community than he could have shown earlier."

10. The Judge could have made it clearer that he weighed all of the factors
    in the proportionality exercise. However I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    clear from reading the decision as a whole that the Judge did  consider
    all of the factors including the age of the appellants,  their  medical
    problems, their dependence on their son [22], the fact that  they  have
    lived with their son for nine years, are estranged from their  daughter
    in India and have contact with their daughter and grandson  in  the  UK
    [27, 28]. I am satisfied that the delay, whilst clearly  a  significant
    factor, was not determinative of the appeal. The weight to be  attached
    to the delay was a matter fro the Judge.

11. At paragraph 36 of the determination the Judge did say that  the  delay
    reduced the weight of  the  need  for  effective  immigration  control.
    However this is in the context of and in accordance with  the  comments
    made by Baroness Hale in EB (Kosovo) as set out by  the  Judge  in  the
    preceding paragraph.

12. I am therefore satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge does not contain a material error of law.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed      Date: 13 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


