
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21098/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th November 2014             |On 16th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              mr Mourad Lounes
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jacobs - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mourad Lounes, a  citizen  of  Algeria  born  31st
    December 1964.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  made
    on 14th May 2013 to refuse indefinite leave  to  remain  (ILR)  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis that he had  been  here  for  a  continuous
    period of fourteen years.  The Appellant's appeal against that decision
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Turquet  on  18th  February
    2014.  The Appellant appealed against Judge Turquet's decision  and  on
    20th August 2014, having heard submissions, I found that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in that Judge  Turquet  failed  to  give  proper  weight  to  the  oral
    evidence, failed to give adequate reasons for her findings and did  not
    consider the evidence in the round.  I set aside her decision  with  no
    preserved findings of fact and I now proceed to remake the decision.

 2. Briefly the facts of this case are that the Appellant arrived in the UK
    on 22nd September 1994 by ferry at Harwich using an Italian ID card  in
    the name of Matteo Cachiato which he had purchased in Italy along  with
    an Italian driving licence.  He went to London where a friend  provided
    him with accommodation for a few weeks.  He then went to an agency  who
    managed to find him work in various restaurants.  Towards  the  end  of
    1998 he registered with Reed Employment Agency  and  thereafter  worked
    under his real name, Mourad Lounes.  He obtained a French ID card and a
    passport in his real name as  a  French  national  and  applied  for  a
    national insurance card as a French  national.   He  had  left  Algeria
    because of the political situation there.  He claims to have  lived  in
    the UK now for over nineteen years continuously.  He  says  he  has  no
    remaining ties to Algeria.

 3. The position of the Respondent is that the Appellant had entered the UK
    in 1994 without a valid travel document, therefore illegally.   He  had
    remained here without leave  to  enter  or  remain.   Although  he  had
    provided an HMRC tax letter in the name of Matteo Cachiato as  evidence
    of residence here between  1994  and  2000  he  had  not  provided  any
    payslips or letters from employers for that period and had been  unable
    to provide original valid photo ID to prove that he and Matteo Cachiato
    were the same person.  A photocopy had been provided but the Respondent
    would not accept this.  The Respondent has accepted that the  Appellant
    has been in the UK continuously since 2001 and it is only the period up
    to then that is disputed.  The Secretary of  State  considered  whether
    the Appellant meets the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules or paragraph 276ADE  but  found  that  he  does  not.   She  also
    considered the application on Article 8 ECHR grounds but refused it.

 4. The Appellant claimed that  all  his  documents  confirming  his  false
    identity as Matteo  Cachiato  were  lost  when  the  apartment  storage
    cupboard into which he had put them was emptied and  cleared.   He  had
    put the documents there because the authorities in Glasgow were looking
    for Algerian people as suspects after the bombing at Glasgow Airport.

 5. At the hearing before me on 26th  November  the  Appellant  provided  a
    bundle of photographs covering the years 1992 to 2012.   The  requisite
    period in this case is as previously stated 1994 to 2000.  He  provided
    the tickets he used to come to the UK in 1994.

 6. In his statement the Appellant  gives  the  following  details  of  his
    employment during the early years after his arrival in the UK.

       . In 1995/96 he worked for Gardner Merchant based  in  Fleet  Street.
         He worked under the head chef Keith Burton for two years.

       . In 1997 he worked in Soho House, Old  Compton  Road.   The  owner's
         name was Nick Jones.

       . In 1998 he worked in St Andrew's Golf Club, Cannon Street for about
         six months.

       . In 1999 he worked  for  Premier  Agency  based  in  Hounslow.   His
         recruitment consultant was Michelle King.  Towards the end of  that
         year he  worked  for  Reeds  Agency  also  in  Hounslow  where  his
         recruitment consultant's name was Angela Hebditch.

       . In 2000 he started working in his own  name  Mourad  Lounes.   That
         year he worked at the Royal  Lancaster  Hotel,  Lancaster  Terrace,
         London.

       . In 2002 he registered with Reeds Agency and has been doing so  ever
         since.

 7. At the hearing before Judge Turquet two of the Appellant's friends gave
    evidence.  They did not attend the hearing on 26th November  before  me
    but they were present at the previous hearing when the issue  of  error
    of law was dealt with.   The  Appellant  said  that  they  had  already
    appeared in court for him on three occasions and they could not get the
    time off work.  I do however have letters from each of them.

 8.  In a letter dated 13th January 2014, Mr Nabil Allal, who is  mentioned
    in the Appellant's initial  statement,  says  that  he  first  met  the
    Appellant in Italy over twenty years ago.  He came to the  UK  in  1994
    and the Appellant came just after him.  At that time he lived in Earl's
    Court and the Appellant spent his first couple of weeks in the UK  with
    him.  The Appellant then moved to Lewisham and Mr Allal would visit him
    almost every weekend.  Two years later he moved  to  Hounslow  and  the
    Appellant decided to find a place there as well.  They would  see  each
    other almost every evening after work.  The Appellant at that time  was
    working as an Italian citizen called Matteo Cachiato and had a  job  in
    London between 1997 to 2000.  They kept in touch even  after  Mr  Allal
    moved to Cardiff in 1999 to take up a job there.  He confirms that  the
    Appellant decided to use his own name in 2000.  The Appellant currently
    lives in Glasgow and Mr Allal meets up with him as often as he can.

 9. The second letter is from Mohamed Gara who says that he has  known  the
    Appellant for years having met him in 1997 during the Appellant's  time
    at the Bohemia Coffee Shop in London.  He would also  meet  him  at  St
    Andrew's Club after he finished his shift there.  They still  see  each
    other.

10. At the start of the hearing Mr Jacobs confirmed  that  the  Appellant's
    application had been submitted to the Home Office prior to  the  change
    in the Immigration Rules which came into force on 9th  July  2012.   He
    said he wished to rely on the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  ZH
    (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 8 paragraphs 16 and 17 in which it was said:

         "The use of a false identity, which was admitted by the  Appellant,
         was held against him.  But no account was taken, as it seems to  me
         it needed to be taken, of the reason he gave for using it: that  he
         was afraid of being detected as  an  illegal  immigrant.   That  of
         course compounds the illegality of his presence here but  it  is  a
         different reason from the more sinister reason for  using  a  false
         identity, which is to commit frauds."

11. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant who adopted his statement.  At
    the start of his evidence Mr Jacobs reminded me that the  crucial  date
    to establish fourteen years residence is 1999.

12. The Appellant was taken  through  the  bundle  of  photographs  he  had
    submitted.  I will not go into them in detail but there is for  example
    one with a date stamp of 1999 showing him in Leicester  Square  with  a
    friend called Sophia.  There is one showing him in Pimlico in 1998  and
    one showing him with a Spanish girl - his girlfriend in 1999.  There is
    one showing him in Turin with Mr Alam in 1994 before he came to the UK.
     One was taken at a staff party in a building near the High Court which
    now belongs to the London School of Economics.  He put the date of this
    at 1995/96.  There was one of him with his nephew  in  London  in  2002
    when his nephew came to visit.

13. He said that at the time of the Glasgow Airport  bombing  it  was  very
    frightening there.  Everyone was talking about it.   He  heard  on  the
    radio that they were looking for Algerian  people.   Someone  tried  to
    break into his flat.  His window was broken.  He decided  to  hide  all
    his papers and just keep the ID card and his national  insurance  card.
    He showed me this ID card.  He had so  many  documents  in  both  names
    because he had kept everything.  He had kept the  work  correspondence,
    his payslips and bank statements etc. since his arrival in  the  UK  in
    1994.  He lives in a block of flats on the first  floor.   There  is  a
    cupboard outside the three flats on  that  floor.   Each  floor  has  a
    similar cupboard.  He put all the stuff into a sort  of  briefcase  bag
    and hid it in the cupboard.  A  week  or  so  later  the  cupboard  was
    cleared out and all the stuff went missing.  He kept the small ID  card
    in his shaver case under his shaver in his flat.  He did not apply  for
    leave because he had no ID documents at that time.  He wanted  to  wait
    until he had established fourteen years residence under his  own  name.
    He then learned in 2012 that he would have to apply before July because
    the law was about to change so he did this.

14. At page 13 of the bundle there  are  several  photocopies  of  business
    cards which he said were the cards for the places he used to work.   He
    went through all of these in detail, explaining what he had done in his
    efforts to get evidence that he had worked at these places.    He  went
    to Soho House to try to speak to Nick Jones but the  man  he  spoke  to
    told him that they had no records prior to 2005.  One of the  cards  is
    for a company called Shergill & Co.  He said that is where the  Premier
    Agency was at the time he worked for them.

15. He agreed that there were discrepancies in the HMRC records.   He  went
    to the tax office in Glasgow to try to get corrected  records  but  was
    told that they would give him nothing unless he had a passport to prove
    his ID and he does not have that.  He provided evidence of his  studies
    in Algeria between 1981 and 1983.

16. He then went through all the jobs he had had between 1994 and 2000, the
    agencies who had provided him with the work and the work he was  doing.
    He gave details of seven different employers during that period.

17. In cross-examination Mr Tarlow  asked  him  if  he  had  tried  to  get
    information from any of these past employers and he explained  that  he
    had gone to Soho House and had tried to find St Andrew's Golf Club  but
    it is not there now.  Gardner Merchant have gone out of business.

18. He said that the tenants in his block of flats do not have  a  key  for
    the storage cupboard.  You have to go to the landlord and he comes  and
    opens it for you to let you put things in or take  them  out.   He  had
    nothing else in the cupboard - only the bag with the papers in it.

19. In his submissions Mr Tarlow said he would  rely  on  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  He said it boils  down  to  the  photographs  and  the
    evidence of the Appellant  on  these.   His  submission  was  that  the
    Appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proof.  He  relied  on  ZH
    (Bangladesh).

20. Mr Jacobs  simply  asked  me  to  allow  the  appeal  saying  that  the
    Appellant's oral evidence was compelling.  He gave a consistent account
    and it is clear that he was telling the truth.

My findings

21. In this case the burden of proof is on the Appellant and  the  standard
    of proof is on the balance of probabilities.

22. The requirements of paragraph 276B relative to 14  years  residence  in
    the UK have now been deleted and essentially  replaced  with  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules. The provision applied to those who had 'resided in
    the UK for 14 years or more either lawfully or unlawfully', the  period
    taken into account to exclude 'any period spent in the  United  Kingdom
    following service of notice of liability to  removal  or  notice  of  a
    decision to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8-10A, or  12-
    14 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971  or  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, or of a notice of intention to  deport
    him from the United Kingdom'. The additional requirements were -

         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
         it would be undesirable for him to be  given  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

              (a) age; and

                  (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

             (c)   personal   history,   including   character,    conduct,
             associations and employment record; and

             (d) domestic circumstances; and

             (e) previous criminal record and the nature of any offence  of
             which the person has been convicted; and

             (f) compassionate circumstances; and

             (g) any representations made on the person's behalf

         (iii) the applicant does not have one or more  unspent  convictions
         within the meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974

         (iv) the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the English language
         and sufficient knowledge of life in the United Kingdom,  unless  he
         is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over at the time he makes  his
         application

23. Paragraph 276B as set out above can only apply to the Appellant  if  he
    can establish that he has been in the UK from 1998,  the  Secretary  of
    State having accepted that he has been here since 2001.

24. It is accepted that there is a dearth of documentary evidence  relating
    to the period 1994-2001. It is accepted that the Appellant came to  the
    UK using a false identity which he continued  to  use  for  some  years
    before deciding to start working under his own name. He  explained  how
    he lost most of the evidence he had relating  to  that  false  identity
    though he did retain his false ID card. I accept the explanation  given
    because I can think of no reason why he would voluntarily  destroy  the
    evidence  of  his  employment  yet  retain  the  ID  card.   There   is
    documentary  evidence of his work post-2001 and the fact  that  he  has
    worked constantly since then gives rise to a reasonable likelihood that
    if he were in the UK from 1994 to 2001 he would have been  working  and
    probably in the same sort of jobs. The evidence of his employment post-
    2001 is of work in the catering industry,  jobs  similar  to  those  he
    claims to have had between his arrival in the UK in 1994 and  2001.  As
    evidence of this work I  have,  in  addition  to  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence, the statements and previous oral evidence of his two friends.
     I accept that they are the Appellant's friends and that he met Mr Alam
    initially in Italy.   I was impressed with the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant.  I did not at any time form the view that he was not telling
    the truth.  He gave a very detailed account of his  employment  between
    1994 and 2001.  He indeed only had to cover the period between 1999 and
    2001 but gave a full account of his work history in the UK. He  gave  a
    very detailed account of his efforts  to  get  evidence  including  the
    names of those he worked for  and  the  locations  he  worked  at.  His
    evidence was fluid and natural. On the balance of probabilities I think
    it highly unlikely that  he  would  have  fabricated  such  a  detailed
    account of his employment when it must have been obvious  to  him  that
    the Home Office could  check  it  out.   His  employment  record  is  a
    significant consideration and clearly, despite the  problems  with  the
    evidence provided by HMRC, it is clear that he  has  been  paying  tax.
    HMRC would have got all his information  for  their  records  from  his
    employers.   These records at the very least confirm that he  has  been
    working.  I do not see anything implausible in the point relied  on  by
    the Home Office in the refusal letter  that  these  records  show  that
    Matteo Cachiato worked in the UK prior to the  Appellant  adopting  his
    identity.  This is entirely possible.

25. With regard to the photographs, Mr Tarlow submitted  that  these  could
    just have been taken while the Appellant was on holiday here but I must
    consider these photographs in the round with the rest of the  evidence.
    There is nothing from the Respondent to suggest that the Appellant  has
    been in and out of the UK over the years. They have produced no records
    of visit visa applications.  There is no  record  of  him  having  been
    questioned at port or of the authorities having any interest in him.  I
    am satisfied that he provided satisfactory evidence of  having  entered
    the  UK  in  1994.  In  all  the  circumstances  and   taking   account
    particularly the compelling oral evidence of  the  Appellant  I  accept
    that he has been in the UK continuously since 1994.

26. The Appellant has no criminal record.   It  seems  that  he  has  lived
    relatively quietly in the UK throughout his time here.  He has not come
    to the attention of the authorities in any way.  He  speaks  very  good
    English. He  has  not  formed  a  family  life  here  but  clearly  has
    established a private life.   It may be  said  that  he  is  guilty  of
    deception and of deliberately  waiting  until  he  had  fourteen  years
    residence here before making an application but this does  not  vitiate
    his claim under paragraph 276B. He has worked constantly in the  UK.  I
    accept that it is likely that in 1994 he came to the UK to  escape  the
    troubled situation in Algeria.

27. Having considered all the  evidence  in  the  round  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has established that on the balance of probabilities he meets
    the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and replaced with  this
decision.

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date: 12th December 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of one half of the fee paid on the basis that some of the evidence  was  not
before the Respondent when the initial decision was made.



Signed        Date: 12th December 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
