
                                    [pic]

ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22604/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 November 2016                            |On 14 November 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                 CHARLES [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against the decision
    of the respondent on 17 February 2014 to refuse to vary  his  leave  to
    remain in the UK and to remove him under s47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.  His appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Carroll ("the FTTJ") who  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 April 2016.

 2. No anonymity direction was made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    request has been made for such a direction; none is required.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kamara  on  5
    October 2016 as follows:

         "2. It is arguable that the judge's assessment of  the  appellant's
            Article 8 claim outside [sic]  did  not  adequately  take  into
            consideration his personal circumstances which include over  30
            years' residence in the United Kingdom as well as the  presence
            of his British children.

         3.    All grounds may be argued."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4.  Mr  Balroop,  for  the  appellant,  provided  the  background  to  the
    application which was the subject of  the  appeal:  the  appellant  had
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds, having  previously
    been granted discretionary leave to remain after a successful appeal in
    2011 against a decision to deport him. His application had been refused
    because he did not meet the suitability criteria in S-LTR.1.3, 1.5  and
    1.6 because of his convictions, the same convictions  which  had  given
    rise to the decision to deport him.   Mr  Balroop  submitted  that  the
    appellant had  been  penalised  twice  for  the  same  convictions.  He
    acknowledged there was no legal authority on the issue, but his primary
    submission was that it was inequitable for the respondent  to  rely  on
    the same ground for removing the appellant when he had already appealed
    successfully against a decision to  deport  him  on  that  ground.  The
    appellant had not committed any offences between the date of  grant  of
    discretionary leave and the refusal which had given rise to the  appeal
    before the FTTJ.  Mr Balroop referred to  R  (Fitzroy  George)  v  SSHD
    [2014] UKSC 2 as being relevant in that the appellant was  required  to
    "regain ILR" by applying for it after  revocation  of  the  deportation
    decision.  Mr Balroop accepted that the appellant's  circumstances  had
    changed since the appeal decision  in  2011  such  that  he  no  longer
    qualified on the grounds of his family life but his  private  life  had
    accrued: he had been in the UK  for  over  20  years,  discounting  the
    period of imprisonment. He submitted that, in  effect,  the  respondent
    could not deport the appellant because of his criminal offences but was
    able to remove him as a result of them.

 5. Mr Balroop's second point was that the FTTJ  had  stated  there  was  a
    dearth of evidence as to what the appellant had been doing in  the  UK;
    paragraph 24 of the decision referred. However, the appellant's  bundle
    contained various skills certificates which the FTTJ had failed to take
    into account. The FTTJ had looked at s117B of the  2002  Act  yet  this
    section was relevant to the assessment of proportionality as part of an
    assessment outside  the  Rules.   If  the  FTTJ  were  considering  the
    appellant's private life, he  should  have  done  so  by  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE; the appellant fulfilled  all  the  criteria  bar  the
    suitability requirements. He submitted  the  FTTJ  had  not  looked  at
    276ADE, in  considering  whether  the  appellant's  circumstances  were
    compelling, as he should have done.

 6. For the respondent, Mr Norton noted the FTTJ had  adopted  the  reasons
    for  refusal  cited  at  paragraphs  5-11.   The  FTTJ   had   referred
    specifically to the suitability requirements and paragraph 276ADE.  The
    appellant would never meet the suitability  requirements;  it  mattered
    not that the appellant's appeal against the decision to deport had been
    successful. That decision had been taken outside the  Rules.  The  FTTJ
    had been correct to apply the rules at the date of decision.  The  FTTJ
    had addressed the appellant's private life at paragraphs 24-27.  He had
    taken into account the appellant's ability  to  meet  the  criteria  in
    276ADE (apart from the suitability criteria).  It  could  not  be  said
    that the appellant's ability to meet 276ADE(1)(iii) gave the  appellant
    an entitlement to live here. The FTTJ had taken into account the length
    of the appellant's residence.

 7. Mr Balroop responded that it was recognised that the appellant had been
    subject to automatic deportation  which  had  been  outweighed  by  the
    appellant's protected rights at the time of the appeal in 2011. It  was
    acknowledged that the changes to the Rules in  July  2012  had  brought
    into force the suitability criteria. The appellant  did  not  challenge
    the FTTJ's finding that he did not meet Appendix FM; the sole issue was
    the FTTJ's consideration of his right to a private life particularly in
    the context of the earlier successful appeal  against  deportation  and
    his lack of further convictions.  He submitted that it was an error  of
    law for the FTTJ not to conduct a  proportionality  assessment  outside
    the Rules.

Findings

 8. There is no challenge to the finding of the FTTJ that the appellant did
    not meet the criteria in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) as a result
    of his falling foul of the suitability criteria at S-LTR.1.3,  1.5  and
    1.6.

 9. Whilst Mr Balroop suggests it is inequitable for the  appellant  to  be
    "penalised" for convictions previously taken into account in connection
    with the deportation decision, I am unable to accept  this  submission.
    The tribunal in 2011 took into account the  appellant's  circumstances,
    including his criminal history and his family and private life, at that
    time.  That family life included his marriage to a British citizen  and
    "close relationship" with  his  two  British  minor  children  and  his
    stepchildren.  Those circumstance had changed markedly by  the  hearing
    before the FTTJ in April 2016 such that  he  found  no  evidence  of  a
    subsisting relationship between the appellant and his claimed  partner.
    He also noted the appellant's children and stepchildren  did  not  live
    with the appellant and none attended the hearing to give oral evidence.
    The FTTJ noted there was "no evidence before me  to  show  that,  if  a
    close relationship existed in 2011, it continues to do so now".    Thus
    the circumstances which gave rise to the successful appeal against  the
    decision  to  deport  the  appellant  and  the  subsequent   grant   of
    discretionary leave did not exist at the hearing before  the  FTTJ.   I
    cannot accept the submission of Mr Balroop that the appellant has  been
    penalised for the respondent's reliance  on  the  same  convictions  in
    respect of two  decisions:  both  the  respondent  and  the  FTTJ  were
    entitled to take the  appellant's  criminal  history  into  account  in
    considering whether the appellant fulfilled the criteria for  variation
    of his leave to remain on human rights grounds.  He did not meet  those
    criteria because of his criminal conviction and there is  no  error  of
    law in the FTTJ's finding that the appellant did not meet the  criteria
    in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

10. I turn to the second issue raised by Mr Balroop namely the criticism of
    the FTTJ's reasoning with regard to the assessment of  the  appellant's
    private life in the UK.  It was submitted that the FTTJ had  overlooked
    the various certificates of his achievements in the appellant's bundle.
    The FTTJ referred at paragraph 1 to having read the appellant's bundle.
     Nine of the certificates in the bundle were issued  between  2008  and
    2010. Three  were  issued  in  2014,  two  relating  to  preparing  for
    employment and one relating to an assessment in health  and  safety  in
    the workplace.  Given the appellant's length of residence  in  the  UK,
    the FTTJ was justified in finding  there  was  a  paucity  of  evidence
    relating to the appellant's private life. I do not  consider  that  his
    failure to refer specifically  to  these  certificates  undermines  the
    validity of his findings.

11. I am satisfied that the FTTJ took into account in making  his  findings
    about the appellant's private life  the  "significant  period"  of  his
    residence here and his varied immigration status (paragraph 24 refers).
     He was entitled to take into  account  the  paucity  of  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's private life. He noted the  extent  of  the
    appellant's ties with Nigeria and the ability of the appellant to adapt
    to life in Nigeria; he noted the appellant's extensive  family  network
    there and that he would be able to continue his private  life  in  that
    country.  These are matters he was entitled to  take  into  account  in
    considering whether there were  compelling  circumstances  such  as  to
    warrant consideration outside the Rules and pursuant to the  Article  8
    jurisprudence.  The FTTJ did not take into  account,  in  making  these
    findings, the appellant's criminal history or convictions.

12. It is unfortunate that  the  FTTJ,  having  made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1) at [14], stated at [14] that "this application  falls  to  be
    considered by reference to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention only". That
    sentence  is  somewhat  misleading  because  the  FTTJ  then  goes  on,
    properly, to make findings with regards to the appellant's  family  and
    private life at [15-26] before deciding at [27] that the "facts of  the
    appellant's case do not give rise  to  any  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances".  This is what he was required to do (SS (Congo) and Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604)  and,  having  found
    there were no compelling circumstances, there was no need for the  FTTJ
    to go further and undertake a proportionality assessment in  accordance
    with the Article 8 jurisprudence.

13. For these reasons, I am satisfied the decision of  the  FTTJ  does  not
    contain any material error of law. It must stand.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                        Dated: 11 November 2016

