
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          udara prasad jayawardana
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jafar, Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 7th May 1980.  His  appeal,
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 7th May  2014  refusing
    indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  in  a
    decision promulgated on 5th February 2015.

2.   The Judge found that the Respondent's decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law because only the Immigration Rules were considered in  the
    refusal letter. The  grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  the  Respondent
    considered the Appellant's Article 8  rights  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore the Judge's conclusion was wrong in fact. The Judge
    erred  in  law  in  taking  into  account  irrelevant  factors  in  her
    assessment of  Article  8  or  alternatively  she  failed  to  properly
    determine the issue.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
    on the grounds that it was arguable the Judge's reasoning  was  unclear
    and she allowed the appeal on the basis that the Respondent had  failed
    to consider Article 8 when in fact it was clear from the refusal letter
    that she had done so. The Judge should have decided the  appeal  rather
    than allowing it in so far as the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

4.   It was agreed by the parties that  that  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside because the Judge failed to make findings under  the  Immigration
    Rules. Mr Jarvis accepted that  the  Respondent's  calculation  of  the
    Appellant's period of lawful residence  was  wrong  and  the  Appellant
    calculations,  set  out  in  the  Rule  24  response,   were   correct.
    Accordingly, the Appellant had not overstayed for a period of more than
    28 days and he therefore had ten years lawful continuous  residence  in
    the UK. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and
    remade allowing the appeal under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

5.   The 28 days of overstaying allowed under the Immigration  Rules  starts
    from the day leave expired and ends on the day a successful application
    was made. Therefore, the Appellant had only overstayed for a period  of
    16 days not 118 days as  alleged  by  the  Respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter.  Accordingly,  the  Appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

6.   I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an  error
    of law in that the Judge failed to make findings under the  Immigration
    Rules and failed to determine  Article  8.  I  allow  the  Respondent's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

7.   I set aside the decision dated 5th  February  2015  and  remake  it  as
    follows: The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of indefinite leave
    to remain is allowed under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 16th July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
