
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22164/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                              md salman farshi
                           RASHEDA BEGUM ZIMMADAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, solicitors from K C Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publication  of
    the details of this appeal.

 2. The appellants in this case  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh.   The  first
    appellant was born in 1993.  He is the son of the second  appellant  who
    was born in  1973.   They  appealed  unsuccessfully  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State on 8 May 2014  (in
    the case of the first appellant) and 15 May 2014 (in  the  case  of  the
    second appellant) refusing them further leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The appellants were given permission to appeal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Frances who said pithily that it is "arguable that the  judge  erred  in
    law in his application of the transitional provisions of the Immigration
    Rules".

 4. The essential point in this  appeal  is  extremely  simple.  It  is  the
    appellants' contention that the Secretary of State and then  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge applied the  wrong  Rules.  Mr  Choudhury,  for  the
    appellants, was very persuasive. Mr Walker, who had the  opportunity  of
    considering the submissions carefully before  the  hearing  as  well  as
    following them during the hearing, was  persuaded,  as  I  am,  that  Mr
    Choudhury's submissions  are  right.  This  decision  was  reached  with
    consent. Explaining my conclusion might not be quite as  straightforward
    as stating it I am going to try.

 5. The first thing to appreciate is the basis  on  which  these  appellants
    come to be in the United Kingdom.  They were given  permission  after  a
    successful appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeals were  allowed
    by Immigration Judge Callow in September 2011. It  is  plain  from  that
    decision that the applications were made in 2010. In fact they were made
    in October 2010.  That is  significant  because  the  Rules  changed  in
    November 2010 and, in very broad terms, they imposed an English language
    requirement on people seeking to settle in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    requirement did not exist when these appellants  made  the  applications
    which led to their having leave to be in the United Kingdom.

 6. There are transitional provisions in the rules so that people already in
    the United Kingdom who entered lawfully when they were not  required  to
    have competence in the English language can remain without  establishing
    such competence. Applicants who wish to renew their leave and who  would
    otherwise have to satisfy an  English  language  test  do  not  have  to
    satisfy an English language test when that was not  a  requirement  when
    they obtained the leave that they wish to renew.

 7. Such applicants are not allowed to have indefinite leave  but  they  are
    entitled to significant a further period of leave.  The  terms  of  such
    leave are within the discretion of the Secretary of State but  they  are
    usually allowed to remain for 30 months.  Mr Choudhury has made it quite
    plain that it is his case that the appellants in this case are  entitled
    to 30 months further leave. They cannot have indefinite leave to  remain
    because they do not have necessary language skills but they do not  need
    those language skills to qualify for some further leave because that  is
    the effect of the transitional provisions.

 8. He argues this,  appropriately,  by  firstly  by  looking  at  what  the
    transitional provisions  actually  state.  Most  helpfully  he  drew  my
    attention to paragraph A277B in the following terms:

         "When the Secretary of State  is  considering  an  application  for
         limited leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain to which Part
         8 of these rules continues to apply (excluding an application  from
         a family member of a Relevant  Points  Based  System  Migrant)  and
         where the application does not meet the requirements for indefinite
         leave to remain (where the application is for indefinite  leave  to
         remain) or limited leave to remain under Part 8  in  force  at  the
         date of decision:

         (a) the application will also be  considered  under  paragraphs  R-
         LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (d), R-LTRPT.1.1.(a),(b) and (d) and EX.1  of
         Appendix FM (family life) and paragraphs 276ADE to  276DH  (private
         life) of these rules;".

 9. Thus paragraph A277B reminds the  decision  maker  that  an  application
    should not fail outright just because the language  requirement  is  not
    met.

10. Paragraph A277A is also relevant. It states:

         "Where the Secretary of State is  considering  an  application  for
         limited leave to remain and indefinite leave  to  remain  to  which
         Part 8 of these Rules continues to apply (excluding an  application
         for a family member of a relevant points-based system migrant), and
         where the applicant:

         (a)  does not meet the requirements of Part 8 for indefinite  leave
         to remain (where the application is for indefinite leave to remain)
         and

         (b)  meets or continues to meet the requirements for limited  leave
         to remain under Part 8 in force at the date of decision,

         further limited leave to remain under Part 8  may  be  granted  for
         such a period and subject to such conditions as  the  Secretary  of
         State deems appropriate."

11. For present purposes, by reasons of paragraph A277A, an  appellant  last
    granted limited leave to enter under Part  8  would  be  considered  for
    further leave if the applicant had last been granted  limited  leave  to
    remain under Part 8 even if the applicant does not meet the requirements
    for Part A for indefinite leave to remain.

12. This is the transitional provisions which Mr Choudhury says  means  that
    the Rules in force at the time of the  original  application  for  entry
    rather that at the time of application for limited leave are  the  rules
    that have to be considered.

13. This  is  not  all.   I  was  referred  to  a  Home  Office  publication
    "Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration:   Chapter   8
    Transitional Provisions". Under  the  heading  "Applications  that  fall
    under the transitional provisions" and "3.1 applicants  granted  or  who
    apply for leave under the Rules before 9 July 2012" we are told at 3.1.1

         "A person who meets the following criteria will remain  subject  to
         the Immigration Rules in force as at 8 July 2012  until  settlement
         (the  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain)  even   where   the
         application is granted on or after  9 July 2012:

         .    A person who made an application before 9 July 2012 under Part
         8 of the Immigration Rules which was not decided by 9 July 2012 and

         .    A person who is in the UK and has been granted entry clearance
         or limited leave to remain under Part 8  following  an  application
         for initial entry  clearance  or  leave  to  remain  under  Part  8
         submitted before 9 July 2012, and this leave is extant  where  this
         is a requirement of Part 8, and they apply for further leave on the
         same basis."

14. This, says Mr Choudhury, is a commentary and the  instructions  make  it
    plain that the interpretation of the Rules that he urged is the one that
    the Home Office says should be followed. This is itself a further reason
    for saying that it is what the Secretary of State should  have  done  in
    this in these cases.

15. As if this were not enough in the  same  document  at  3.4.2  under  the
    general heading "Transitional provisions and  applications  for  limited
    leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain" we are told:

         "Under  the  transitional  provisions,  if   an   application   for
         indefinite leave to remain does not meet the requirements of Part 8
         for indefinite leave to remain (in  a  category  other  than  as  a
         family member of a relevant  PBS  Migrant)  the  case  worker  must
         consider under paragraph A277A  whether  the  applicant  should  be
         granted further limited leave in the same category under the Part 8
         Rules in force at the date of the decision."

16. Once it is established, as I am satisfied that it is, that the  relevant
    Rules do not make a requirement for an  English  language  qualification
    then it is plain  as  far  as  the  second  appellant,  the  mother,  is
    concerned that she meets the requirements of the  Rules  that  ought  to
    have been applied and in her case the appeal ought to be  allowed.   The
    son's position for all practical purposes is the same.

17. That takes me  to  paragraph  298  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  its
    variations.  The critical point is 298(b) which makes it  plain  that  a
    person is entitled to the benefit of that Rule  where  that  person  had
    leave to enter or remain with a view to settlement under  paragraph  302
    or Appendix FM.  It does not matter if that person  was  a  minor.  Many
    people who satisfy the requirements of that Rule are minors, but  it  is
    not limited to them. It also encompasses people given leave to remain or
    enter with a view to settlement.  That  is  the  leave  that  the  first
    appellant enjoyed and therefore he comes under  the  scope  of  298  and
    therefore his appeal should be allowed as well.

18. It is for these reasons I indicated at the end  of  the  hearing,  these
    appeals should be allowed.

19. It is not for me to say what leave they should be  given.  It  may  well
    that 30 months is right and the appellants would  certainly  be  content
    with that but the result of my decision is only that the appellants  are
    entitled to further leave under the rules.

20. In each case I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
    substitute a decision allowing these appeals.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 December 2015               |

