
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22334/2015
                                                               IA/22335/2015
                                                               IA/22336/2015
                                                               IA/22337/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2016                   |On 12 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Sydney [M]
                                   [M M M]
                                   Mrs [S]
                                   [M B M]
                         (ANONYMITY oRDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S A Canter, Counsel, instructed by 1215 Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, whom we will  continue  to
    refer to as the  respondent,  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated  on  29  June  2016  allowing  appeals  against  a
    decision  of  the  respondent  made  on  29  May  2015  to  refuse  the
    applications of the four appellants for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of their family and/or private life.

2.   The first and third  appellants  are  the  father  and  mother  of  the
    children, who are twins born on 24 December 2007 and who have lived all
    their lives in the United Kingdom.  In particular they had  lived  here
    for at least seven years by the date of decision.

3.   The reasons for the refusal were set out  in  a  letter  dated  29  May
    2015.  The judge in the First-tier Tribunal, at which the Secretary  of
    State was not represented, found that the  appeals  of  the  first  and
    third appellants succeeded outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  he
    allowed the appeals of the second and fourth appellants under paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.  In effect the appeals  of  the  first  and
    third  appellants  piggybacked  the  success  of  the  appeals  of  the
    children.

4.   Before us it was argued by  Mr  Bramble,  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, that there was an error of law in the determination.  The test
    of reasonableness, it was said, was applied narrowly. There should have
    been taken into account the children's nationality, their  young  ages,
    the cultural awareness relating from their parents and their  heritage,
    their health and their parents' immigration history.  It is  said  that
    the Tribunal had considered none of these points and in failing  to  do
    so had erred in law.  The Article  8  finding  on  the  parents'  cases
    rested entirely on the decision in the children's cases  and  so  their
    appeal should have been refused also.

5.   In reply Mr Canter, putting matters in a nutshell, submitted  that  the
    various factors  set  out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  in  fact
    considered by the judge and if they were not considered then they  were
    irrelevant.  Nationality was implicit, the judge being  well  aware  of
    it.  The children's ages were set out.  Their  cultural  awareness  was
    dealt with at paragraph 63.  The judge heard oral  evidence  about  the
    languages spoken.  It was explained to us that in evidence the  parents
    said they spoke English at home because each of them spoke a  different
    Zambian language.

6.   The judge noted that the children had paid no  visits  to  Zambia.   Mr
    Chileshe, a relative, had been to Zambia with his child,  who  was  the
    same age as  the  twins,  and  described  the  difficulties  which  the
    children would meet there. They would stick  out.   Health  was  not  a
    factor.  As far as their parents' immigration  history  was  concerned,
    that was something the judge was aware of  and  he  dealt  with  it  in
    particular at paragraphs 58, 66 and 67 of the determination.

7.   It was said by Mr Bramble that the judge did not follow the case of  PD
    and Others (Article 8-conjoined family claims) Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT
    00108 (IAC). Mr Canter submitted that he did in fact follow  PD,  which
    was cited to him and which the judge in fact refers to at paragraph  45
    of the submission.  Each case had to be be considered on its own facts,
    and in relation to the issues which were up for  determination  it  was
    not suggested that the parents themselves could succeed.  The only  way
    in which they could succeed would be, as it were, to  piggyback,  as  I
    have said, the appeals of the  children.   That  is  why  there  was  a
    concentration on the latter.

Discussion

8.   The immigration history of the parents was well-known and  is  referred
    to by the judge and the only issue therefore was one which  had  to  be
    addressed through the prism of the children.  Once that  was  done  the
    whole family situation could be considered.  The judge,  it  seemed  to
    us, considered the best interests of the  children,  he  said  what  he
    perceived those to be and he set out at paragraph 66 what the Secretary
    of  State's  position  was,  namely  that  the  objective   information
    available demonstrated that Zambia had a functioning  education  system
    that most children would be able to enter.   Removal  of  the  children
    would involve  a  degree  of  disruption  to  private  life  which  was
    considered by the  Secretary  of  State  to  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control and was  in
    accordance with the Section 55 duties of the respondent.

9.    The  judge  assessed  these  matters  for  himself  and  indicated  in
    paragraph 67  particularly  that  he  had  considered  the  documentary
    evidence,  the  oral  evidence  and  endeavoured  to  make  an  overall
    assessment of the particular circumstances of the  children.   That  is
    because it was the issue of the children which was at the forefront  of
    matters.  He kept in mind, he said, the best interests of the  children
    as a primary consideration but in addition to  that  he  kept  in  mind
    throughout the legitimate aim of the Secretary of State in  maintaining
    effective immigration control.

10.  This determination could have been better  expressed  but  when  it  is
    read as a whole we are satisfied that the Tribunal dealt with the  live
    issues which were before it.  It was not necessary to  go  any  further
    and while another judge  might  have  made  a  different  decision  the
    decision which the First-tier Tribunal reached was one which  was  open
    to it and we refuse the Secretary of State's appeal.

11.  No anonymity order is sought or made.



                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 11 January 2017


