
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22707/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2016                  |On 14 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS

                                   Between

                           miss patriche anderson
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding instructed by J McCarthy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Flynn given on 17 January 2014, far too long  ago  regrettably  in  the
    circumstances of this case, which refused the appellant's  appeal,  she
    being a citizen of Jamaica, against the decision made on 22 May 2013 to
    remove her under Section 10 of the 1999 Act.

2.   The history is significant so far as this is concerned.  The  appellant
    came to this country with her mother and sister and they  were  granted
    leave to enter originally on a visit visa in July 2002. There was  then
    an application for leave as a child of a  person  present  and  settled
    together with her sister but that was rejected and eventually there was
    an application in 2009 which again was rejected because of insufficient
    fee and finally an application for leave in  December  2011  which  was
    refused with no right of appeal.  This was an application for leave  by
    mother and the two sisters.  At that stage the  younger  sister  was  I
    think still just under 18 but the appellant  was  an  adult.   However,
    following judicial review, there was a right of appeal granted although
    the decision to refuse was maintained.

3.   The appeal came  before  District  Judge  Malone  on  23  August  2011.
    Through what has been described as an administrative error although the
    circumstances and the details have not been disclosed, the  appellant's
    appeal was not before Judge Malone and he dealt with the appeals of her
    sister and her mother.  He decided that mother and  sister  should  not
    have been the subject of removal,  indeed  their  human  rights  claims
    succeeded but he made it clear beyond peradventure that he was  dealing
    with the family  together  and  he  said  and  concluded  that  if  the
    appellant's appeal had  been  before  him  he  would,  as  he  put  it,
    obviously have allowed it.  He said he could not allow the  appellant's
    appeal as for some unexplained reason it  was  not  on  the  Tribunal's
    system.   Essentially  for  family  reasons  in  his  view  there   was
    compliance with the requirements of Article 8.

4.   The appellant did not immediately apply for leave to remain but did  so
    in December 2011.  The Secretary of State was of course  aware  of  the
    decision of Judge Malone and he had made it as we  say  entirely  clear
    what the Secretary of State should do.  The Secretary of State chose to
    ignore what Judge Malone had said, albeit  there  had  been  no  appeal
    against his decision and rather than comply with it a decision was  not
    reached until May 2013, inexcusably thus well over a  year  was  taken,
    and then the application was refused.  In the meantime the  mother  and
    sister had been given leave until some time in 2014.

5.   It seems to us that there is an obligation upon the Secretary of  State
    whatever technicalities may exist, to apply a fair system.  Indeed  she
    asserts that she does endeavour to act fairly in respect of  all  those
    who make applications.  There can be no question but that she  has  not
    acted fairly in relation to the decision reached against this appellant
    and the way in which that decision  was  made.   It  should  have  been
    obvious that immediately she made the application  in  accordance  with
    Judge Malone's decision she ought  to  have  granted  her  leave  which
    accorded with that granted to her sister and her mother.  Not  to  have
    done so was in our view tantamount  to  maladministration  and  was  so
    obviously unfair that it cannot properly be justified.  She has been we
    are informed continuing to live with her sister and mother.  The family
    situation is the same and indeed  what  prevailed  largely  with  Judge
    Flynn in the decision that she reached in January of this year was that
    the situation with the stepfather, if we can call him that,  Mr  Burke,
    had changed but we gather that that as it were has gone  back  to  what
    was originally considered to be the position and there is now  a  child
    who has been born to the mother.  So there is  effectively  a  stronger
    family situation that now exists and no doubt there  is  a  Section  55
    consideration which applies.  However,  it  is  apparent  and  we  have
    evidence to establish that not only mother but also the younger  sister
    who is now an adult had been granted leave to remain until 2018.  Again
    it is difficult to conceive how fair administration could not result in
    the same for her sister, the  appellant.   We  are  surprised  that  Mr
    Melvin as the Home Office Presenting Officer has not received  sensible
    and suitable instructions from the Secretary of State  recognising  the
    unfairness of what has gone  on,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
    reasons for allowing this.  Judicial review lies on the principles  set
    out by Mr Justice Stewart-Smith as long ago as May  2014  in  which  he
    said there were important issues first there being no fact or point  of
    law which could distinguish the claimant's case from that of her mother
    and sister in 2011, what is the effect of that  decision  and  secondly
    whether the underlying decision of the Secretary of State in  the  2013
    proceedings could be lawful in the light  of  the  evidence  available,
    namely lawful continued residence by claimant's mother and sister until
    at least September 2014.  He said there might be a complete  answer  to
    these arguments but they were not immediately apparent.   Nothing  said
    by Mr Melvin has indicated that there is any answer to those arguments.
     We are satisfied that the failure of the Secretary of  State  to  have
    any regard in making the decision in 2013  to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Malone and the failure of Judge Flynn to recognise  the  importance  of
    ensuring in a given case that unfairness  did  not  prevail,  that  the
    decision of Judge Flynn was flawed.

6.   Accordingly, what we propose to do is  to  allow  this  appeal  and  to
    direct that the Secretary of State give  leave  to  this  appellant  in
    accordance with the leave that has been granted to her sister  and  her
    mother.  We hope that the Secretary of State will take this decision to
    heart and to try to avoid such blatant unfairness in  future  decision-
    making.  It is essential for  the  system  to  be  respected  that  the
    Secretary of State properly has regard to decisions of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and indeed the Upper Tier Tribunal.  Simply  to  disregard  is
    not proper administration by the Home Office and we hope that  we  will
    never have to see a case like this again.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date:  2nd March 2016

The Hon. Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

    TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No request made

[pic]
Signed                                  Date:  2nd March 2016

The Hon. Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
