
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: iA/22910/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 13 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Ms priscilla jlay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr D. Mills, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mrs Imamovic, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the
    decision of First-tier Judge Watson whereby he allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse to issue  her  with  a  residence
    card as confirmation of her right to reside in the UK as the spouse  of
    an EEA national who has acquired a permanent right of residence in  the
    United kingdom. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the claimant  requires  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The sole issue in the appeal was whether the claimant's  estranged  EEA
    national husband was a worker or self-employed person  who  had  ceased
    activity as defined in Regulation 5, and who  had  thereby  acquired  a
    right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  permanently  under  Regulation
    15(1)(c) so as to confer  upon  the  claimant  a  derivative  right  of
    residence.

 3. The appellant was not represented at the hearing  before  Judge  Watson
    which took place in Birmingham on  11  March  2016.  The  claimant  had
    previously asserted that her husband was a qualified person because  he
    was self-sufficient. However, in her grounds of appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal she clarified that her case was that he had been  granted
    permanent residence as a result of a permanent incapacity to work,  and
    the other requirements of Regulation 5(3) being satisfied.

 4. The claimant was represented by  Counsel,  who  handed  in  a  skeleton
    argument. The judge received oral evidence from the claimant, and  took
    into account the fact that the husband had  been  receiving  Disability
    Living Allowance since the year 2000. He concluded on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the husband satisfied the requirements of Regulation
    5, and that he had thereby acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence
    under Regulation 15(1)(c).

 5. Mr Tufan of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal. He pleaded inter alia that  the  judge  had  been
    wrong to hold that the husband had been issued with a certificate which
    was "indefinite" and that the husband could not "on the factual  matrix
    of  his  circumstances"  qualify  for  permanent  residence  under  the
    Regulations. Designated Judge Appleyard granted permission to appeal on
    26 August 2016 as he considered that the grounds  of  appeal  disclosed
    arguable errors of law.

 6. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Mills volunteered new information that was not before the First-
    tier Tribunal. Having conducted an investigation,  he  had  established
    that the husband had been issued with  a  registration  certificate  in
    2011 because he was  recognised  as  being  a  worker  who  had  ceased
    activity due to permanent incapacity.

    Discussion

 7. The registration certificate was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    judge was wrong to characterise this document as  conferring  upon  the
    claimant an indefinite right of residence.

 8. However, the judge's error is  not  material  as  he  made  a  parallel
    finding that the husband had acquired a right of  permanent  residence,
    and this finding is sustainable for the other reasons which  the  judge
    gave.  The inference which he drew from the other  pieces  of  evidence
    which he expressly considered has been  vindicated  by  the  additional
    information provided by Mr Mills.   It  is  not  now  disputed  by  the
    appellant that the husband has acquired a right of permanent residence,
    albeit that he has not yet applied for or been issued with a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of this.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and the decision stands. This appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

