
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 12 August 2015                    |on 7 September 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                         Mrs Busayo Grace Akindolie
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 20 October 1983. She is
    married to Mr Adeyoyin  Adekunle  Tinuosho,  who  is  also  a  Nigerian
    national, born on 13 March 1980. They have three children, all born  in
    the UK.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith,  who  dismissed  her
    appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated  7  May  2014  to
    refuse to grant her leave to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her
    family and private life.

 3. In granting permission to appeal, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Frances
    stated that it was arguable, given the documentary evidence  submitted,
    that the Judge erred in law in his assessment of paragraph 276B of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant appeared before the First-tier Tribunal in person.  There
    was a Home Office Presenting Officer who represented the  secretary  of
    state.

 5. The appellant entered the UK as a student  in  November  2004  and  was
    subsequently granted further extensions of leave to remain as a Tier  4
    (General) Student until 31 March 2012.

 6. Her application dated 19 October 2010 in that category was refused with
    a right of appeal. Her appeal was subsequently allowed in  August  2010
    with the result that she was granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student until 17 November 2011. Her application  for  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student was rejected ons 20 April  2012  as
    no fee had been paid.  Her  re-application  dated  30  April  2012  was
    refused on 3 October 2012 with no right  of  appeal.   The  matter  was
    eventually reconsidered following which leave was granted [4].

 7. On 7 May 2014, her application dated 10 October 2013 for  variation  of
    her leave to remain was refused with a right of appeal. A decision  was
    also taken to remove her from the UK. A one  stop  warning  was  served
    upon her pursuant to s.120 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  As at the date of her application she had lived here  for  9
    years and her third child had not yet been born [6].

 8. The  appellant  gave  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  She
    commented on her immigration history as recorded by the respondent. She
    claimed that her application dated 30 March 2012 had  been  accompanied
    by the appropriate fee. The respondent  had  returned  her  application
    even though there was money in  her  account.  She  produced  the  bank
    statement covering the  relevant  period  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

 9. The appellant presented evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    she had been in the UK lawfully for a period of 10 years as at the date
    of decision.

10. The respondent submitted to the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant
    had not shown that she had ten years' lawful residence to remain in the
    UK [23]. It was acknowledged that her length  of  residence  should  be
    taken  into  account  in  the  "proportionality   exercise."   It   was
    specifically contended that on 24 July 2013, the appellant  would  have
    been in  the  UK  for  eight  years  and  eight  months.  However,  her
    application "was voided"  because  there  was  a  previous  outstanding
    application that needed to be dealt with. Accordingly,  she  failed  to
    meet the criteria for fees.

11. The appellant presented evidence with  regard  to  private  and  family
    life. It was accepted that she had  been  living  with  a  partner  and
    children as part of a family unit [24].

12.  Judge  Griffith  found  that  in  the  absence  of  further   detailed
    information,  she  was  unable  to  find  that  the   appellant   could
    demonstrate full compliance with  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules to be eligible for a grant of indefinite leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of long residence [29].

13. Nor did she meet the requirements under Appendix FM or under Article 8.
    She found that relocating to Nigeria  with  a  young  family  after  an
    absence  of  10  years  would  not  be  easy  [36].  The  decision   on
    proportionality was "finely balanced" but she decided in favour of  the
    respondent [37].

14. Ms Revill (who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) submitted that the appellant had argued on  appeal  that  she
    satisfied the requirements of the rules based on 10  years'  continuous
    lawful residence.  She accepted that as at the date of  application  on
    10 October 2013, she had not yet accumulated 10 years'  residence,  nor
    at the date of the decision. Nevertheless, she had done so  as  at  the
    date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. She submitted that as a s.120 notice had been served on  the  appellant
    who had then given a statement of additional grounds, she was  entitled
    to rely on the provisions of paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules.
    In her statement of additional grounds   made on 25 September 2014  the
    appellant set out the basis upon  which  she  contended  that  she  had
    completed her 10 years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.

16. Ms Revill submitted that although  the  Judge  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant was entitled to rely on the provisions of paragraph  276B  of
    the rules, she failed to have regard  to  material  items  of  evidence
    showing that the appellant had indeed been lawfully resident  here  for
    ten years.

17. Whilst accepting the continuity of the appellant's residence in the UK,
    the  Judge  "apparently  doubted"  its  lawfulness  for  two   periods,
    beginning on 30 March 2012 and 28 August 2013.

18. She submitted that with regard to the period in 2012,  the  appellant's
    leave to remain was due to expire on 31 March 2012. On 30  March  2012,
    she made an attempted application which was apparently rejected  on  20
    April 2012 for alleged non payment of  fees,  following  which  it  was
    resubmitted.  The  respondent  subsequently  refused  the  application.
    However, the appellant appealed against that refusal and her appeal was
    ultimately allowed, following which leave was granted based  upon  that
    successful outcome. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  initially
    dismissed her appeal.  However, on 3 June 2013, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Lewis  allowed  her  appeal  against  that  decision.   In   his
    determination he noted that the respondent had in due  course  accepted
    an application made on 30 April 2012 for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    Student Migrant. Further, the First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with  the
    issue of the right of appeal, finding in favour of the appellant [2].

19. Judge Lewis noted that the Judge had refused her appeal  on  the  basis
    that she did not have a valid CAS  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision. The Judge had not however given consideration as  to  whether
    or not the decision was in accordance with  the  law  by  reference  to
    fairness. Judge Lewis accordingly set aside that decision.

20. He was satisfied that the appellant was  unaware  of  the  decision  to
    revoke her CAS prior to the respondent's decision. She was not  put  on
    notice of the revocation. The respondent should thus have permitted her
    "a period of grace" to allow her a reasonable opportunity to  vary  her
    application by obtaining a new CAS.  He  accordingly  directed  that  a
    fresh decision on the appellant's application was not to be made for  a
    period of 60 days from the date of promulgation of  his  determination,
    to enable the appellant to obtain a fresh CAS.

21. Ms Revill submitted that throughout this period, the appellant's  leave
    was extended for both the period pending the outcome of the application
    and thereafter pending the outcome of the appeal, pursuant to  s.3C  of
    the Immigration Act 1971.

22. The other period in issue  related  to  2013.  The  respondent  in  her
    decision dated 7 May  2014  contended  that  on  13  August  2013,  the
    appellant was granted  leave  to  remain  until  13  October  2013  and
    confirmed that she applied for further leave on 10 October  2013.  That
    was before the  expiry  of  her  leave.  Accordingly,  that  leave  was
    extended under s.3C while  the  application  was  outstanding  and  the
    present appeal pending.  Ms Revill submitted that had  the  application
    not been made in time, there would not have been any  right  of  appeal
    and moreover, no s.47 removal decision could have been made.

23. She accordingly submitted that  the  appellant  had  remained  lawfully
    resident following her allowed  appeal  in  2013  up  to  the  date  of
    hearing. Attempted applications  in  August  and  September  2013  were
    rejected as invalid, but that did not  change  the  lawfulness  of  the
    appellant's residence during that period.

24. Ms Revill also referred to various letters between the  appellant's  MP
    and the Home Office. Initially the respondent wrote back to him  on  27
    February 2014 contending that the appellant had no right of appeal  and
    that her application would not be reconsidered. However,  on  25  April
    2014, having again been approached by the  member  of  parliament,  the
    respondent accepted that she had been wrong to conclude that there  had
    been no right of appeal and furthermore accepted that  her  application
    had been made in time.

25. On 7 May 2014, the appellant received a new decision in which  she  was
    given a right of appeal. She did appeal in time.

26. Ms Holmes had been afforded the opportunity during the  course  of  the
    hearing to satisfy herself that the documents referred to and relied on
    by Ms Revill corroborated the appellant's claim of lawful residence.

27. Ms Holmes very fairly accepted that having regard  to  the  documentary
    evidence produced, there was "nothing to dispute" with  regard  to  the
    contention that the appellant had satisfied paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the
    Immigration Rules.

28. Ms Revill  submitted  that  the  public  interest  consideration  under
    paragraph 276B(ii)  did  not  disclose  any  reason  why  it  would  be
    undesirable for the appellant to be given indefinite leave to remain on
    the grounds of long residence.

29. Ms Holmes  submitted  that  as  the  respondent  has  not  yet  had  an
    opportunity to consider those factors, it would be more appropriate for
    the case to be remitted to  the  respondent  for  the  public  interest
    decision to be considered.

    Assessment

30. I am indebted to Ms Revill for bringing some order  to  the  voluminous
    bundle before the Tribunal.

31. I am satisfied on a close analysis of the disputed periods to  which  I
    have referred that for the reasons already set out above, the appellant
    has discharged the burden of proof on the balance of probabilities that
    she has met the ten year requirements for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    under paragraph 276B(i)(a). Ms Holmes' concession  in that respect  was
    correctly made.

32. Having regard to the application of s.3C of the Immigration  Act  1971,
    the appellant has shown that she had completed ten  years'  lawful  and
    continuous residence as at the date of the decision before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The documentation in support of that contention had been
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

33. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
    of an error on a point of law. I set this decision  aside  and  re-make
    it.

34. I  find  that  the  appellant  has  completed  ten  years'  lawful  and
    continuous residence in the UK.

35. Ms Holmes submitted  that  the  public  interest  factors  set  out  at
    paragraph 276B(ii) should initially be decided by the respondent.

36. Ms Revill submitted that the Tribunal should decide whether it would be
    undesirable for her to be granted indefinite leave.

37. I have had regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in MU  ("statement  of
    additional grounds" - long residence-discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT
    422 (IAC).

38. As Senior  Immigration  Judge  McKee  observed  in  agreeing  with  the
    respondent's submission in that regard, that  if  the  Tribunal  is  to
    become the primary decision maker under that section, then it  must  be
    able to take account of all  the  immigration  rules  if  an  appellant
    claims to qualify for leave to remain in a different category from that
    for which she applied to the secretary of state [11].

39. The discretion to refuse indefinite leave on long residence grounds  is
    to be found in the Rules themselves. That discretion is exercisable  by
    the Tribunal if it is the first instant decision maker.

40. I thus consider that I have an exercisable discretion as to whether  or
    not indefinite leave on long residence grounds should  be  refused  for
    the reasons set out in paragraph 276B.

41. I do not find that there are any  compelling  reasons  that  have  been
    advanced as to why such discretion should be left to the  secretary  of
    state having invited the appellant to respond to a s.120 notice,  which
    she did.

42. Unlike  the  appellant  in  MU,  this  appellant  has  never  practised
    deception throughout her residence in the UK. There  is  no  suggestion
    that she has any criminal record, nor that she has in any way  breached
    the immigration rules. I was informed that she has in fact  "done  jury
    service". Further, she has been in gainful employment.

43. I have had regard to numerous letters of support. I am  satisfied  that
    she has a strong connection in the UK. I do  not  find  that  there  is
    anything in her personal  history  regarding  her  character,  conduct,
    associations and employment record which in any way militates against a
    grant of indefinite leave to remain.

44. I have had regard to her  domestic  circumstances  which  are  set  out
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. She  is  married  and  has  three
    children, all of whom were born in the  UK  in  2008,  2012  and  2013.
    Neither her husband nor her children are British citizens. Her  husband
    does not have leave to remain in the UK. He  is  however  part  of  the
    family unit.  I do not find that there  is  anything  in  her  domestic
    circumstances which makes it  undesirable  for  this  appellant  to  be
    granted leave under the rules.

45. I have also had regard to the various diplomas  and  awards  that  have
    been achieved by the appellant during her residence in the UK. She  has
    sufficient knowledge of the English language as well  as  knowledge  of
    life in the UK.

46. Having regard to the evidence and circumstances as a whole, I find that
    there is nothing to suggest that the appellant's  presence  in  the  UK
    would be undesirable for any of the reasons referred  to  in  paragraph
    276B.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside. I substitute a fresh decision  to
    allow the claimant's appeal under the immigration rules.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 5 September 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


