
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 October 2016                    |On 31 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Plowright, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

    1. The question of law that  is  to  be  addressed  in  this  appeal  is
       concerned with the different positions of family members and Extended
       Family Members ("EFMs") within the legal framework applicable  to  an
       application for a residence card confirming a right of  residence  in
       the United Kingdom. In the light of the recent reported  decision  of
       Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC), a question arises
       also as to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to entertain this  appeal
       by a former durable partner of an EEA  national  against  refusal  to
       issue her with a residence card. It  is  convenient  to  address  the
       question of the Tribunal's jurisdiction after considering  the  legal
       framework relating to the differing positions under European  law  of
       family members and EFMs of EEA nationals.

    2. On 24 April 2007 the appellant, who  is  a  citizen  of  Brazil,  was
       issued with a  residence  card  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent
       accepted that she was, at that time, in a durable  relationship  with
       [NA], who was an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the  United
       Kingdom. That relationship ended a little less than two years  later,
       on 15 February 2009, when the appellant left the home they  had  been
       sharing. She did not inform the respondent  of  that  change  in  her
       circumstances.

    3. In April 2012 the appellant submitted an application for a  residence
       card on the basis that she  was  entitled  to  a  retained  right  of
       residence  because  her  relationship  had  broken  down  because  of
       domestic violence and, as five years had elapsed since she was issued
       with her residence card as the durable partner of  an  EEA  national,
       during which she claimed to  be  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
       accordance with the EEA  regs,  she  claimed  to  be  entitled  to  a
       permanent right of residence and so a residence card recognising that
       entitlement.

    4. In these proceedings the appellant appeals against a decision of  the
       respondent, made on 30 April 2014, to maintain an earlier decision to
       refuse to issue to her a residence card, permission to appeal  having
       been granted in respect of the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Dineen who,  by  a  determination  promulgated  on  8  January  2016,
       dismissed the appellant's appeal. At the initial hearing  before  the
       Upper Tribunal before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Froom,  it  was
       common ground and agreed between  the  parties  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge had made a material error of law such  as  to  require
       that his decision be set aside and remade by the Upper Tribunal.

    5. The litigation history leading to the decision  now  under  challenge
       is, of course, well known to the parties, as is the previous  history
       of the relationship between the appellant and  [NA]  and  it  is  not
       necessary to recite here all of the details of that history.

    6. The reasoning that led the respondent to refuse the  application  may
       be summarised as follows:

        a. Reg 7(3) of the EEA regs confirms that a person  issued  with  a
           residence card as an Extended Family  Member  ("EFM")  shall  be
           treated as a family member of an EEA national but  only  for  as
           long as she continues to meet the definition of an EFM in reg 8;

        b. EFMs do not enjoy the same automatic right to live and  work  in
           the United Kingdom under European law as do family members of an
           EEA national;

        c. When the appellant ceased to cohabit with  her  former  partner,
           leaving their home on  15  February  2009,  she  was  no  longer
           treated as a family member;

        d. Therefore, the appellant's "qualifying period" is only two years
           and so she cannot demonstrate having lived in the United Kingdom
           in accordance with the EEA regs for a continuous period of  five
           years;

        e. Although reg 10(5) provides for  retained  rights  of  residence
           where there has been domestic violence, this is  available  only
           to family members and is not available to EFMs who cease  to  be
           treated as family members when the durable relationship comes to
           an end;

        f. In any event, the respondent did not accept that  the  appellant
           had been "a consistent victim of domestic violence".

    7. The  case  advanced  on  the  appellant's  behalf  by  Mr  Plowright,
       distilled to its essence, may be summarised as follows.  Although  he
       accepts that reg 10(5)(d)(iv) of the EEA regs and  Article  13(2)  of
       the  Citizen's  Directive  2004/38/EC   ("the   Directive")   provide
       specifically for retained rights of residence for the spouse or civil
       partner (i.e. the family member) of an EEA national  but  not  for  a
       former durable partner (i.e. an EFM)  who  has  been  the  victim  of
       domestic violence, Article 13(2) ought to be read to include  durable
       partners  in  accordance  with  "the  European  principles  of  equal
       treatment and proportionality: As para 289A and Appendix FM DVILR  of
       the Immigration Rules provide for the unmarried partner of a  British
       citizen to be granted  settlement  if  the  relationship  broke  down
       because of domestic violence, therefore  unmarried  partners  of  EEA
       nationals ought to be entitled to the same advantage. In  support  of
       that submission Mr Plowright draws upon what was said at para  30  of
       Netherlands v Ann Florence Reed [1986] EUECJ R-59/85:

           "... Article 7 of the Treaty, in conjunction with Article 48  of
           the Treaty and Article 7(2) of regulation No  1612/68,  must  be
           interpreted as meaning that a member  state  which  permits  the
           unmarried companions of its nationals, who  are  not  themselves
           nationals of that member  state,  to  reside  in  its  territory
           cannot refuse to grant the same advantage to migrant workers who
           are nationals of other member states."

       Therefore, in Mr Plowright's submission, because  unmarried  partners
       of British nationals who have been the victims of  domestic  violence
       are entitled to settlement, unmarried partners of EEA nationals ought
       to be entitled  to  the  same  advantage  as  that  afforded  to  the
       unmarried companions of British nationals.

    8. Further, Mr Plowright  draws  from  Article  52  of  the  Charter  of
       Fundamental Rights of the European Union ("the Charter") a  principle
       of proportionality such as to demand that the United  Kingdom  should
       not apply the Directive or the EEA regs to a former  durable  partner
       in a way that limits the rights and freedoms of  the  former  durable
       partner in a way that is not necessary and does  not  genuinely  meet
       objectives of general interest recognised by the Union or the need to
       protect the rights and freedom of others. Article 52 provides:

           "Any limitation on the  exercise  of  the  rights  and  freedoms
           recognised by this Charter must  be  provided  for  by  law  and
           respect the essence of those rights and freedoms. Subject to the
           principle of proportionality, limitations may be  made  only  if
           they are necessary and  genuinely  meet  objectives  of  general
           interest recognised by the Union or  the  need  to  protect  the
           rights and freedoms of others."

    9. The respondent's position is  as  set  out  in  a  skeleton  argument
       drafted by Mr Peter Deller, which was adopted  by  Mr  Whitwell.  The
       respondent points to  the  clear  distinction  drawn  between  family
       members and EFMs in  European  law  and  submits  that  there  is  no
       legitimate comparison between provisions for  retaining  a  right  of
       residence under the Directive and domestic United Kingdom  provisions
       in the Immigration Rules for partners following the  breakdown  of  a
       relationship following domestic violence. The  respondent's  position
       is that EU law is simply not engaged  in  relation  to  non-EEA  EFMs
       beyond the requirement of Article 3(2) of the Directive. Put  another
       way, in Mr Whitwell's submission, the status of a  non-EEA  national,
       who is not a family member of the EEA  national  and,  following  the
       breakdown of a formerly durable relationship, is  no  longer  an  EFM
       either, falls outside the scope of EU law.

   10. The respondent submits that the asserted analogy between a  right  of
       residence under the EEA regs and leave to enter or remain  under  the
       Immigration Rules is misconceived.  It  is  correct  that  para  289A
       applies to both married and unmarried  couples  but  the  Immigration
       Rule applies stricter criteria for leave  to  enter  or  remain  than
       provided for by reg 8(5).

The legal framework

   11. In order to inform the discussion that follows, it  is  necessary  to
       set out a recital of the relevant material.

   12. The relevant provisions of the Directive 2004/38/EC are  Articles  2,
       3, 7(2) and 13:

           'Article 2

           Definitions

           For the purposes of this Directive:

             1) 'Union citizen' means any person having the nationality of a
                Member State;

             2) 'Family member' means:

                 a) the spouse;

                 b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
                    registered partnership, on the basis of the  legislation
                    of a Member State, if the legislation of the host Member
                    State treats registered partnerships  as  equivalent  to
                    marriage and in accordance with the conditions laid down
                    in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;

                 c) the direct descendants who are under the age  of  21  or
                    are dependants and those of the  spouse  or  partner  as
                    defined in point (b);

                 d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and
                    those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

           (3)   'Host Member State' means the  Member  State  to  which  a
                Union citizen moves in order to exercise  his/her  right  of
                free movement and residence."

           Article 3

           Beneficiaries

           1.    This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move
                to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they
                are a national, and to their family members  as  defined  in
                point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them.

           2.    Without prejudice  to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
                residence the persons concerned may have in their own right,
                the host Member State shall, in accordance with its national
                legislation,  facilitate  entry  and   residence   for   the
                following persons:

                (a)    any  other  family  members,  irrespective  of  their
                    nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2
                    of Article 2 who, in the country from  which  they  have
                    come, are dependants or members of the household of  the
                    Union citizen having the primary right of residence,  or
                    where  serious  health  grounds  strictly  require   the
                    personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;



                (b)    the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
                    relationship, duly attested.

                The  host  Member  State  shall   undertake   an   extensive
                examination of the personal circumstances and shall  justify
                any denial of entry or residence to these people.

           Article 13

           Retention of the right of residence by  family  members  in  the
           event of  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of
           registered partnership

             1. Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
                annulment of the Union citizen's marriage or termination  of
                his/her registered partnership, as referred to in point 2(b)
                of Article 2 shall not affect  the  right  of  residence  of
                his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.

                Before acquiring  the  right  of  permanent  residence,  the
                persons concerned must meet  the  conditions  laid  down  in
                points (a), (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).

             2. Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
                annulment of  marriage  or  termination  of  the  registered
                partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not
                entail loss of the right of residence of a  Union  citizen's
                family members who are  not  nationals  of  a  Member  State
                where:

                (a)    prior to  initiation  of  the  divorce  or  annulment
                    proceedings or termination of the registered partnership
                    referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2, the marriage  or
                    registered partnership has lasted at least three  years,
                    including one year in the host Member State; or

                (b)    by agreement between  the  spouses  or  the  partners
                    referred to in point 2(b)  of  Article  2  or  by  court
                    order, the spouse or partner who is not a national of  a
                    Member  State  has  custody  of  the   Union   citizen's
                    children; or

                (c)     this  is   warranted   by   particularly   difficult
                    circumstances, such as having been a victim of  domestic
                    violence while the marriage  or  registered  partnership
                    was subsisting; or

                (d)    by agreement between the spouses or partners referred
                    to in point 2(b) of Article 2 or  by  court  order,  the
                    spouse or partner who is not  a  national  of  a  Member
                    State has the right of access to a minor child, provided
                    that the court has ruled that such access must be in the
                    host Member State, and for as long as is required.

                Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the right
                of residence of the persons concerned shall  remain  subject
                to the requirement that they are able to show that they  are
                workers  or  self-employed  persons  or   that   they   have
                sufficient resources for themselves and their family members
                not to become a burden on the social  assistance  system  of
                the host Member State during their period of  residence  and
                have comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover  in  the  host
                Member State, or  that  they  are  members  of  the  family,
                already constituted in the host Member State,  of  a  person
                satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources"  shall
                be as defined in Article 8(4).

                Such family members shall retain their  right  of  residence
                exclusively on a personal basis.'

   13. Next, the EEA regs. Reg 8 is  concerned  with  EFMs.  So  far  as  is
       relevant it provides:

           "Extended family member

           8.- (1) In these Regulations "extended family  member"  means  a
           person who is not a family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under
           regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the  conditions
           in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

           ...

           (5) A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
           person is the partner of an EEA national  (other  than  a  civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that  he  is  in  a
           durable relationship with the EEA national.

           (6) In these  Regulations  "relevant  EEA  national"  means,  in
           relation to an extended family member, the EEA national  who  is
           ... the partner of the extended family member for  the  purposes
           of paragraph (5).

   14. Reg  7  is  concerned  with  family  members,  included  within  such
       definition are spouses and civil partners but  reg 7(3) provides:

           ... a person who is an  extended  family  member  and  has  been
           issued with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or
           a residence card shall be treated as the family  member  of  the
           relevant EEA national for as long as he continues to satisfy the
           conditions in regulations 8(2),(3),(4) (5) in relation  to  that
           EEA national and the permit, certificate or card has not  ceased
           to be valid or been revoked.

   15. Reg 10 provides for retained rights of residence for family members:

           10. -  (1)    In  these  Regulations,  "family  member  who  has
                  retained  the  right  of  residence"  means,  subject   to
                  paragraph (8), a person who satisfies  the  conditions  in
                  paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

                  ...

                  (5)  A person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph
                  if-

                      (a)   he ceased to be a family member of a  qualified
                           person on the  termination  of  the  marriage  or
                           civil partnership of the qualified person;

                      (b)   he  was  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                           accordance with these Regulations at the date  of
                           the termination;

                      (c)   he satisfies the condition  in  paragraph  (6);
                           and

                      (d)   either-

                           (i)      prior   to   the   initiation   of   the
                               proceedings  for  the  termination  of   the
                               marriage  or  the  civil   partnership   the
                               marriage or civil partnership had lasted for
                               at least three years and the parties to  the
                               marriage or civil partnership had resided in
                               the United Kingdom for  at  least  one  year
                               during its duration;

                           (ii)    the former spouse or civil partner of the
                               qualified person has custody of a  child  of
                               the qualified person;

                           (iii)   the former spouse or civil partner of the
                               qualified person has the right of access  to
                               a child of the qualified  person  under  the
                               age of 18 and a court has ordered that  such
                               access  must  take  place  in   the   United
                               Kingdom; or

                           (iv)    the continued right of residence  in  the
                               United Kingdom of the person is warranted by
                               particularly difficult  circumstances,  such
                               as he or another family member having been a
                               victim  of  domestic  violence   while   the
                               marriage   or    civil    partnership    was
                               subsisting.

                  (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

                      (a)   is not an EEA national but would, if he were an
                           EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person
                           or a self-sufficient person under  regulation  6;
                           or

                      (b)   is the family member  of  a  person  who  falls
                           within paragraph (a).

   16. Reg 15

           15. - (1)   The following persons shall  acquire  the  right  to
                  reside in the United Kingdom permanently-

                      ...

                      (f)   a person who-

                           (i)     has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                               accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
                               continuous period of five years; and

                           (ii)    was, at the end of that period, a  family
                               member  who  has  retained  the   right   of
                               residence.

   17. Before carrying out an analysis of those competing submissions  there
       is a matter of fact in issue between the parties to be  resolved.  As
       we have seen from the summary of the  reasons  for  refusal  set  out
       above, the respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  "a
       consistent victim of domestic violence" and so on  that  basis  alone
       she could not benefit from the provisions of reg 10(5)(d)(iv). At the
       hearing the appellant herself gave oral evidence of what she  claimed
       to amount to the domestic violence she suffered at the hands  of  her
       former partner. She called two witnesses  also  although  they  added
       very little indeed to the case she sought to make out.

   18. In her oral evidence the  appellant  gave  a  clear,  convincing  and
       demonstrably truthful  account  of  the  difficulties  that  she  had
       encountered during a difficult and  somewhat  turbulent  relationship
       with [NA]. The couple first entered into a relationship as  long  ago
       as 2001 but they separated after  just  six  months  after  which  he
       returned to his previous partner. The relationship  was  subsequently
       resumed and they lived together between 2003 and 2007,  although  the
       appellant  made  regular  visits  to  Brazil,  which  punctuated  the
       continuity of that period of cohabitation.  During  that  period  the
       appellant described her partner as an extremely  jealous  person  who
       would be verbally aggressive towards her, accusing  her  of  flirting
       with other men and of acting like a prostitute and of having  affairs
       with other men, none of  which,  the  appellant  said,  was  true  or
       remotely  justifiable.  The  appellant  described  how   [NA]   would
       frequently grab her arms, sometimes with sufficient  force  to  cause
       bruising and would push her against a wall while shouting at her.  On
       one such occasion her arm was cut as she was pushed  against  a  wall
       socket.

   19. In July 2007, just three months after the residence card  was  issued
       to her, she returned to Brazil  and  while  staying  there  with  her
       family [NA] contacted her and her relatives repeatedly  by  telephone
       or text messages  making  offensive  and  untruthful  allegations  of
       inappropriate behaviour by the appellant. He told the appellant  that
       he would send someone to kill her while she was in  Brazil  and  said
       that because she bore a physical resemblance to her sister it may  be
       that her sister would be killed instead. The  appellant  returned  to
       the United Kingdom in August 2007 and  reported  to  the  police  the
       difficulties she had been experiencing. No  charges  followed  but  a
       police report confirms both that the appellant made such a  complaint
       and that as a result [NA] was offered advice by police.

   20. Despite all that, and despite having been advised by the  police  not
       to have any further contact with [NA], the appellant did subsequently
       resume the relationship but it finally  ended  on  15  February  2009
       when, following a meal at a  restaurant  with  a  man  sharing  their
       accommodation, [NA] accused her of flirting with  him  and,  once  in
       their room, he grabbed her by the neck, tore her clothes, shouted  at
       her and was generally aggressive and abusive. The  following  morning
       the appellant left their home and recognised  that  the  relationship
       had finally come to an end.

   21. In cross examination Mr Whitwell identified some  inconsistencies  or
       contradictions in the evidence that the appellant had given about all
       of this but none of that undermines the cogency of her account, which
       I accept to be true. I have no hesitation in finding as a  fact  that
       the appellant was consistently throughout the relationship  a  victim
       of domestic violence.

   22. However, that is not a complete answer to the question posed  by  reg
       10(5). It must be recognised that the test to be  applied  under  reg
       10(5) is not the same as that under paragraph 289A of the Immigration
       rules. What has to be established to succeed under  para  289A  as  a
       victim of domestic violence is that the appellant:

           "Is able to produce evidence to establish that the  relationship
           was caused to permanently break down ... as a result of domestic
           violence"

       whereas what has to be demonstrated under reg 10(5) is that:

           "the continued right of residence in the United Kingdom  of  the
           person is warranted  by  particularly  difficult  circumstances,
           such as he or another family member  having  been  a  victim  of
           domestic violence while the marriage or  civil  partnership  was
           subsisting."

       Three things may be noted about those two provisions:

        i) a family member seeking to retain a right of residence following
           the end of a relationship with an EEA national does not need  to
           demonstrate, as is the case under the Immigration rules, that it
           was  domestic  violence  that   caused   the   relationship   to
           permanently break down, simply that because of being a victim of
           domestic violence, a continued right of residence is  warranted,
           despite the end of the relationship upon the basis  of  which  a
           residence card was issued;

       ii) although under the rules no exercise of discretion is called for
           on the part of the respondent because once the applicant has met
           the requirements of the rule leave will be granted, the position
           under reg 10(5) is very different because it is not  enough  for
           the applicant to  establish  that  she  has  been  a  victim  of
           domestic violence. In  order  to  succeed,  the  applicant  must
           satisfy the respondent that the nature of the domestic  violence
           has  been  such  as  to   amount   to   particularly   difficult
           circumstances such as to warrant a continued right of residence.
            That calls for a judgement to be made by  the  respondent.  The
           applicant who established  that  she  has  been  the  victim  of
           domestic violence has no entitlement to  a  continued  right  of
           residence;

      iii) reg 10(5)(d)(iv) provides for  the  possibility  of  a  retained
           right of residence following domestic violence only where it has
           arisen  during  the  subsistence  of   a   marriage   or   civil
           partnership. That this is not extended to those who have been in
           a durable relationship is notable.

The appellant's position under the EEA regs.

   23. It is not in dispute between the parties that the EEA regs, on  their
       face, do not enable the appellant to succeed in her application for a
       residence card, now that she is no longer in a  durable  relationship
       with [NA]. That is because  the  position  is  as  described  by  the
       respondent in refusing the application. The appellant is an EFM  only
       while the durable relationship subsists. Regulation 8(5) is expressed
       in the present tense:

           'A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
           person is the partner of an EEA national  (other  than  a  civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that  he  is  in  a
           durable relationship with the EEA national.'

       Similarly, reg 7(3) reinforces the point that  the  benefits  flowing
       from being in  a  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA  national  are
       available only during the currency of that relationship (the emphasis
       is mine):

           '...  a person who is an extended family  member  and  has  been
           issued with ... a residence card shall be treated as the  family
           member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues
           to satisfy the  conditions  in  regulation  8(2),  (3),  (4)  or
           (5)...'

       As discussed above, it is unambiguously clear from the terms  of  reg
       10 that non EEA nationals who were formerly in a durable  partnership
       with an EEA national were intended to be  excluded  from  eligibility
       for retained rights of residence where that relationship ended before
       a qualifying period of five years had elapsed.  That  is  made  clear
       both by the final phrase of reg 10(5)(d)(iv):

           'the continued right of residence in the United Kingdom  of  the
           person is warrented  by  particularly  difficult  circumstances,
           such as he or another family member  having  been  a  victim  of
           domestic violence while the marriage or  civil  partnership  was
           subsisting.'

       and by the fact that each of the other routes to qualification for  a
       retained right of residence set out in  reg  10(5)  are  specifically
       limited to family members who acquired that status  as  a  result  of
       marriage or a civil partnership.

   24. As we have seen, Mr Plowright submits that the respondent should  not
       have simply applied the EEA  regs,  which  could  lead  only  to  the
       conclusion that the appellant had no retained right of residence  and
       so did not qualify for a permanent residence card,  but  should  have
       had regard to the Directive and the Charter of Fundamental Rights  of
       the European Union and concluded that Article 13(2)(c)  ought  to  be
       read to include durable partners. For the reasons that follow,  I  am
       satisfied that Mr Plowright's argument cannot succeed.

   25. There is a stark contrast between the approach taken in the Directive
       to family members and to EFMs.  Indeed,  in  the  vocabulary  of  the
       Directive  such  persons  are  not  family   members   at   all   but
       "beneficiaries". It can be seen that such persons are "beneficiaries"
       because  providing  that  benefit  facilitates  the  rights  of  free
       movement guaranteed to EEA nationals. Beneficiaries do not derive any
       rights independent of the EEA national,  unlike  family  members  who
       have, in their  own  right,  an  entitlement  to  free  movement  and
       residence in the host member state where their EEA national  relative
       is exercising Treaty rights.

   26. It can be seen from the recitals to the  Directive  that  this  sharp
       distinction between spouses and civil partners  (family  members)  on
       the one hand and durable partners (beneficiaries)  was  unambiguously
       intentional. Recital 5 explains that:

           'The right of all Union  citizens  to  move  and  reside  freely
           within the territory of the Member States should, if it is to be
           exercised under objective conditions of freedom and dignity,  be
           also  granted  to  their   family   members,   irrespective   of
           nationality...'

       While recital  6  makes  clear  that  those  who  are  in  a  durable
       relationship but who do not qualify  as  family  members  are  to  be
       treated differently:

           'In order to maintain the unity of the family in a broader sense
           and without prejudice to the prohibition  of  discrimination  on
           grounds of nationality, the situation of those persons  who  are
           not included in the definition  of  family  members  under  this
           Directive, and who therefore do not enjoy an automatic right  of
           entry and residence in the host Member State, should be examined
           by the host Member State  on  the  basis  of  its  own  national
           legislation, in order to deicide  whether  entry  and  residence
           could be granted to  such  persons,  taking  into  consideration
           their  relationship  with  the  Union  citizen  or   any   other
           circumstances, such as their financial or physical dependence on
           the Union citizen.'

   27. That distinction between family members and EFMs  is  echoed  in  the
       Articles of the Directive.  The  distinction  is  emphasised  by  the
       exclusion of durable partners from the definition of  family  members
       set out in Article 2. Article 3 makes clear  that  the  admission  of
       "beneficiaries" or EFMs is a matter for the domestic  law  of  Member
       States and that it is not a right derived from European law. For  the
       avoidance of any possible doubt, Article 3 opens with  a  reiteration
       of the rights enjoyed by EEA nationals and their family  members,  as
       defined in Article 2, after  which  there  is  provision  for  Member
       States to "facilitate" entry  and  residence  of,  inter  alia,  "the
       partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable relationship,  duly
       attested". Article 3 concludes by saying:

           'The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination
           of the personal circumstances and shall justify  any  denial  of
           entry or residence to these people.'

       Once again, this demonstrates that "these people" do  not  enjoy  any
       right of entry or residence under the terms of the Directive,  simply
       a right to have their application examined and to  be  provided  with
       clear reasons for any refusal of entry or residence.

   28. In the light of this  analysis  of  the  Directive,  it  is  entirely
       unsurprising that Article 13, which provides  for  retention  of  the
       right of residence  by  family  members  in  the  event  of  divorce,
       annulment of marriage or termination of a registered  partnership  is
       inapplicable to those who have been, but are no longer, in a  durable
       relationship with an EEA national. There is, therefore, no  provision
       in the Directive that enables the appellant  to  retain  a  right  of
       residence following the end of her relationship with [NA]  and  there
       is no reason at all to read into Article 13 such a provision  as  its
       exclusion was precisely what was intended.

   29. The  arguments  advanced  by  Mr  Plowright  in  support  of  such  a
       submission do not survive scrutiny. The appellant  cannot  draw  upon
       the Charter of Fundamental Rights as an aid to interpretation of  the
       Directive because that has  already  been  factored  in.  Recital  31
       states:

           'This Directive respects the fundamental rights and freedoms and
           observes the principles recognised in particular by the  Charter
           of Fundamental Rights of the European Union...'

       In any event, there is nothing  in  that  Charter  that  assists  the
       appellant in constructing any rights not specifically made  available
       by the Directive. Article 45 of the Charter states:

           'Freedom of movement and of residence

           1.    Every citizen of the Union  has  the  right  to  move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States.

           2.    Freedom of movement  and  residence  may  be  granted,  in
           accordance with the Treaties, to nationals  of  third  countries
           legally resident in the territory of a Member State.'

       It is the EEA regs, implementing the  provisions  of  the  Directive,
       that determine the basis upon which the appellant is lawfully present
       in the United Kingdom on the basis of her relationship  with  an  EEA
       national.

   30. Mr Plowright placed reliance  upon  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Justice in Netherlands v Ann Florence Reed, a decision that is now of
       some vintage, having been made some twenty years ago.  That  decision
       makes clear (see for example paragraph 26) that  the  "rights"  being
       considered were those of the EEA national  seeking  to  exercise  his
       right of  freedom  of  movement  and  not  those  of  his  "unmarried
       companion" as a durable partner was described. The decision begins by
       stating:

           "Article 10(1) of regulation no 1612/68 cannot be interpreted as
           meaning that the companion,  in  a  stable  relationship,  of  a
           worker who is a national of a member state and  is  employed  in
           the  territory  of  another  member  state   must   in   certain
           circumstances be treated as his "spouse"  for  the  purposes  of
           that provision.

           The possibility for a migrant worker of obtaining permission for
           his unmarried companion to reside with him, where that companion
           is not a national of the  host  member  state,  can  assist  his
           integration in  the  host  state  and  thus  contribute  to  the
           achievement of freedom of movement for  workers.   Consequently,
           that possibility must be regarded as falling within the  concept
           of a social advantage  for  the  purposes  of  Article  7(2)  of
           regulation no 1612/68. It must  therefore  be  conceded  that  a
           member state which grants such an advantage to its own nationals
           cannot refuse to grant it to workers who are nationals of  other
           member states without being guilty of discrimination on  grounds
           of nationality, contrary to Articles 7 and 48 of the Treaty."

       However, it will be seen from this that  the  "social  advantage"  is
       that of the EEA national and not his unmarried companion. Its purpose
       is to ensure that the rights of the EEA  national  are  not  impeded.
       Thus, once the relationship has ended, there is no  social  advantage
       for European  law  to  preserve.  In  any  event,  [NA]  has  secured
       precisely that which was in issue in Ann Florence Reed, which was the
       facilitation of the residence of his  unmarried  partner  while  that
       relationship subsisted.

   31. All of this chimes with the respondent's submission that  EU  law  is
       not engaged in relation to EFMs beyond the  obligations  set  out  in
       Article  3(2)  of  the  Directive,  which  obligations  are   clearly
       discharged by the United Kingdom in implementing the Directive in the
       EEA regs: see also SSHD v Rahman and others Case no C-83/11.

   32. Nor, in my judgment, is there any merit  in  the  submission  founded
       upon analogy with para 289A of the Immigration Rules. That is because
       these are two wholly different regimes which cannot  be  equated.  An
       applicant for indefinite leave to remain pursuant to  para  298A  has
       already met the significantly more demanding criteria of the rules in
       securing leave to enter or remain. There is no reason  why  a  person
       present in the United Kingdom having been granted a residence card on
       the basis of a durable partnership that has come  to  an  end  should
       have the benefit of para 298A while being excused the  need  to  meet
       also the requirements for the initial grant of leave under paras  282
       or 295 of the Immigration Rules.

   33. For these reasons, the decision  to  refuse  the  application  for  a
       residence card, however framed, was correctly and  lawfully  refused.
       The applicant did not have any retained right of residence and so her
       application for a permanent residence card was bound to  be  refused.
       If considered as an application for a residence card as an EFM it was
       also bound to fail as the appellant no longer met the requirements of
       reg 8.

Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to entertain an appeal by an EFM?

   34. In the recently reported case of Sala  (  EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal  )
       [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal decided  that  there  is  no
       statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
       State not to grant a Residence Card to a person  claiming  to  be  an
       Extended Family Member. In this appeal the  appellant  claims  to  be
       someone who is entitled to be treated as if she were a family  member
       because she had been granted a residence card as an EFM  and  applied
       for a permanent residence card under reg 18 of the EEA Regs. However,
       as the respondent did not accept, correctly, that the  appellant  had
       access to any retained right of residence under reg 10,  she  treated
       the application as one being made by someone claiming to  be  an  EFM
       for a residence card and refused it on the  basis  that  she  was  no
       longer in a durable relationship with an EEA national. Therefore,  on
       at least one view, the case falls within the ambit of Sala and I must
       explain why, despite that, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  does
       have a statutory right of appeal.

   35. The reasoning that led the panel in Sala to the  conclusion  that  an
       EFM has no right of appeal against refusal to grant a residence  card
       may be summarised as follows.

        a. First, the  tribunal  recognised  the  distinction  between  the
           position of family members and EFMs. Family members have a right
           of residence regardless of whether a residence card  is  issued.
           Where a residence card is issued that is simply  in  recognition
           of  a  right  of  residence  that  arises  under  European  law.
           Conversely,  no  right  of  residence  arises   for   EFMs.   An
           application having been made, the respondent  has  a  discretion
           under reg 17(4) as to whether or not to issue a residence  card.
           It is the issue of the card that creates the right of residence.
           (para 19);

        b. Once a residence card has been issued to  an  EFM  she  will  be
           treated as a family member  but  only  while  she  continues  to
           satisfy the conditions of reg 8  which  resulted  in  her  being
           accepted to be an EFM. (para 24);

        c.  Family  members  derive  their  right  of  residence  from  the
           Directive and so from EU  law  whereas  EFMs  derive  rights  of
           admission and residence from the procedural right to have  their
           applications determined following the extensive  examination  of
           their personal  circumstances  demanded  by  reg  17(5)  and  an
           exercise of discretion in their favour by the SSHD. (para 26);

        d. Rights of appeal are set out in reg 26. An appeal  lies  against
           an EEA decision. An EEA decision  is  defined  by  reg  2(1)  as
           follows:

           "'EEA decision' means a decision under  these  Regulations  that
           concerns -

                (a)    a person's entitlement to be admitted to  the  United
                    Kingdom;

                (b)    a person's entitlement to  be  issued  with  or  have
                    renewed,  or  not  to  have  revoked,   a   registration
                    certificate, residence card, derivative residence  card,
                    document certifying  permanent  residence  or  permanent
                    residence card;

                (c)    a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or

                (d)    the cancellation, pursuant to regulation  20A,  of  a
                    person's right to reside in the United Kingdom; but does
                    not include  decisions  under  regulations  24AA  (human
                    rights considerations  and  interim  orders  to  suspend
                    removal) or 29AA (temporary admission in order to submit
                    case in person); ..."

        e. At para 36 the Tribunal said that, as a consequence, whether the
           appellant, who sought a residence card as a durable partner, had
           a right of appeal depends upon there being first a decision made
           under the EEA regs and  second  that  the  decision  concerns  a
           person's entitlement to be issued with a residence card.

        f. Whereas a family member who satisfies the requirements of reg  7
           has an entitlement to be issued with a residence card, a durable
           partner, having met the requirements of reg 8(5) must rely  upon
           an exercise of discretion in her favour by the respondent  under
           reg 17(5). This exercise of discretion  "sits  between"  meeting
           the requirements of reg 8(5) and the outcome of whether or not a
           residence card is issued. Therefore,  this  cannot  properly  be
           regarded  as  an  entitlement.  The  only  entitlement  is  that
           discretion  is  exercised  lawfully  in  accordance   with   the
           Directive. (para 46);

        g. As the decision under  challenge  did  not  concern  a  person's
           entitlement to a residence card it  was  not  therefore  an  EEA
           decision and so there was no right of appeal available.

   36. A major difficulty with this reasoning was presented by  reg  26(2A),
       which was introduced by way of an amendment to  reg  26  in  November
       2012. This provides that:

           '(2A) If a person claims to be in a durable relationship with an
                EEA national he  may  not  appeal  under  these  Regulations
                unless he produces -

                (a)    a passport; and

                (b)    either -

                    (i)      an EEA permit; or

                    (ii)     sufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of
                        State that he is in  a  relationship  with  an  EEA
                        national.'

       Why would Parliament have inserted into the EEA regs a limitation  on
       a right of appeal if it did not exist? The Tribunal  considered  that
       it was not necessary to address this concern  because  of  the  legal
       principle that an amendment cannot be  had  regard  to  in  order  to
       interpret the meaning of the regulations as originally enacted. (para
       64). In any event, the Tribunal considered that the purpose in making
       this amendment to the regs was unclear. (para 72)

   37. A difficulty with the approach taken  by  the  Tribunal  in  Sala  is
       illustrated by reg 10(5). This appellant is a durable partner and  so
       treated as a family member only for as long as she continues to be in
       a durable relationship and holds a valid residence card. However,  if
       an applicant is a spouse, and so a family member pursuant to  Article
       2 of the Directive and reg 7 of the EEA regs, she retains the  status
       of a family member after the marital relationship has broken down and
       cohabitation has ended. She may seek a retained right of residence as
       a victim of domestic violence under  reg  10(5)(d)(iv).  As  we  have
       seen, such a retained right of residence is not  an  entitlement  but
       something that will be provided if the respondent considers that  the
       domestic violence that has occurred is such to amount to particularly
       difficult circumstances such as  to  warrant  a  continued  right  of
       residence. If the approach taken in Sala is correct, that would  mean
       that the spouse, who remains a family member, would have no right  of
       appeal.

   38. It is, though, in regulation 26(3)(b)(iii) that  we  find  a  further
       answer to the question of jurisdiction in this appeal:

           '(3)  If a person to whom paragraph (2) does not apply  [i.e.  a
           non-EEA national] claims to be a family member who has  retained
           the right of residence or the family member or  relative  of  an
           EEA national he may not appeal under these Regulations unless he
           produces-

                (a)    ... a passport; and

                (b)    either-

                    (i)      an EEA family permit;

                    (ia)     a qualifying EEA State residence card;

                    (ii)     proof that he is the family member or  relative
                    of an EEA national; or

                    (iii)    in the case of a person claiming to be a family
                    member who has retained the right  of  residence,  proof
                    that he was a family member of the relevant person.'

       This appellant is a person who claims to  be  a  family  member  even
       though  plainly  she  is  not,  following  the  end  of  the  durable
       relationship. But she has the most cogent of proof  that  she  was  a
       family member, or at least treated as  one,  as  she  was  previously
       issued with a residence card. It has to be recognised that reg  26(3)
       is not as drafted in the original version of the regulations  but  as
       the qualifying criteria now found in reg 26(3)(b)(iii) was  contained
       within the regulation as originally drafted, that is of  no  account.
       This means that although this appellant has no entitlement to  either
       a retained right of residence or to a permanent right  of  residence,
       she does have a statutory appeal against the respondent's decision.

Summary of conclusions

   39. The appellant, having been  issued  with  a  residence  card  as  the
       durable partner of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  in  the
       United Kingdom was treated as a family member while she continued  to
       satisfy the conditions of reg 8(5). When the relationship came to  an
       end on 15 February 2015 she ceased to satisfy the conditions  of  reg
       8(5) and so ceased to be treated as a family member.

   40. Although a right of residence arises from the issue to an  EFM  of  a
       residence card, that right does not continue for the term of the card
       if the relationship comes to an end. That is because  the  qualifying
       criteria of reg 8(1) and (5) is expressed in the present tense, as is
       reg 7(3) so that once a person ceased to satisfy  the  conditions  in
       reg 8(5) he or she ceases to be both an EFM and to be  treated  as  a
       family member. That is why the EFM is told, on issue of the residence
       card, that he must  report  to  the  respondent  any  change  of  the
       circumstances that led to qualification for its issue.

   41. There is no provision for retained rights of  residence  for  durable
       partners following breakdown of the  relationship.  Reg  10(5)(d)(iv)
       provides for retained rights of residence following domestic violence
       but only for those formally in a marriage or civil  partnership  with
       an EEA national.

   42. There is no reason to justify the "reading in" to Article 13  of  the
       Directive of a provision  extending  its  reach  to  those  who  were
       formerly in a durable partnership that has come to an end.

   43. Although, therefore, this was an application that was bound to  fail,
       the appellant does have a  right  of  appeal  under  reg  26(3)(b)(3)
       because she is a person who claims to be  a  family  member  who  had
       retained a right of residence  (even  though  she  is  not)  and  has
       provided proof that she was the family member (being treated as  such
       pursuant to reg 7(3)) of an EEA national.

Summary of decision:

   44. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error  of  law
       error of law and his decision is set aside.

   45. The Upper Tribunal  substitutes  a  fresh  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appellant's appeal.




                               Signed   [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 13 October 2016
