
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22268/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2014              |On 27 November 2014             |
|Oral Determination              |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE F LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ALEXANDER NOSULYA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 17 July
    2014 in which she allowed Mr Nosulya's appeal against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State made on 22 May 2014 to refuse  to  grant  him  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right of residence as a spouse of
    an EEA national, pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis that  there
    were discrepancies in the  documentary  evidence  as  to  when  he  had
    commenced employment, the contract being dated 10 April  2012  but  was
    signed on 4 April 2014.  It was noted also that  there  was   no  other
    evidence such as bank statements, P60s or wage slips as confirmation of
    employment.

 3. The respondent appealed against  that  decision,  requesting  that  the
    matter be dealt with on the papers without an oral hearing.  The matter
    then came before Judge Foudy on that basis and  she  concluded,  having
    had regard to the contract of employment  dated  10  June  2012  and  a
    letter from Marriot Hotel in Park  Lane  dated  27  May  2014  that  Mr
    Nosulya's wife was employed.  The judge noted also that the contract of
    employment clearly states at paragraph [3] that  the  employment  would
    commence on 24 June 2012  and  therefore  there  was  no  inconsistency
    between the contract and the information provided by the respondent and
    his wife.   Judge  Foudy  therefore  concluded  that  the  respondent's
    partner was exercising treaty rights and allowed the appeal.

 4. The appellant sought leave to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  there  was
    "clearly no up-to-date evidence such as wage slips or a letter from the
    employer to state that the  sponsor  was  still  employed  by  Marriott
    Hotels".  The grounds also pointed out that there was no bundle from Mr
    Nosulya as Judge Foudy had noted.

 5. When the matter came before us we noted that, contrary  to  what  Judge
    Foudy had noted, there was in fact a bundle produced by the  respondent
    received on 30 May 2014.  It is unclear why Judge Foudy said that there
    was no bundle but it appears to have been a slip on her part as  indeed
    is her dating of the decision as 24 January 2014. In any  event,  given
    her references to material therein, she must have considered it.

 6. The bundle contains a letter, which contains the  contract  indicating,
    as Judge Foudy noted, that Mr Nosulaya's employment was to commence  on
    24 June 2012.  It also contains a letter from her employer dated 27 May
    2014 which confirms that she continues to  be  employed  and  has  been
    since 24 June 2012 and that her position is  permanent.   In  addition,
    there are attached a P60 for the tax year to 5  April  2014  indicating
    that he continues to be employed by Marriott Hotels; there  is  also  a
    P60 for the preceding tax year which shows the same also.

 7. Mr Tufan made no submission that these documents were not  genuine  and
    in the circumstances, we are satisfied that  Judge  Foudy  was  on  the
    documents  before  her  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    respondent's wife continued to  be  employed  at  all  material  times.
    Accordingly, we find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not involve the making of an error of law and we uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and we uphold it.



Signed        Date: 26 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
