
[pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal number:
IA/22662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |      Determination         |
|                                     |Promulgated                 |
|On August 3, 2015                    |      On August 13, 2015    |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MR SALEH ALINIA
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Ms Rothwell, Counsel, instructed by BMAP
For the Respondent: Mr Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. On April  12,  2014  the  appellant
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier One (Entrepreneur) Migrant.   The
    respondent  refused  the  application  on  May  8,  2014  finding  that
    mandatory documents had not been submitted. A decision  to  remove  him
    was also  taken  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on  May  22,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  He  argued
    the documents had been submitted and  removal  would  also  breach  his
    right to private life.

 3. The matter came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McMahon  on
    January 27, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on February 10, 2015 the
    Tribunal upheld the refusal and dismissed the appellant's appeal  under
    both the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  on  February  18,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal  was  initially
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes on April 9, 2015 but
    following renewed grounds Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun granted permission
    to appeal on the grounds it was arguable the Tribunal had erred.

 5. A Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent on July 1, 2015.

 6. The appellant was in attendance before me and was  represented  as  set
    out above.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Ms Rothwell adopted her colleague's grounds of appeal and submitted the
    Tribunal had erred in two areas. Firstly, she  submitted  the  Tribunal
    had erred by failing to recognise the appellant had an active business.
    She referred me to Paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) and reminded me what evidence
    had been submitted. She argued the appellant had  demonstrated  he  was
    actively running a business because he had done an MA in  his  area  of
    work, completed post study work and had demonstrated he had  set  up  a
    company, registered himself properly and opened a bank account. He  had
    been sourcing work when his application was submitted and following the
    decision in Shebl (Entrepreneur; proof of contracts) [2014] UKUT  00216
    (IAC) she invited me to find the appellant's  actions  demonstrated  he
    met paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv)(2). Secondly, she argued that  the  Tribunal
    had erred by  finding  removal  was  proportionate.  The  Tribunal  had
    accepted at the date of decision and/or hearing his business was active
    and fully functional and  the  conclusion  in  paragraph  [23]  of  its
    determination undermined the Tribunal's finding on this point.

 9. Mr Clarke adopted the Rule 24 response and submitted there was no error
    on either ground. The Rules set out what was required and the  Tribunal
    refused to accept that the evidence submitted  demonstrated  an  active
    business. The appellant relied on  the  bank  statement  (page  73)  as
    evidence of an active  business  along  with  HMRC  and  Company  House
    paperwork but the Tribunal was entitled to  find  the  evidence  merely
    showed the appellant was setting up a business as against demonstrating
    an active business. The Tribunal quite properly distinguished the facts
    of Shebl as in that case there  was  evidence  of  trading  before  the
    Tribunal. It was a leap to far to find the bank letter showed  activity
    and there was no error. The Tribunal considered article  8  and  whilst
    not setting out the specific requirements of Section 117B of  the  2002
    Act this was not an error as the Tribunal in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015]
    UKUT 90 (IAC) made clear it was not an error of law to fail to refer to
    ss.117A-117D considerations if the judge has applied the test he or she
    was  supposed  to  apply  according  to  its  terms;  what  matters  is
    substance, not form. The Tribunal considered all of  the  evidence  and
    bearing in mind he had no expectation to be allowed to remain as a Tier
    One migrant when he submitted his latest application coupled  with  the
    fact he did not meet the  Rules  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find
    removal was proportionate.

10. Ms Rothwell reminded me that at the date of refusal the  appellant  was
    trading and the Tribunal's finding in paragraph  [23]  amounted  to  an
    error in law.

11. I reserved my decision and advised the parties I would issue a  written
    decision on the matters argued before me.

    CONSIDERATION AND FINDINGS

12. The appellant came to the United Kingdom to study and  having  obtained
    an MA in landscape architecture from Greenwich University he applied to
    work as a Tier One (post study work) migrant. Shortly before this leave
    expired he submitted his current application.

13. The Tribunal accepted at the date of application he had:

     a. He had provided evidence that he set his  company  up  in  February
        2014.
     b. Prepared a detailed business Plan.
     c. Opened a  bank  account  with  national  Westminster  Bank  in  his
        company's name.
     d. There was marketing material

14. The Tribunal concluded in paragraph  [14]  of  its  decision  that  the
    business was not actively trading.

15. Ms Rothwell has argued that the Tribunal erred in its approach  because
    taking the  evidence  together  there  was  evidence  he  was  actively
    trading.

16. The steps taken by the appellant were steps he had to take to start his
    business. He had to register his company with Companies  House  and  he
    had to demonstrate he was a director  of  his  business.  Any  business
    needed a bank account and the mere opening of an account does not  mean
    a person is actively trading. The appellant was unable to point to  any
    "contracts" or any source of income for his business.

17. The Tribunal in Shebl dealt with a business that demonstrated  purchase
    orders, pro-forma  invoices  and  sales/commercial  invoices.  When  he
    submitted his application the appellant's business had  not  progressed
    this far as it was in its infancy. The appellant had set up  a  company
    but had  not  been  engaged  in  any  work  when  his  application  was
    submitted. This distinguishes this case from the  facts  considered  in
    Shebl. The bank statement showed  no  history  and  there  was  nothing
    before the respondent when the application was submitted  to  show  the
    business was active. The fact the business was subsequently  active  is
    not the test  to  be  applied  and  the  Tribunal  identified  this  in
    paragraph [14] of its decision.

18. In the circumstances, the Tribunal was entitled to make the finding  it
    did under the Rules and the dismissal of the application  was  open  to
    it.

19. The Tribunal did not consider the application under paragraph 276ADE HC
    395 and this was neither argued before the Tribunal nor raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal. The Tribunal considered the appeal under  article  8
    ECHR.

20. At paragraph [20] of its decision the Tribunal reminded itself the real
    issue was whether the refusal was proportionate. The Tribunal noted  he
    was financially self-supporting and he had never been a burden  on  the
    state and throughout his time in the United Kingdom he  had  sought  to
    comply with all immigration requirements. He was of good character  and
    in reasonably good health.

21. The Tribunal did not specifically refer to Section 117B of the 2002 Act
    but as Mr Clarke has already submitted this is not a legal  requirement
    as long as he has applied the test.  More  recently,  the  Tribunal  in
    Forman (ss117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 reminded us that the
    public interest in firm immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by  the
    consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8  ECHR  has
    at no time been a financial burden on the state or  is  self-sufficient
    or is likely to remain  so  indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these
    factors is that where they are  not  present  the  public  interest  is
    fortified. The list of considerations contained in section 117B of  the
    2002 Act is not exhaustive. A court or tribunal  is  entitled  to  take
    into account additional considerations, provided that they are relevant
    in the sense that they properly bear on the public  interest  question.
    In cases where the provisions of sections 117B of the 2002  Act  arise,
    the decision of the Tribunal must demonstrate that they have been given
    full effect.

22. In considering article 8 the Tribunal demonstrated that  it  was  aware
    the appellant  spoke  English  and  was  financially  independent.  The
    Tribunal also had regard to the appellant's  immigration  history.  The
    issue is  whether  the  Tribunal's  recommendation  in  paragraph  [23]
    undermined his proportionality assessment and whether the Tribunal  had
    regard to Section 117B factors.

23. I am satisfied that the Tribunal had in mind Section 117B  and  made  a
    number of  positive  findings  on  the  appellant's  behalf  but  those
    positive findings, set out in paragraph [20] of its  decision,  do  not
    negate the fact that the maintenance of effective  immigration  control
    is in the public interest. If he did not speak English or  was  reliant
    on the State benefits or others for funding then they would be  adverse
    factors but simply because he is not in that position does not  fortify
    his claim.

24. The Tribunal considered the decision of Tekle v SSHD [2008]  EWHC  3064
    (Admin) and had regard to all of the factors  identified  in  paragraph
    [8] of the grounds  of  appeal.  The  fact  the  Tribunal  believed  he
    deserved an opportunity to regularise his status  does  not  alter  the
    fact the Rules were not met and he had come here as a student  and  had
    subsequently been  allowed  to  carry  out  post  study  work.  Neither
    category of visa gave him any expectation that he would be  allowed  to
    stay unless he satisfied the Rules.

25. The findings on proportionality were open to the Tribunal and there  is
    no material error in its approach to either the  Immigration  Rules  or
    article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


26. There was no material error.  The original decision shall stand.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
