
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22601/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December, 2017                         |On 15th January 2018          |
|Corrected, signed and sent                    |                              |
|to Promulgation on 12th January, 2018         |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              md towhidul islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Maqsood
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 4th  April  1987.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 23rd March, 2008 with  limited  leave  to
    enter as a student valid until 30th June  2011.   He  was  subsequently
    granted an extension of stay in the same category until  30th  November
    2014.  Two days before that leave was due to expire he made application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human  rights  grounds  on
    the basis of his Article 8 rights.  That application was refused by the
    respondent on 22nd May 2015 as a result of which the appellant appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   His appeal was listed for hearing on 26th  September  2016,  at  Taylor
    House and he wrote to the Tribunal on 15th  requesting  an  adjournment
    following an accident which took place on 3rd September 2016, in  which
    his right leg was injured.  He included  with  that  letter,  a  report
    prepared by Professor S Lingam of Harley Street Medical Express  Clinic
    dated 13th September 2016, confirming that the  appellant's  right  leg
    was plastered and bandaged, and it was likely that  his  leg  had  been
    fractured.  The letter enclosed other evidence as well, as a result  of
    it consideration the  matter  was  adjourned,  and  the  appellant  was
    notified.

3.   He was also informed that he must in future  provide  medical  evidence
    of his fitness to attend court on any further occasion if he required a
    further adjournment.  The appeal was relisted for hearing on 6th  March
    2016.  On 15th February 2016, he wrote asking for a further adjournment
    due to a worsening of his health condition.   He  stated  that  he  was
    bedridden and  that  doctors  were  considering  performing  a  further
    operation on 27th February.  He was unable to stand and had been unable
    to prepare his witness statement and appeal  bundle.   He  did  however
    provide some  evidence,  including  a  letter  of  13th  February  from
    Professor Lingam informing the appellant  that  he  should  request  an
    adjournment because of his worsening health condition and the fact that
    he needed a leg operation by the end of February.  There was  a  letter
    also from Professor Lingam addressed to whom it  may  concern,  stating
    that the appellant continued to  feel  unwell  and  that  it  had  been
    decided to "go for a bone operation on Monday 27th February, 2017.

4.   The request for an adjournment was refused.   The  appellant  wrote  to
    the Tribunal on 1st March with an urgent adjournment request stating he
    had undergone the operation on 27th February and was in severe pain and
    bedridden.   He enclosed a further letter from Professor  Lingam  dated
    1st March 2017, confirming that the appellant had had an  operation  on
    his leg and that normally a patient would need intensive  rest  for  at
    least five or six months.  The request for an adjournment  was  refused
    on 3rd March 2017, by Judge Shaerf who was concerned that there was  no
    evidence  from  the  surgeon  or  hospital  where  the  operation   was
    performed.  As  a  result,  directions  were  sent  to  the  appellant.
    Unfortunately, those directions were not sent until very  late  in  the
    day and I am told were not received by the appellant until the  day  of
    the hearing.

5.   The judge decided to proceed to hear the appeal in the absence  of  the
    appellant and in doing so made a material error of law.  It  was  clear
    from the evidence before the judge that the appellant was  in  need  of
    some form of operation on his  leg  and  there  was  a  letter  from  a
    professor,  indicating  that  the  appellant  was  to  undergo  a  bone
    operation on Monday 27th February.  The same professor  indicated  that
    after this type of surgery normally a patient would need intensive rest
    for five or six months.  I do not suppose for one minute the  professor
    meant that for five or six months the appellant needed to remain in bed
    and would not be fit enough to attend court, but clearly the closer  to
    date of the operation the less mobile the appellant could  be  expected
    to be.

6.   I believe that on Monday  6th  March  it  should  have  been  blatantly
    apparent to the judge (assuming he had read all the correspondence that
    I have referred to) that it was likely  that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to attend the hearing so soon after an operation on  a  bone  in
    his leg and he should have adjourned the matter.

7.   I therefore set aside the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Spicer.  The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    hearing before a judge other than Judge Spicer.  I would have heard the
    appeal myself today, but for the fact that no witnesses have  appeared.
    There will be four witnesses and I suggest that three hours  should  be
    allowed for the hearing of the appeal.  A Bengali interpreter should be
    available.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


