

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal number:
IA/22314/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |      Determination         |
|                                     |Promulgated                 |
|On January 6, 2015                   |      On January 8, 2015    |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                            mr SURESH SUBRAMANIAM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Capel, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born December 4, 1989, is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.  The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom on June  11,  2011  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student. His leave was valid until March 30, 2014.  On  March
    28, 2014 he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    student but the respondent refused his application on May 2,  2014  and
    at the same time took a decision to remove him  by  way  of  directions
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 20, 2014 and
    on October 7, 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Blandy (hereinafter
    referred to as the  "FtTJ")  heard  his  appeal  and  in  determination
    promulgated on October 9, 2014 he refused his appeal on  the  basis  he
    had failed to satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  no
    human rights claim had been advanced.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal  on  October  15,  2014  and  on
    November 20, 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchinson
    gave permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that  the
    FtTJ had erred by possibly not dealing  with  all  of  the  appellant's
    claims.

 4. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  on  that  date  the
    appellant was not in attendance but  was  represented.  Solicitors  had
    written to the Tribunal informing the Tribunal they were instructed and
    counsel confirmed that the solicitors had spoken to  the  appellant.  I
    agreed that Miss Capel could represent the appellant's interests.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 5. Miss Capel requested an adjournment on the basis her client  was  unfit
    to attend the hearing due  to  having  recently  been  discharged  from
    hospital. Mr Wilding submitted that the appellant had submitted his own
    grounds of appeal and the Tribunal was capable of determining an  error
    in law without him being in attendance.


 6. In considering the adjournment request I have had regard to Regulations
    2 and 5 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (as
    amended).

 7. I was satisfied that Miss Capel was able to deal with whether the  FtTJ
    had materially erred although I indicated that if there was an error  I
    would consider adjourning the matter to another date. A similar request
    for an adjournment had been made and refused on January 5, 2015 and had
    been dealt with administratively. Whilst I noted  some  documents  that
    were unreadable were now in fact viewable the issue in  this  case  was
    not  the  appellant's  current  medical  condition  but   whether   the
    appellant's grounds of appeal had any merit. I was  satisfied  that  as
    counsel had not been in the original hearing she had  to  rely  on  the
    grounds filed and there was no reason  to  adjourn  the  error  of  law
    hearing for the appellant to be in attendance. I therefore refused  the
    adjournment request.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Miss Capel relied on the appellant's grounds of  appeal  and  submitted
    that he had raised mental health, risk on return and  private  life  at
    the earlier hearing. She noted the court and presenting officer  record
    referred to the appellant stating in oral evidence he could not  return
    home and she submitted this should have alerted the FtTJ to  issues  of
    possible persecution and/or serious harm. Although the issues were  not
    raised in any real detail it was incumbent on the FtTJ to  have  regard
    to the fact he was unrepresented and consider  all  avenues  of  appeal
    even though he told the FtTJ he did not want  to  pursue  a  claim  for
    asylum. The FtTJ failed to question the appellant or give  reasons  for
    dismissing his article 8 claim.

 9. Mr Wilding submitted neither the presenting officer's  nor  the  FtTJ's
    notes corroborated the appellant's claim that he had argued article  8,
    mental health or risk of persecution. Although  his  ground  of  appeal
    raised article 8 he did not put any evidence  forward  to  support  his
    claim. The FtTJ dealt with  all  matters  placed  before  him  and  his
    decision was open to him.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. The FtTJ kept a written note of the proceedings. Those notes  confirmed
    his evidence only concerned why he did not meet the Rules including the
    fact why he felt the college would not accept him.  He  then  told  the
    FtTJ that all last year he had been trying hard and he  felt  he  could
    not return to Sri Lanka. He made it clear he did not claim asylum as he
    did not want to. The presenting officer's note was similar in content.

11. Miss Capel invited me to find the reference  to  him  being  unable  to
    return to  Sri  Lanka  as  evidence  that  he  was  in  fear  of  being
    persecuted. I am unable to make that finding,  as  neither  the  FtTJ's
    notes nor the presenting officer's notes support  that  assertion.  The
    appellant spoke of his efforts to study and I read the notes as  if  he
    had studied and worked hard here and was therefore unable to return  to
    Sri Lanka.

12. Whilst there is a reference to asylum the appellant makes it  clear  he
    had not applied for asylum,  as  he  did  not  want  to  make  such  an
    application. There was no reference in the  record  of  proceedings  to
    persecution or any mental health issues.

13.  The  available  evidence  simply  does  not  support  the  appellant's
    submission that the FtTJ failed to consider his mental  health  or  any
    asylum or humanitarian claims.

14. The court record specifically confirms that the appellant did not  wish
    to pursue an asylum claim at that hearing. I am further satisfied  that
    decision also extends to humanitarian protection and any mental  health
    claim.

15. The appellant has provided some evidence that suggests he is now unwell
    and that may well be the case  although  a  more  substantive  document
    would be needed to support a claim of ill health. The appellant made no
    reference to his mental health and whilst I note  he  was  admitted  to
    hospital on December 19 and remained there as an  inpatient  until  his
    release on December 30, 2014 this  does  not  mean  he  raised  medical
    issues before the FtTJ. Neither the court  record  nor  the  presenting
    officer's note supports this claim.

16. Mr Wilding submitted the content of his grounds of appeal  amounted  to
    nothing more than a "wish list" of claims and I am satisfied  that  the
    grounds do not reflect what happened at the earlier hearing.

17. I am told the appellant has an appointment about his  asylum  claim  on
    January 9, 2015 and that is clearly the correct place for that claim to
    be pursued.

18. He raised private life in his original grounds of appeal. There  is  no
    evidence that he argued anything other than the  mere  fact  he  was  a
    student and that related to why his application had  been  refused.  In
    the absence of any other evidence the FtTJ would have had no  basis  to
    allow an article 8 claim bearing in the decision of  Nasim  and  others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC). At  paragraph  [20]  the  Tribunal
    stated in that case-

         "We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others is
         a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."

19. Any private life claim would not have satisfied the  Immigration  Rules
    and there was no basis to allow the appeal outside of the  Rules  based
    on the evidence presented and in light of available case law.


20. I am satisfied that there was no material error.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose an error.  The
    original decision shall stand.

22. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    such order was made in the First-tier and I see no reason to make  such
    an order now.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
