
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22411/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AKASH SAINI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Expert Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent is a citizen of India born on 6 March 1990 who has been
    in the UK since 2011. On 15 November 2014 he married a woman whose
    father is a Polish national. On 16 December 2014 he applied for a
    residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006
    Regulations") as a family member of an EEA national (his father in
    law).

 2. The Secretary of State rejected the application on the basis that the
    respondent's marriage was one of convenience that was entered into for
    the purpose of remaining in the UK and therefore he was not a family
    member under Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations. The respondent
    appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.

 3. Judge Hussain found that it was a misnomer for the Secretary of State
    to decide the application under Regulation 7, which concerns "family
    members", as the respondent's case was that he was an "extended family
    member" of an EEA national under Regulation 8. The judge then proceeded
    to consider whether the marriage between the respondent and his wife
    was one of convenience and concluded that it was not. Having reached
    this finding, the judge allowed the appeal.

 4. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred in law because once he
    found the respondent was not in a marriage of convenience he was
    required to consider whether the respondent met the definition of an
    extended family member under Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations.

 5. Before me, Mr Singh argued, firstly, that following Sala (EFMs: Right
    of Appeal) 2016 UKUT 00411 (IAC) I should find an error of law on the
    ground that there is no statutory right of appeal in this case.
    Secondly, he argued that the judge had failed to consider the factors
    in Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations that are relevant to the
    question of whether the respondent is an extended family member.
    Thirdly, he argued that the judge was not, in any event, entitled to
    allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and could only have found
    that the decision was not in accordance with law as the Secretary of
    State had yet to exercise her discretion.

 6. Mr Ahmed argued that that as the Secretary of State's refusal decision
    was solely concerned with the question of whether there was a marriage
    of convenience there was no error in the judge's approach which was to
    deal with that issue. He noted that the decision predates Sala and
    submitted that the factual findings should stand in order that the
    Secretary of State should consider its discretion under Regulation 8 on
    the basis of those findings.

Consideration

 7. Although there has been a longstanding assumption that there is a right
    of appeal under Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations against a
    decision of the Secretary of State to not grant a residence card under
    Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations to a person claiming to be an
    extended family member of an EEA national, the Upper Tribunal panel in
    Sala has made clear that there is no such right. Accordingly, for the
    reasons given in Sala, with which I agree, the respondent did not have
    a right of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision and the
    First-tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 8. The judge's decision was made before Sala was promulgated and therefore
    the judge cannot be faulted for proceeding on the basis that there was
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal. However, for the reasons given in
    Sala, there was no jurisdiction and it was an error of law to proceed
    on the basis that there was.

 9. This finding is sufficient to dispose of the matter. However, for
    completeness, and in any event, I find that the judge made two further
    errors of law.

10. Regulation 8 sets out a number of conditions that a person must satisfy
    to meet the definition of being an "extended family member". The judge
    failed to consider whether any of these applied to the respondent and
    instead allowed the appeal on the basis that the respondent is in a
    genuine marriage with the daughter of an EEA national. This is a clear
    error of law as the respondent's marriage cannot, of itself, bring him
    within any of the conditions specified in Regulation 8.

11. A further error arises from the judge allowing the appeal when the
    issuing of a residence card to an extended family member is at the
    Secretary of State's discretion. If the judge was satisfied the
    respondent was an extended family member then (leaving aside the
    jurisdiction point) the correct course of action was to allow the
    appeal as not being in accordance with the law, leaving the matter of
    how to exercise that discretion to the Secretary of State. See Ihemedu
    (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [20111] UKUT 340 (IAC).



Decision

12. The First-Tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

13. Given the absence of jurisdiction, it was an error of law to hear the
    appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

14. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by dismissing the
    respondent's appeal as he does not have a statutory right of appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to not grant him a residence
    card as an extended family member of an EEA national.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 22 November 2016              |

