
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
ia/22749/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 February 2016                        |On 17 March 2016               |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                nadeem ahmed
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson of Counsel (Direct Access)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manuell promulgated on 27 July 2015 in which he  allowed
    Mr Ahmed's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department refusing to issue a permanent residence  card  pursuant
    to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Ahmed  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent and Mr Ahmed as the Appellant.


3.   The Appellant's application for permanent  residence  was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 14 May
    2014.  The refusal  was  based  essentially  on  two  matters;  one  in
    relation to the circumstances of the Appellant's  former  partner,  and
    one in relation to the Appellant's own circumstances. It is the  latter
    matter that is the subject of consideration before the  Upper  Tribunal
    at the present time.


4.   It  was  the  Respondent's  case  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he met the requirements of regulation 10(6)(a) - which
    is  applicable  by  reason  of  regulation  10(5)(c)  -  and  in  those
    circumstances had  not  demonstrated  an  entitlement  to  a  permanent
    residence card.  In this regard the RFRL is in these terms:

         "In  addition  to  this  in  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of
         regulation 10(6) you also need to provide evidence that  since  the
         date of your divorce you have been a worker, a self employed person
         or a self sufficient person. As evidence of this you have  provided
         3 brief tax calculations for years 2011, 2012 and 2013 and personal
         bank statements.  This is insufficient evidence to  show  that  you
         have been either a  worker,  a  self  employed  person  or  a  self
         sufficient person.  Therefore you fail to meet the requirements  of
         regulation 10(6)."



5.   In this context it is important to note that  the  date  of  divorce  -
    which is the date from which the Appellant needs to demonstrate that he
    himself was a worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-sufficient
    person - was 20 March 2013, and the supporting documents submitted with
    the application, in particular the tax documents, only went up  to  the
    end of the tax year in 2013 i.e. just a couple of weeks after the  date
    of divorce.




6.   It seems that the Appellant was alert to the evidential lacuna  because
    in the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  addressing
    regulation 10(6), it was pleaded on his behalf that he would  endeavour
    to  provide  further  evidence  of  his  ongoing  self-employment:  see
    paragraphs 18-20 of the grounds.  Whilst  it  was  contended  that  the
    materials that he had submitted  with  his  application  were  relevant
    "fairly determinative confirmation of his ability to satisfy Regulation
    10(6)", it seems to  me  that  the  phrase  'fairly  determinative'  is
    recognition that they were not completely and absolutely determinative.




7.   Accordingly when  the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    regulation 10(6) was very much a live issue.  It seems that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was alert to this because he says this at  the  end
    of paragraph 2, "the Appellant had in any event failed to prove that he
    was a worker, self employed or self sufficient at the  material  time".
    That quotation appears in the context of  the  Judge  setting  out  the
    basis of the Respondent's decision that he was considering on appeal.


8.   Although some further reference is made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to the Appellant's case that he was  a  self-employed  builder
    throughout the relevant period, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  no
    express factual finding in that regard and, more particularly, made  no
    subsequent  analysis  in  his  determination  of  the  requirement   of
    regulation 10(6).  To that end,  very  properly  and  very  fairly,  Mr
    Richardson accepts that there was an error and that it was an error  of
    law.  However Mr Richardson suggests that in all of  the  circumstances
    it was not a material  error  because  there  was  sufficient  material
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge such that he would inevitably, had
    he properly  turned  his  mind  to  it,  reached  the  conclusion  that
    regulation 10(6)  was  satisfied.   In  this  regard  my  attention  is
    directed  in  particular  to  pages  100,  101,  102  and  103  of  the
    Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.


9.   Page 100 provides a further tax calculation, for  the  year  2013/2014;
    the other pages provide evidence of  national  insurance  contributions
    made in October 2013, March 2014 and  October  2014.   Over  and  above
    that, before the Upper Tribunal in preparedness for a finding of 'error
    of law', the Appellant has  now  submitted  some  further  evidence  in
    respect of his continuing self-employment by way of documents that take
    the matter beyond those documents before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    almost up to the present time, including his tax  calculation  for  the
    year 2014/2015.


10.  In this context it is germane to  note  that  the  Appellant  made  his
    application for a residence card in the first instance in May 2009, and
    the residence card itself was issued in September 2010.   It  might  be
    said that if the Appellant met the requirements of the  Regulations  at
    the time that he made his application in May 2009 then  he  would  have
    completed five years' residence in May 2014.   On  the  other  hand  it
    might be said that if the Appellant could only demonstrate that he  met
    the requirements for a residence card by  reference  to  its  issue  in
    September 2010 the five year period would run up to September 2015.  No
    express finding was made in this regard by the First-tier Tribunal.


11.  In those circumstances it seems to me that it is  not  inevitable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal would have concluded on the basis of  documents
    running up to April 2014 that the Appellant satisfied the  requirements
    of 10(6) to an extent that it could be said that he had  been  resident
    for a full five years pursuant to the Regulations.  In  any  event  the
    production of the supporting documentary material would not  inevitably
    have led to an acceptance of all of the circumstances said to be proven
    by those documents, and so on balance I take the view that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's error was indeed  material.   In  any  event,  it
    seems to me that where a matter that is absolutely core to the  overall
    consideration has not been addressed at all  this  Tribunal  should  be
    very slow to consider that that cannot be properly characterised  as  a
    material error just because the case in support was  very  powerful  on
    the evidence.


12.  I conclude that the error was material, the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside,  and  necessarily  the  decision  in  the
    appeal requires to be re-made.


13.  In respect of remaking the decision, Ms Everett does  not  concede  the
    case but neither does she seek to make any  particular  submissions  to
    challenge the authenticity of the  documents  that  the  Appellant  has
    produced, and she does not seek to examine him in any way in respect of
    those documents. It seems to me  that  in  those  circumstances,  on  a
    balance of probabilities, it is no difficult task to simply accept  the
    supporting documents as genuine and as demonstrating that the Appellant
    has been a self-employed person throughout the relevant period from the
    date of his divorce through May 2014 and through September 2015 to  the
    extent that on balance I am satisfied that he has  met  the  objections
    raised by the Secretary of State in the decision letter and is entitled
    to the issue of a  permanent  residence  permit  pursuant  to  the  EEA
    Regulations.


14.  For completeness I should just say that Mr Richardson  raised  a  costs
    question in the Rule 24 response, but has indicated that  he  does  not
    seek to pursue that issue.


Notice of Decision

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside. I remake the decision in the appeal.


16.  The appeal is allowed.


17.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.

Signed:                                 Date: 7 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Appellant had already received the benefit of a  fee  award  before  the
First-tier Tribunal and in as much as it is necessary  to  repeat  that  fee
award herein I so do.

Signed:                                 Date: 7 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

