
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22499/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 April 2013                              |On 10 May 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                        mr Chaudhry Ali Akbar Janjua

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S T Akhtar, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13 March 1982.   He  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Sullivan dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 27 September 2012 refusing to  grant  him  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant under the points-
    based system (PBS).  The appellant came to the  United  Kingdom  having
    been granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 24  May
    2012.  On 5 April 2012 he made the application for leave to remain that
    gave rise to this  appeal.   The  respondent  refused  the  application
    because the respondent was satisfied that the appellant  had  not  been
    awarded an eligible qualification  in  the  twelve  months  before  his
    application and consequently did not qualify for 15 of the 75 points he
    claimed under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules for attributes or the
    10 points he claimed under Appendix B for English language.

2.   In oral evidence before the judge the appellant said he  had  completed
    all the requirements of the MA course before he  made  his  application
    and that he was told his results on 2  April.   The  judge  noted  that
    there was no evidence from Anglia Ruskin University to that effect  and
    no copy of any letter to the appellant about the outcome of his studies
    prior to the two letters dated 13 July 2012.  Following  evidence  from
    the appellant the judge accepted that by 5 April 2012 the appellant had
    done the work required to complete his MA course of study.

3.   The judge found as follows:

         "18. Central to this appeal is whether the appellant  had  to  have
             been awarded the MA in  Marketing  and  Innovation  by  Anglia
             Ruskin University prior to his application for leave to remain
             in order to qualify for the points claimed by him.  In my view
             the language of paragraph 245FD, which says that an  applicant
             "must meet" the listed requirements of that provision and  the
             language at paragraph 245FD(c) which says  that  an  appellant
             "must have" a  minimum  of  75  points  for  attributes  under
             Appendix A points to a requirement for the appellant  to  have
             qualified for those points by the date of his application.   I
             am reinforced in this view by  the  wording  of  the  relevant
             table at Appendix A to the Rules which says that the appellant
             "has been awarded" the qualification on  which  he  bases  his
             points claim and that  he  made  the  application  "within  12
             months of obtaining the relevant qualification".


         19.  I was asked to distinguish NO (Post Study Work - award  needed
             by date of application) Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT  00054  on  the
             basis that the appellant in that case had  not  submitted  his
             dissertation before making his application.  It is right  that
             that was the chronology in that case.  I also  note  that  the
             UKAIT was  there  dealing  with  an  earlier  version  of  the
             Immigration Rules and with an earlier version of the guidance.
              However in my view none of that detracts from the essence  of
             the guidance issued by the Tribunal, namely that in  order  to
             be entitled to points the applicant must have been awarded the
             requisite qualification in respect of which points are claimed
             by the date of the application.


         20.  I find that at the  date  of  application  the  appellant  had
             completed the work required for the MA course but had not been
             awarded any MA by Anglia Ruskin University.  It  follows  that
             in my view he did not qualify for 75  points  under  paragraph
             245FD(c) and Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  By the time
             of  his  application  English  language  skills  had   to   be
             demonstrated in one  of  a  specified  number  of  ways.   The
             appellant relied on the MA degree qualification.  It  had  not
             been awarded by the date of application and  consequently  the
             appellant  did  not  qualify  for  the  points  claimed  under
             paragraph 245FD(d) and Appendix B of the Rules.   I  therefore
             find that the refusal is in accordance with the  law  and  the
             applicable Immigration Rules."

4.   The appellant lodged grounds of appeal stating:

         "In light of recent decision of Upper Tribunal in Khatel and Others
         (S85A; effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) it
         would be appropriate that this appeal is relisted for  hearing  and
         permission be granted."

    The First-tier Judge in granting  permission  said  that  although  the
    judge did not have the assistance of the guidance in Khatel  identified
    as being central to the appeal, the issue as to whether  the  appellant
    had obtained his award prior  to  his  application  for  leave,  Khatel
    decides that an appellant is not precluded by Section 85(5) of the 2002
    Act from relying in an appeal upon evidence that was  notified  to  the
    Secretary of State before the decision  and that an application  is  to
    be treated as continuing.

5.   Mr Parkinson asked for an adjournment on the basis that  the  Court  of
    Appeal is due to hear Khatel on 11 and 12 June 2013.  He submitted that
    the fact that the President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  who  allowed  the
    appeal in Khatel granted permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
    meant that the President must have been of the opinion that there  must
    be some strength in the grounds lodged by the Secretary  of  State  for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

6.   Mr Akhtar objected to an adjournment.  Although I found that there  was
    a tension between the Immigration  Rules  requiring  the  appellant  to
    submit  his  application  with  all  the  documents  by  the  date   of
    application, and the  decision  in  Khatel,  I  formed  the  view  that
    although Khatel was not binding on me, it was persuasive.

7.   Mr Parkinson submitted that Khatel which  he  considers  to  be  highly
    persuasive is not binding on the Tribunal; it is not retrospective  and
    not declaratory law.  He said  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal predated Khatel.   The  judge  could  not  have  had  advanced
    knowledge on the arguments in Khatel.  For the appellant to succeed  in
    his appeal today it is not sufficient to merely say that if  the  judge
    had considered his appeal in the light of Khatel, he would have allowed
    his appeal, but whether at the date of the hearing and at the  date  of
    promulgation there was anything in the determination that was absent in
    Khatel which meant that the judge made an error of law.   He  submitted
    that the judge made a reasoned conclusion as to why  the  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to conclude that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules as they were in front of him and in doing  so
    did not err in law.

8.   I accept that the decision of the judge predated Khatel  and  that  the
    judge could not have had advanced knowledge of the arguments in Khatel.
     Nevertheless, Khatel is persuasive.  It states in its  first  headnote
    that:

         "An application for further leave to remain is to be treated  as  a
         continuing application, starting with the date when  it  was  first
         submitted and ending on the date when it is decided: AQ  (Pakistan)
         v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833."


    It goes on to say that it follows that an appellant is not precluded by
    Section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
    amended) from relying in an appeal upon evidence that was  notified  to
    the Secretary of State before the date of her decision.   Therefore  in
    an application for leave as a post-study work migrant, the obtaining of
    the academic award needed to gain the requisite  points  satisfies  the
    requirement of Table 10  that  the  qualification  is  obtained  within
    twelve months of making the application even when the award is notified
    to the Secretary of State after the date when the application was first
    made but before a decision is made on the application.

9.   In the light of Khatel, I find  that  the  judge  erred  in  law.   His
    decision cannot stand.  I remake the decision.

10.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

