
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22666/2014
                                                               IA/25409/2014
                                                               IA/25418/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 May 2015                       |On 4 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                HELINA ASARE
                         (AND TWO CHILD DEPENDENTS)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Office
For the Respondent:    In person

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.  We  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that  might  infringe  the
respondents' protected human rights if the  details  were  to  become  known
publicly. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity this decision will refer to the parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal albeit that the  Secretary  of
    State is technically the  appellant  in  this  particular  appeal.  The
    Secretary of  State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Young to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal in a decision that was promulgated  on  18  February  2015.  The
    appellant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  revoke
    her residence card because she  no  longer  met  the  requirements  for
    residence as the family member of an EEA national under The Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006").

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of  birth  is  02  July
    1977. She has two dependent children, Chelsea  Nana  Ama  Adobea  (DOB:
    06/07/04) and Charlie Ahianyo Boateng (DOB:  18/05/07).  Charlie  is  a
    Ghanian citizen. In a recent letter to the Tribunal dated 02  May  2015
    the appellant said that Chelsea has now been registered  as  a  British
    citizen and she asked to withdraw the appeal.  Although  the  appellant
    did not attach a copy of the registration certificate we are  satisfied
    that she has given notice of the withdrawal of the appeal in so far  as
    it relates to Chelsea and we are satisfied that we can treat that  part
    of the appeal as withdrawn under rule  17  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

3.    The appellant's date of entry to the UK is unclear from  the  evidence
    currently before the  Tribunal.  On  30  June  2007  she  contracted  a
    Ghanaian customary marriage with Harrison Cornelius Ahianyo  who  is  a
    German citizen. On 21 October 2011 the Secretary of  State  issued  the
    appellant  and  her  two  dependent  children  with   residence   cards
    recognising their rights of residence  as  family  members  of  an  EEA
    national who was exercising his rights of free movement in the  UK.  Mr
    Ahianyo later contacted the Secretary of State to inform her  that  the
    marriage had broken down and provided copies of various documents  from
    Ghana as evidence of a divorce. In light of this evidence the Secretary
    of State wrote to the appellant on 21 September 2012  and  03  February
    2013 to say  that  she  was  reviewing  whether  she  qualified  for  a
    residence document and requested further evidence. The  appellant  says
    that she did not receive the  correspondence.  On  29  April  2014  the
    Secretary of State made a decision to revoke her residence card on  the
    ground that she no longer had  a  right  of  residence  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Young was satisfied that the  appellant  met
    the requirements of regulation 10(5) of the EEA  Regulations  2006  and
    allowed the appeal. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    it was arguable that the First-tier judge  erred  in  law  because  the
    judge failed to make clear findings as to  whether  the  appellant  was
    divorced and whether the marriage was therefore  "terminated"  for  the
    purpose of regulation 10(5) of The Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006").

5.    The  matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.



Submissions

6.    On behalf of the Secretary of  State  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law in failing to come  to
    any clear findings  as  to  whether  the  marriage  had  been  properly
    terminated. In order to retain a right of  residence  under  regulation
    10(5) the appellant needed to show that there had been a valid divorce.
    The judge made conflicting findings. In paragraphs 33  and  34  of  the
    decision the judge expressed doubts about whether  the  proper  divorce
    procedure had been followed yet in paragraph 44 the judge  appeared  to
    accept that a divorce had taken place but  gave  no  reasons  for  this
    finding. He submitted that  the  judge  made  conflicting  findings  in
    relation to the divorce. However, when pressed on whether the Secretary
    of State accepted the documents relating to the divorce in Ghana, given
    that they formed the reasons  for  revoking  the  appellant's  existing
    residence card, Mr Melvin was unable to give a clear answer himself. He
    said that there were documents from Ghana to suggest a divorce and  the
    decision was made on that basis.

7.    In response the appellant said that she relied on the points she  made
    in her letter dated 02 May 2015. She said that she didn't know why  the
    Secretary of State was now questioning the  evidence  relating  to  the
    divorce when those documents  seem  to  have  been  accepted  when  the
    decision was made in 2014.  The  Secretary  of  State  acted  on  those
    documents then but now seemed to be questioning whether a divorce  took
    place. The appellant said that the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
    decision. The appellant said it was for the Tribunal to decide  whether
    there had been a proper divorce  or  not.  She  said  that  she  didn't
    receive the initial letters asking for further evidence that were  sent
    prior to the decision to revoke her residence card. The first she  knew
    of it was when she received the decision.

8.    In response Mr Melvin said that  there  needed  to  be  a  finding  on
    whether there had been a valid divorce  because  the  paperwork  showed
    that the appellant was represented at the  divorce  by  various  family
    members. She seemed to be adopting the position that best  suited  her.
    He asked us to treat the evidence the appellant gave with caution given
    the letters and evidence to show that her family members supported  the
    divorce.

Conclusions

9.    We  are  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of a material error of law. Whilst the decision was
    otherwise carefully written there is a  contradiction  in  the  judge's
    findings as to whether there had been a valid divorce. In paragraph  33
    the judge expressed doubts about whether the appropriate procedure  had
    taken place given the dates  on  the  documents.  At  the  hearing  the
    appellant also questioned the reliability of the documents  given  that
    the statutory declaration purported to be  signed  by  members  of  her
    family. She said that no one from her side of the family was present or
    had  authority  to  represent  her  when  the  marriage  was  dissolved
    (paragraph 33). In paragraph 44 the judge found that the appellant  met
    the requirements of regulation 10(5). The judge treated the marriage as
    "terminated" for the purpose of the regulation but failed to  give  any
    reasons why in light of earlier doubts that had  been  expressed  about
    the evidence.

10.   In paragraph 49 of the decision the judge made  quite  clear  that  it
    was not necessary to consider "the efficacy of the divorce"  given  the
    finding that she met the requirements for retained right  of  residence
    under regulation 10(5). However, it was a prerequisite for the judge to
    make a clear finding as to whether  there  had  been  a  valid  divorce
    before it could properly be concluded that  the  appellant  retained  a
    right of residence as a result of the termination of her  marriage.  It
    seems quite clear from the wording  of  paragraph  49  that  the  judge
    specifically avoided making such a finding. For these reasons  we  find
    that the failure to make clear findings as to whether the marriage  had
    been terminated through divorce for the  purpose  of  regulation  10(5)
    amounted to a material error of law and we set aside the decision.

11.   We consider that  it  is  possible  to  remake  the  decision  on  the
    evidence that is already before the Tribunal. The evidence relating  to
    the divorce was relied upon by the Secretary of State to  underpin  the
    original  decision  to  revoke  the  appellant's  residence  card.  The
    evidence included a statutory declaration dated  05  July  2012,  which
    purported to be signed by members of Mr Ahianyo's  family  as  well  as
    members  of  the  appellant's  family.  The  statutory  declaration  is
    accompanied by an attestation by the First Deputy Judicial Secretary of
    the High Court in Ghana dated 06 July 2012. There is  also  a  document
    entitled Notice of Dissolution of Customary Marriage (Second  Schedule)
    dated 15 June 2012.

12.   An extract from the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration)  Law
    1985 was provided to the First-tier Tribunal. The Notice of Dissolution
    of Customary Marriage relied on by the Secretary of State  states  that
    the marriage was dissolved under this law. Section 7  states  that  the
    parties notifying the Registrar should make  a  statutory  declaration,
    which should be supported by their parents or a person standing in loco
    parentis. On receipt of the notification the Registrar would record the
    dissolution of the marriage and then prepare a notice under the  Second
    Schedule of the law. The  procedure  for  dissolution  of  a  customary
    marriage clearly provides for a statutory declaration  to  be  made  by
    both parties to the marriage, which is supported by their  parents.  It
    is only after the statutory declaration is provided  to  the  Registrar
    that a Notice of Dissolution of Customary Marriage is issued.

13.   In this case the Notice of  Dissolution  of  Customary  Marriage  pre-
    dates the statutory declaration,  which  casts  doubt  on  whether  the
    correct procedure  was  followed.  We  find  that  the  fact  that  the
    statutory declaration was not made by both parties to the  marriage  in
    combination with the appellant's evidence that, as far as she is aware,
    none of her family members represented her in the divorce  proceedings,
    is sufficient to  cast  serious  doubt  on  the  reliability  of  these
    documents as evidence to show that a valid divorce took place in  Ghana
    in 2012. For these reasons we conclude that the Secretary of State  has
    failed to discharge the burden of proof. In Samsam  (EEA  revocation  &
    retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 the  Tribunal  confirmed  that
    where the Secretary of State revokes a residence card before the expiry
    of its validity it falls to her to discharge the burden of  proof.  The
    Secretary of State failed to produce sufficiently reliable evidence  to
    show that the appellant ceased to be a family member of an EEA national
    in order to justify revocation of her residence card. The Secretary  of
    State's  decision  was  therefore  not  in  accordance  with  the   EEA
    Regulations 2006.

14.   The effect of this decision is that the Secretary of  State  must  now
    consider whether to reinstate the original residence cards in  relation
    to the appellant and  her  daughter  or  make  a  further  decision  in
    relation to the validity. We have found that there  was  insufficiently
    reliable evidence to show that the appellant  ceased  to  be  a  family
    member of an EEA national but the Secretary of State might want to seek
    further evidence  to  be  satisfied  that  the  EEA  sponsor  is  still
    exercising his rights of  free  movement  in  the  UK,  either  through
    further evidence from the appellant, or if she  is  unable  to  do  so,
    through the Secretary of  State's  own  enquiries  with  HMRC.  In  the
    alternative, the Secretary of State may want to take note of  the  fact
    that the appellant now states that her daughter has been registered  as
    a British citizen, which might potentially give rise to derived  rights
    of residence.

DECISION

IA/22666/2014

IA/25418/2014

    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error  on  a
    point of law.

    We set aside the decision.

    We re-make the decision and allow the original appeal.

IA/25409/2014

    The appeal is withdrawn.

Signed       [pic]     Date 02 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




FEE DECISION
Note: this is not part of the determination

In the light of our decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, we have considered whether to make a fee  award.  We  have  had
regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee  Awards  in  Immigration
Appeals. We have decided to make a whole fee award  because  we  have  found
that the residence cards were wrongly revoked and in those circumstances  it
should not have been necessary for the appellant to appeal.

Signed       [pic]     Date 02 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

