
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2016                          |On 12th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                               SOFIAN FERRARD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Algeria born on 31st March 1969.  He
    first arrived in the  UK  in  May  1997  when  he  applied  for  asylum
    unsuccessfully.  The Appellant did not leave the UK, and in  July  2013
    he again applied unsuccessfully for asylum.   On  7th  March  2014  the
    Appellant applied for a residence card as the unmarried partner  of  an
    EEA national, namely Jardilu Martius Borges Telma Maria,  a  Portuguese
    citizen.  That application was refused for the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 1st May 2014.  The Appellant appealed,  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird (the Judge)  sitting
    at Taylor House on 11th February 2015.  She allowed the appeal for  the
    reasons given in her Decision dated 17th March  2015.   The  Respondent
    sought leave to appeal that  decision,  and  on  30th  July  2015  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The original  application  of  the  Appellant  was  refused  under  the
    provisions of Regulation 17(1)(a) and (b) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).   This  was  because
    the Appellant had failed  to  produce  with  his  application  a  valid
    passport as evidence of his identity as a non-EEA citizen, and  also  a
    valid passport or identity card establishing that his  partner  was  an
    EEA national.  The Judge allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law  because  the
    Respondent had considered the application under the wrong provision and
    had not dealt with it under Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Clarke argued that in coming to that conclusion  the
    Judge had erred in law.  Indeed, the Judge should not  have  heard  the
    appeal  as  according  to  Regulation  26(2A)  of  the  Regulations  an
    Appellant could only appeal if he had produced his passport which  this
    Appellant had failed to do.

 5. There was no counter-argument for me  to  consider.   At  the  hearing,
    there was no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant had not lodged a Rule 24 response.  I  decided  to  hear  the
    appeal in the absence of the Appellant under the provisions of Rule  38
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I was satisfied
    that the Appellant had been properly notified of  the  time,  date  and
    place of the hearing and I was satisfied that it was in the interest of
    justice to proceed to hear the appeal.  There was  no  explanation  for
    the absence of the Appellant.

 6. I find there was an error of law in the decision of the Judge  which  I
    set aside.  It is not in dispute that at  no  time  did  the  Appellant
    produce a valid passport for himself.  Therefore  he  did  not  have  a
    right of appeal under Regulation  26(2A)  in  which  event  instead  of
    allowing the appeal the Judge should have found that there was no valid
    appeal before her.

Remade Decision

 7. I then proceeded to remake the decision of the Judge.  As there was  no
    valid appeal before me for the reasons given  above,  I  dismissed  the
    purported appeal.

Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.





Signed                              Date: 30th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my  decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
dismissing it, I make no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 30th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

