


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
IA/22451/2015

                                                     IA/01705/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |  Decision & Reason           |
|                                      |Promulgated                   |
|On 4 October 2017                     |  On 18 October 2017          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between

                     (1) Mr MOHD ABUL HOSSAIN CHOWDHURY
                             (2) Mrs SADIA AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel  (instructed by D J Webb and
Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on   25   July   2017   against   the
           determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  who  had
           dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants  seeking  settlement
           pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules,  i.e.,  10
           years'  continuous  lawful  residence  and  on  Article  8  ECHR
           grounds. The decision and reasons was promulgated on 11  January
           2017.


      2.     The  Appellants  are  nationals  of  Bangladesh,  husband   and
           dependant wife.  The First  Appellant  had  entered  the  United
           Kingdom lawfully as a student in  2004,  which  leave  had  been
           extended in stages.  One of the reasons given for refusal of the
           long residence claim made in 2014 was that the  First  Appellant
           had used deception by submitting false documents in  a  previous
           application, for which he had been cautioned by the Metropolitan
           Police.   The Appellants did not deny  that  but  had  contended
           that there were significant  obstacles  to  their  reintegration
           into Bangladesh where they would be unable to enjoy full  family
           life.  The United Kingdom had become their home. The judge found
           against the Appellants on the significant obstacles issue, found
           that  their  family  life  could  continue  in  Bangladesh   and
           dismissed the appeal on that basis.


      3.    Permission to appeal was  granted  with  reservations  and  only
           because  it  was  considered  arguable  that   the   judge   had
           misunderstood whether or not the First  Appellant  had  accepted
           that  paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  had   been
           correctly applied by the Respondent.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Revill for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary counsel argued that the judge  had
           not  understood  that  refusal  under   paragraph   322(2)   was
           discretionary.  Counsel also pointed out that because the  First
           Appellant had accepted a police caution within 24 months of  his
           application, in any event he had to be refused  under  paragraph
           322(1C)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. to appeal.  Agyarko [2017]
           UKSC 11 and MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10  had  not  been  applied
           correctly in that the scales had not  been  correctly  prepared.
           The facts had not been  considered  with  sufficient  attention.
           The determination should be set aside and remade.


      6.    Mr Tarlow for the Respondent relied on the rule  24  notice  and
           submitted that there was plainly no material error of law.   The
           onwards appeal should be dismissed.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           generous. Even then it had been said in terms in the grant  that
           the claim under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules looked
           weak in the extreme, which it was.  As Ms Revill had noted,  the
           First Appellant's long  residence  claim  failed  for  mandatory
           refusal under the Immigration  Rules  before  any  discretionary
           issues arose, as the judge had correctly noted at  [28]  of  her
           decision.  Any misunderstanding of the First Appellant's  stance
           over the refusal under paragraph 322(2) was thus  immaterial  as
           it could take the appeals no further.  But  the  tribunal  finds
           that there was no misunderstanding on  the  experienced  judge's
           part.  As the judge pointed out at [29]  of  her  decision,  the
           First Appellant stated in terms that he did not dispute the Home
           Office decision under the Immigration Rules: see  [1.b]  of  his
           witness statement dated 12 December 2016.


      8.    The judge  examined  the  evidence  with  commendable  care  and
           compassion (the death of an infant was one of  the  facts).   At
           [34] onwards, having given an accurate self-direction, the judge
           reached  secure  findings  demonstrating  that  there  were   no
           significant  obstacles  to  the  enjoyment  of  family  life  in
           Bangladesh nor to reintegration in  Bangladesh.   The  evidence,
           which included claims as to the Second Appellant's health,  fell
           well short  of  sustaining  any  other  conclusion.   The  judge
           referred to a number of relevant authorities which need  not  be
           recited again here.


      9.    Ms Revill's submissions, like the onwards grounds, amount to  no
           more than disagreement with the judge's decision.


      10.   The tribunal finds that the onwards appeal has no substance  and
           that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision
           challenged.


      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 9 October 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




