
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/22491/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 March 2016                    |On 5 April 2016                   |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                           COSSI RUFIN BOKO BOUDAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Waithe (counsel) instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Boyes promulgated on 14  August  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 13 September 1973 and is a national of Benin.


4. On  14  April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for a  residence  card  as  the  unmarried  partner  of  an  EEA
national. The appellant's partner, Ayele Leocadie Pauline  Folly  ("the  EEA
National") is a French National.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Boyes ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 11 January 2016  Judge  White
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3. Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal and  the
      decision and reasons, I am satisfied that in reaching his decision the
      judge arguably made an error of law for the following reasons; -


           a. The judge noted many discrepancies in the evidence that  were
           material to his decision.


           b.  It  is  arguable  that  such  discrepancies  arose  out   of
           misinterpretation  (such  issue  having  been  raised   by   the
           appellant's counsel at the hearing itself [23])."

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Waithe, counsel for  the  appellant,  adopted  the  terms  of  the
grounds of appeal. He told me that the decision contains  a  material  error
of law because there were errors in  interpretation  of  the  evidence  from
both the appellant and the sponsor before the First-tier Tribunal.  He  told
me that the interpreter at the First-tier hearing was a French speaker,  but
the language required was French/African. He  told  me  that  the  appellant
tried to raise concerns about the quality of interpretation at  the  hearing
but was simply told to keep quiet, and that he made  submissions  about  the
quality of interpretation before the First-tier. He  took  me  to  [21]  and
[22] of the decision (where the Judge sets out discrepancies in evidence  in
some detail) and told me that the Judge's findings there are flawed  because
of errors in interpretation.

(b) Mr Waithe told me that this case  turns  entirely  on  the  question  of
whether or not the appellant and sponsor are in a durable  relationship.  He
told me that, because there are fundamental errors in the findings  of  fact
made by the Judge, the Judge  was  unable  to  apply  the  correct  test  to
determine whether or not a  durable  relationship  existed,  and  that  that
amounts to a further material error of law. He urged me to set the  decision
aside and remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to determine of new.

7. For the respondent, Mr Tarlow told me that the decision does not  contain
any errors, material or otherwise. He adopted  the  terms  of  the  rule  24
response dated 22 January 2016. He told me that there are no errors  in  the
Judge's fact-finding exercise; that the Judge correctly directed himself  in
law and then reached  conclusions  which  were  well  within  the  reach  of
reasonable conclusions available to the Judge. He  urged  me  to  allow  the
decision to stand and to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

8. It was argued for the appellant that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  &
applied the wrong test  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  appellant  and
sponsor are parties to a durable relationship. There is  no  merit  in  that
submission. Between [24] and [33] the Judge discusses the evidence  and  the
facts found on the basis of that evidence, before coming to  the  conclusion
that the appellant and sponsor are not parties to  a  durable  relationship.
At [32] the Judge correctly records that "the burden  of  proof  is  on  the
appellant to demonstrate on the balance of probabilities  that  he  and  the
sponsor are in a durable relationship..." At [33] the Judge correctly  notes
that the term "durable relationship" is not defined in the 2006  regulations
nor is it defined in the directive, before  concluding  that  the  appellant
and the sponsor are not in a relationship at all.

9. In the course of submissions, I referred counsel  for  the  appellant  to
[32] & [33] of the decision and asked him  to  tell  me  exactly  where  the
error of law lay in relation to the Judge's treatment of  the  evidence,  or
findings of fact, or conclusions, in  relation  to  "durable  relationship".
Counsel told me that the error was an error  in  the  fact-finding  exercise
which, he argued, was tainted by errors in interpretation.

10. When I consider the decision as a whole I find that the  Judge  has  not
misdirected himself in law. I find that the Judge has  correctly  identified
the issue in this case. Although counsel argues that there are  two  grounds
of appeal, in reality there is only one - &  that  is  a  challenge  to  the
quality of interpretation. The issue before me is whether or not  the  court
interpreter's performance was so poor that  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact
cannot stand.

11. Between [3] and [6] the Judge sets out the background  to  this  appeal.
At [8] and [9]  the  Judge  summarises  the  evidence.  At  [10]  the  Judge
correctly identifies the burden and standard  of  proof.  Between  [11]  and
[14] the Judge summarises the appellant's submissions.

12. Between [15] and [18] the Judge considers whether or not  the  appellant
and sponsor are parties to a valid marriage. No challenge is taken  to  what
is said by the Judge there; in fact, there is no challenge directed  at  [1]
to [19] of the decision.

13. Between [20] and  [22]  the  Judge  sets  out  "significant  fundamental
discrepancies..." in the appellant's evidence. It is there  that  the  focus
of this appeal lies. At [23] it is recorded that counsel  submitted  to  the
First-tier, after the evidence had been heard, "...  that  any  issues  that
may have arisen in particular in relation to  the  sponsor's  evidence,  may
have been as a consequence of the language barrier and the sponsor's  French
cultural background."

14. In a carefully reasoned and detailed decision there is not one  word  to
suggest that a challenge was raised in the course  of  the  hearing  to  the
quality of interpretation. The submission that is recorded from counsel  for
the appellant is not a challenge to the quality of interpretation, but is  a
reference to "... the language barrier and  the  sponsor's  French  cultural
background"

15. What is important is that the Judge records  that  submission  and  then
deals with it. At [23] the Judge not only states "I do not  agree..."(  with
counsel's submission), but also gives detailed reasons for  rejecting  those
submissions. The Judge records at [23] that the sponsor confirmed  that  she
understood the interpreter and that the sponsor  was  given  more  than  one
opportunity to answer questions when she hesitated to answer.  At  [23]  the
Judge explains that he found discrepancies in the appellant's  evidence.  At
[23] the Judge explains why he could not rely on the evidence of either  the
appellant or the sponsor.

16. At [21] and [22] the Judge sets out careful reasons  for  rejecting  the
evidence of the appellant and sponsor.  Between  [21]  and  [32]  the  Judge
makes it abundantly clear that he has not only considered the oral  evidence
but has also fully considered the documentary evidence  placed  before  him,
before reaching conclusions which were  manifestly  open  to  the  Judge  to
reach.

17. The determinative finding in the Judge's  decision  is  his  finding  at
[33] that the appellant and sponsor are not in a relationship at all. It  is
clear that the  Judge  reached  that  finding  by  considering  all  of  the
evidence (both documentary and oral). It is equally clear  that  that  is  a
finding which was open to the Judge to reach. [23]  makes  it  obvious  that
the Judge considered whether or not the evidence before him was  tainted  by
errors  in  interpretation,  and  (for  the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge)
concluded that it was not.

18. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

19. In this case, there is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact  finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

20.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

21. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

22. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date
15 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



