
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA229892015
     IA229902015 & IA229912015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2017                                 |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                   M E A E
                                     M M
                                   C M A M

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P V Thoree, Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on  27  September  2016  dismissing
    their appeals against the decisions of the respondent  to  refuse  them
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The first and second appellants are the parents of the third appellant;
    all three are citizens of Ecuador.  The first and second appellants are
    adults  and  have  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  for   a
    significant  period  of  time.   They  appear  to  have  made  numerous
    applications  which  were  unsuccessful.   The  third  appellant   was,
    however, born in the United Kingdom and as at  the  date  of  the  most
    recent application had lived in the United Kingdom for seven years.

 3. The judge concluded that the first and second appellants did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) or any of the other provisions
    as he was not satisfied that there were significant obstacles to  their
    integration again in Ecuador.

 4. The judge then went on to deal with the  child,  the  third  appellant,
    making findings specifically at paragraphs [11]  and  [12]  considering
    that, applying Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009, it was reasonable to expect her to go  to  Ecuador  with  her
    parents and that she would  be  able  to  re-adapt  again  to  life  in
    Ecuador. Having had regard to the decision in Tinizaray v  SSHD  [2011]
    EWHC 1850 (Admin), and that the child there was British he  found  that
    her best interests were best served by being with her parents and  they
    should return to Ecuador as they do not fulfil  the  Immigration  Rules
    and she could reasonably be expected to go with them.

 5. The appellants have sought permission to appeal this on several grounds
    but as distilled in submissions today this is  that  the  judge  failed
    properly to have regard to the best  interests  of  the  child,  failed
    properly  to  have  regard  to  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,  the
    Secretary of State's policies as set out in the Immigration Directorate
    Instructions, and, also had failed properly to apply relevant case law.

 6. Mr Thoree submitted essentially that this was a case in which there was
    an inadequacy of reasons and in any event that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to engage with the law, in particular Section 117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.

 7. For the respondent, Mr Wilding submitted that there was in fact in this
    case no material error, given that the judge  very  properly  addressed
    himself to the best interests of the child. It could not in  this  case
    be said that there was any improper conclusion reached  given  that  in
    effect it had been open to  the  judge  on  the  material  provided  to
    conclude that, having balanced the various different  factors,  it  was
    still reasonable to expect the child to go to Ecuador with her parents.
     He submitted relying on Dube [2012] UKUT 90 (IAC) that in  effect  the
    issue here was substance, not form and  that  the  judge  had  properly
    dealt with the issues, specifically dealing with all the relevant facts
    at paragraphs 9 to 15 of the decision.

 8. Whilst I accept that the judge has in  this  case  addressed  the  best
    interests of the child, I consider that at no place in the decision has
    the judge properly considered the significance of  the  child  reaching
    the age of 7 years.  That is a factor to which attention is drawn in MA
    (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705, particularly at paragraphs 46, 47
    and 49.

 9. The Court of Appeal has made it clear that significant weight has to be
    attached to the fact that the child has reached 7 years  of  age,  that
    this must be given significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise
    for two related reasons, first because of its relevance to  determining
    the nature and strength  of  the  child's  best  interests  and  second
    because it establishes as a starting point that leave should be granted
    unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

10. There is no proper indication in  the  judge's  decision  that  he  has
    considered either of these issues nor could it be said  that  he  would
    have reached the same  conclusion  had  he  properly  taken  them  into
    account.  This  required  a  nuanced  balancing  exercise  taking  into
    account the interests of the child and particularly the fact  that  she
    had reached 7 years of age, which he has not done and for these reasons
    I am satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

11. Both parties have agreed that  in  effect  there  will  need  to  be  a
    complete rehearing of this case as the  findings  of  facts  could  not
    stand and there would need to be a fresh fact-finding exercise  on  all
    issues.  For these reasons I am satisfied that it is necessary to remit
    the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  on  all
    issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside

12. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues; none  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    preserved.

13. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-Tier Tribunal

Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
